Just in Time, the Rangers Recover
The Rangers, showing the pluck of champions, allowed two short-handed goals 14 seconds apart in the third period last night but then rallied for a 5-4 triumph over the Quebec Nordiques at Madison Square Garden, their fourth victory in a row.
The short-handed goals, by Mike Hough and Joe Sakic, starting exactly at the 12-minute mark, gave the Nordiques a 4-3 lead.


TV Weekend; The Dreyfus Affair as a Prototype
The Dreyfus Affair as a parable for our times?
That's the provocative contention of "Prisoner of Honor," having its premiere on HBO tomorrow night at 9.
And despite some jagged editing, the film manages to be powerfully convincing in its efforts to foreshadow the prevalent dishonor later found in scandals that would get such shorthand labels as Watergate or Iran-contra.
The star and one of the principal producers of "Prisoner of Honor" is Richard Dreyfuss.
He does not play Capt.
Alfred Dreyfus of the French Army (no family connection), who was sent to solitary confinement on Devil's Island in 1895 after being convicted of espionage and treason.
Rather, Mr.
Dreyfuss assumes the role of Col.
George Picquart, the new head of French Army counterintelligence assigned to examine the Dreyfus file and determine why he did what his accusers said he had done.
Picquart discovers that the real spy is Major Esterhazy, that Dreyfus has been made the scapegoat merely because he is a Jew.


Storm's Huge Waves Make Hurricane Seem Tame on Massachusetts Coast
Peter Montgomery knew the storm was bad when he looked out his window Wednesday and saw waves breaking over the top of Minot's Light, a 100-foot-tall stone lighthouse that is a landmark of the Massachusetts coast.
The old gray shingled house where Mr.
Montgomery lives, a mile from the lighthouse on a spit of land that juts out into Massachusetts Bay, was also being pounded by the raging northeaster.
"Every time a wave hit the building, you could feel it -- va boom! -- the whole house shook," said Mr.
Montgomery, a caretaker for a group of summer residents.


BRIEFS
*
Applied Bioscience International Inc., East Millstone, N.J., a provider of toxicological testing services, and Pharmaco Dynamics Research Inc., Austin, Tex., a clinical research company, said they would merge if Applied Bioscience's shareholders approved.
Pharmaco shareholders would receive about 2.9 million Applied Bioscience common shares, or about 20 percent of the outstanding shares. *
Du Pont, Wilmington, Del., has completed the acquisition of the Nason Automotive Refinish business from O'Brien Corp., South San Francisco, Calif., a maker of architectural paints and powder coatings.
Terms were not disclosed.


A Little Trick-or-Treater Waits to Be Frightened


Flight Attendants Sue Over Passengers' Smoking
Declaring that they had contracted cancer, heart disease and respiratory illnesses because they had been exposed to smoke from passengers' cigarettes, seven current and former flight attendants sued a number of tobacco companies yesterday.
The suit, in Dade County Circuit Court in Miami, where several of the plaintiffs live, seeks an unspecified sum in actual damages and $5 billion in punitive damages on behalf of the plaintiffs as well as 60,000 airline employees.


Quotation of the Day
"We're talking about the potential for chaos in a country with 30,000 nuclear weapons. It's clearly in our interest not to allow food and medicine shortages to trigger some kind of unrest." -- Representative Les Aspin.  [ A12:4. ]


Changes at Optima Unit By American Express
Continuing to unravel the troubles in its Optima card division, the American Express Company said yesterday that it had dismissed executives who hid growing defaults and appointed a new senior management team to run the credit-card business.
Although the company said neither was involved in any improprieties, Anne Busquet, the executive vice president of the Optima card, and Rich Interdanto, the head of the Optima Regional Operating Center, are being replaced as part of the management changes.


Elite Group to Dedicate Reagan Library
If precariously balanced schedules hold firm on Monday, this range of parched yellow hills where Hollywood cowboys used to ride will see a gathering of five former and current American Presidents, the largest such gathering in the nation's history.
The occasion is the dedication of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library, where a museum and vast underground archives will document Mr.
Reagan's life and Administration.


Audit Draft Questions Regional Bell Costs
The early draft of an audit by Federal and state regulators provides evidence that a research consortium owned by the regional Bell telephone companies overcharged them by $80 million over five years, and that they, in turn, may have passed those overcharges on to telephone customers.
But telephone executives denied any improprieties, and officials involved with the audit emphasized that its conclusions were still preliminary.
The report was prepared jointly by the Federal Communications Commission and the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners, an association of state regulators.


As Selection of Smith Jurors Begins, Focus Is on History of the Kennedys
As the accused man himself sat nearby, lawyers in the William K. Smith rape trial began the laborious process of selecting the six jurors who will decide the case.
Every potential juror questioned knew the basic facts of the case, including details that could be ruled inadmissible in the trial.
Some of the questions they were asked concerned that knowledge, and whether they thought they could fairly judge Mr.
Smith, the 31-year-old Kennedy heir who has been charged with raping a Florida woman at the Kennedy family's estate here over Easter weekend.


Optimism Is Blighted in the Midwest
Across the Midwest, traditional home of industry and a can-do optimism, a mood of hesitancy, mistrust and disorientation seems to have taken hold.
Nebraska still welcomes travelers with a billboard saying, "The Good Life," but interviews with dozens of people in four states suggest a profound uneasiness about the nation's leadership and its economy.
Purchases of everything from cars to combines are being postponed.


Mayor Wants To Freeze Tax On Property
Mayor David N. Dinkins wants to freeze New York City property taxes for at least two years -- and perhaps four if he can win support from the City Council and Albany for a mix of new fees to finance garbage collection or bridge maintenance, senior mayoral aides said yesterday.
But City Hall officials said the Mayor had not yet made a final decision, as he prepares his four-year plan for keeping the budget balanced, due next Wednesday.
They said the plan would also call for cutting the city work force by a total of 25,000 jobs by 1995 and would count on nearly $1 billion in aid from a state takeover of Medicaid costs, roughly twice what Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has proposed to provide in that period.


After Madrid, Time to Dig In
With the Madrid conference ending today and Arab-Israeli bilateral talks about to begin, questions about the peace process trouble Americans.
Were the parties ready for Madrid?
The Arabs and Israelis probably have not fully thought out their negotiating strategies for the next stage, but it is wrong to say they went to Madrid only because we dragged them there.
They went also because they are tired of decades of conflict.


Peggy Guggenheim's Collection Still Alive and Well in Venice
To the Editor:
"Peggy Guggenheim's Grandsons Challenge Museum's Managers" (arts pages, Oct. 16) questions the Guggenheim Museum's intentions for Peggy Guggenheim's collection in Venice.


THE MIDDLE EAST TALKS: In Israel and Arab Nations: Hostility and Skepticism, Fascination and Hope; Opinions of Arabs Are Ranging Even to Indifference
For those who have a stake in it, the Palestinians and Israel's Arab neighbors, the last two days in Madrid have proved riveting.
For Arab militants who demonize the West, the last two days have proved exasperating.
And for nearly everyone else in the Arab world, the last two days have proved rather dull.
History may have been in the making at the Middle East peace conference in Madrid, but you would have had a hard time explaining that to any of the patrons in the Hussein Cafe in Cairo.
The gurgle and smoke of the water pipes, the syrupy sweet coffee in tiny porcelain cups, the card games and endless chatter that consumes so many lives here, were barely disrupted by the parade of dignitaries, all in coats and ties and speaking in a foreign tongue, who had their moment on the screen overhead and then disappeared from view.


Economic Scene; Bleak Job Picture Darkens the Mood
AT face value, the first estimate of gross national product in the third quarter, released by the Commerce Department this week, implies that the recession is over: total output of goods and services, adjusted for inflation, rose at an annual rate of 2.4 percent.
But practically nobody took the number at face value.
Economists noted that the gain in G.N.P. was largely a result of a slower rate of inventory cutting.
Inventories declined at an annual rate of $12.9 billion in the third quarter, less than half as fast as the $27.2 billion second-quarter drop.
The slower decline added $14.3 billion to G.N.P.
But final sales -- G.N.P. less inventory change -- rose by only six-tenths of 1 percent, just a smidgen above the gain of three-tenths of 1 percent in the second quarter.


Shearson's Notes
Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., the securities company owned by the American Express Company, yesterday sold $100 million in seven-year noncallable notes with an 8.875 percent coupon, due in 1998, through Lehman Brothers, at a price of 99.664 to yield 8.94 percent.
The notes have been rated A-3 by Moody's and A by Standard &amp; Poor's.


TV Ads and Attacks Increase In Pennsylvania Senate Race
As Pennsylvania's Senate race moves into the home stretch, the candidates are increasing their television advertising, expanding into radio advertising and stepping up their attacks on each other.
Dick Thornburgh campaigned in Pittsburgh, talking about his ideas for creating jobs while his new television advertisement was playing all over the state.


Appeals Court Clears Doctors Who Were Censured in the Libby Zion Case
In the latest turnabout in the Libby Zion medical negligence case, a state appeals court today cleared two doctors of findings that they had provided inadequate care to the teen-ager, who died in a New York City hospital in 1984.
The unanimous ruling by the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court here overturned a decision last year by the State Board of Regents.
The Regents had censured Dr.
Gregg W. Stone and Dr.
Luise L. Weinstein for gross negligence in treating the 18-year-old Miss Zion at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.


Spare Change? Giants Need Two Quarters
Almost from the beginning of this puzzling season, Giants' fans have wondered why that once-wonderful defense seemingly self-destructs in the second half.
Today, Al Groh, the Giants' new defensive coordinator, came up with two answers, one general and one specific.
First, he said, the defense has often done so well in the first half that the law of averages has been catching up with it in the second half.


U.S.O.C. to Get New Ethics Rules
A convention-style series of Olympic meetings opened here today, sponsored by the United States Olympic Committee, whose senior officials will be presented on Friday with new rules governing conflicts of interest and public disclosure.
The presentation will be made by William Hybl, who became the U.S.O.C. president last month.
His predecessor, Robert Helmick, was forced to resign because of questions about his business practices while president.
Helmick was U.S.O.C. president since 1985.


Review/Dance; Modern Choreography Plus the Speed of Ice
The Ice Theater of New York is described by its founder, Moira North, as a dance company on ice, a definition given an extra dimension by its artistry in performance.
The seven-year-old troupe, directed by Miss North and Rob McBrien, gave itself a Halloween benefit on Wednesday night at Rockefeller Plaza.
The performance on the ice rink featured "Sedona Surprise," a short but speedy space-scanning premiere by the experimental modern-dance choreographer Laura Dean; "Lumiere," a premiere by Miss North, and "Malevolent Landscape," a solo by one of the most creative skaters on the ice today, Gary Beacom.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about President Lech Walesa's offer to become Poland's Prime Minister misidentified the current Prime Minister.
He is Jan Krzysztof Bielecki.


FATALITIES HIGHER ON CROWDED JETS
In a study of major airline crashes in the United States over a 15-year period, experts at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have concluded that the chances of dying in a crash are significantly increased if the flight is heavily booked.
The results of the study, involving crashes of jetliners operated by major American carriers on domestic flights, were published in the current issue of Flight Safety Digest by Dr.
Arnold Barnett, a professor of operations research at M.I.T.'s Sloan School of Management, and Todd Curtis, a former M.I.T. student who is a systems safety engineer with the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 572 money market mutual funds decreased by $2.62 billion, to $464.13 billion, in the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 210 institutional funds decreased by $1.06 billion, to $145.04 billion.
The assets of the 270 general-purpose funds were down by $429.7 million, to $173.55 billion.
The 92 broker-dealer funds decreased by $1.13 billion, to $145.55 billion, the institute said.


Policing New Haven: Patrols and Politics - A special report.; Chief With High Profile Uses Streets to Test New Theories
Talking about himself, which he clearly relishes, Nicholas Pastore slips easily into the third person.
Nick Pastore, he will tell you, was "an outstanding patrol officer," a "super crime-fighting cop," "a good cop with the Mafia," "Sherlock Holmes."
Most of all, the man who has been police chief here for the last 20 months portrays himself as someone who inherited "a city out of control" and led it out of an iron-fisted law-enforcement tradition into the promised land of community-based policing.
Campaigning on Crime
"I'm not a cop's cop," he said. "I'm a people's cop. You understand what I'm saying?"
But turmoil over the Chief's flamboyant leadership as well as an ominously rising murder rate and random nightly gunfire -- including a shootout on the steps of police headquarters only weeks ago -- have led many to question whether this city of ivied Yale towers and concrete-block slums is on the right course.
On Tuesday, the city's first black Mayor, John C. Daniels, seeks a second term after a campaign in which crime has been the most volatile issue.
Although figures show major crime down about 10 percent for much of this year compared to last, New Haven in 1990 ranked sixth in violent crime per capita in American cities with more than 100,000 residents.
In October New Haven had an average of six reported gunfire incidents a day.
In effect, New Haven will also be choosing between two approaches to handling crime: whether to entrench, citywide, Chief Pastore's experiment with "problem-solving" foot patrols, an experiment on which the verdict remains out, or revert in large part to reactive policing by emergency-response radio cars and SWAT teams, as advocated by the Republican challenger, Alderman Jonathan J. Einhorn.
Perhaps in no city in America is the dichotomy in policing more clearly drawn, with the outcome of importance to departments around the country.
Dean M. Esserman, a disciple of the guru of community policing, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown of New York City, recently took the job of assistant chief here, with Mr.
Brown attending his swearing in.
But the argument over the best way to fight crime in New Haven has been clouded by what amounts to warfare between the freewheeling Chief and his many disgruntled officers, backed by their union.
He is treating them, they say, the authoritarian way he doesn't want them to treat the public.
"The cops clearly hate the Chief and they say it," said Mr.
Esserman, a former counsel to the New York City transit police, who has been working furiously to repair relations and win officers over to Chief Pastore's program.
In many ways the 53-year-old Chief has made himself, as much as his program, the issue.
Describing the department he took over in February 1990 as "brain dead," he has proceeded to turn it upside down, staging what he called a "coup" aimed at "ventilating" the 417-member force and wiping out the command echelon and a fifth of the ranks.
A popular commander was literally dispatched to the doghouse as head of the department's animal shelter.
From banning leather gloves as too intimidating to ridiculing officers who lingered in doughnut shops to secretive motel room meetings with a shadowy "Mafia informant," the irrepressible Chief has put his stamp on New Haven.
To protest disciplinary action against two officers whose shots killed a fleeing drug suspect, more than 60 officers came down with the "blue flu," calling in sick on a weekend in September.
Citing a "thunderous" no confidence vote in the Chief's leadership, the police union demanded his resignation, adding, "Please reserve a table at your retirement for the union executive board."  The Troubled Years Politics, Wiretaps And a 'Stud Bus'
The confrontation in this ethnically diverse city of 130,500 on Long Island Sound, a city of communal neighborhoods and small-town familiarities, springs from years of political maneuvering and personal ambitions and animosities.
Politics and the police, in particular, have long been intertwined.
In 1977, it was disclosed that the police had illegally wiretapped thousands of phones during the heyday of demonstrations against the Vietnam war, especially after the Black Panthers helped turn Yale into a center of protest.
Mr.
Pastore, who had joined the force in 1962 and briefly ran the wiretaps in 1968, was a star witness before a police board inquiry, an act for which some members of the force never forgave him.
By 1981, Mr.
Pastore concluded he could not serve under the new Police Chief, William F. Farrell, a former Marine Corps officer.
They were just incompatible, he recalled recently.
Suffering from a kidney ailment and wary of what he said were "all those people around who were going to get Pastore," he left the department as Chief of Operations after applying unsuccessfully for a medical disability pension.
Increasing Violence
Under Chief Farrell, whose office was adorned with military regalia and who still flies a Marine flag at his home near the coast, the department epitomized the reactive style of American policing of the time.
Patrol cars raced from one emergency to another as officers fought a battle of containment against rampant drug-fueled violence.
Cocaine was sold openly although New Haven was spared the epidemic of low-priced crack that devastated New York City starting in the mid 1980's.
Between 1987 and 1989 alone, complaints of robbery and aggravated assault each rose by about 50 percent.
The number of murders annually rose from 23 to a record 34.
Yet the Police Department collected virtually no intelligence of its own and mounted no significant undercover operations.
The existence of drug gangs, though well known to police officers, was officially denied, even in the face of a downtown gun battle between rival factions that had passers-by ducking bullets on the courthouse steps.
Meanwhile, a hard-pressed Police Department developed its own reputation for harsh tactics.
A squad of officers hidden in a van known as the "stud bus" often descended on youths gathered on street corners, seizing or roughing up many without cause, according to widespread complaints.
The unit was referred to on the streets as "the beat-down posse."
Mr.
Farrell, in an interview, said he believed in "being firm" but denied tolerating improper force.
"You didn't have to have notches in your gun to go forward with me," he said.
One incident in September 1989 -- never publicized -- occurred especially close to home: in the jail adjoining police headquarters downtown at One Union Avenue.
Despair Over Crime
A jail clerk reported seeing an officer grab a handcuffed prisoner, a young man, by the neck and push him to a desk.
"As I looked through the window I observed the police officer punching the prisoner in his back left side, the area of his kidney, and then punch him in the front portion of his left side," she said in a complaint.
At first she thought the officer was using brass knuckles.
Police officials now say it was his keys.
An assault charge against the officer was dropped after the victim declined to testify.
The officer, granted "accelerated rehabilitation" by the court, remains on the force.
Such incidents, coupled with despair over rising criminal violence, led in November 1989 to a new city regime espousing the politically catchy gospel of "community based" policing.
Mr.
Daniels, the new Mayor, was a State Senator and former Alderman who operated a plumbing company.
A report later written by two graduate students from the Yale School of Organization and Management quoted a senior Daniels adviser as saying that the campaign had advanced the idea of community-based policing to provide "a patina of technocracy" for the mayoral platform to appeal to New Haven's "progressive, intellectual community."
Behind the scenes was Mr.
Pastore.
He spent the 1980's selling costume jewelry and, staked by large bank loans, investing heavily in real estate, including an ice cream parlor with a video game arcade in Madison, Conn.
But when the real-estate downturn hit, he was sued by a variety of creditors for more than $2 million.
Today, by his count, he owes $1.3 million and, hoping to avert bankruptcy, is looking for "a workout with the banks."  Moving for 'Ventilation'
During the 1989 campaign, Mr.
Pastore quietly advised Mr.
Daniels, a friend from high school days.
And the following February, after what was proclaimed to be a broad search, Mayor Daniels stunned New Haven by bringing Mr.
Pastore back to the Police Department as chief.
Chief Pastore embarked quickly on his "ventilation." He removed the shield of bulletproof glass separating the public from desk officers in the fortress-like police headquarters, made a show of throwing open his office door to members of the department and replaced martial symbols with a photograph of himself and Lee Brown.
A large mural of police activities, done by a police artist and prized by Chief Farrell, was unceremoniously painted over on a weekend.
Among his first targets were some of the highest-ranking commanders, five of whom received a "golden handshake" giving them 75 percent of their pay as well as full health benefits for life -- well above the norm.
The sixth, former Comdr.
Leonard Gallo -- who had been supervisor of patrol services, the street crime and drug unit, the harbor patrol, and was a graduate of Federal Bureau of Investigation and Secret Service programs -- suffered a more ignominious fate.
Refusing to be, as he put it, "pushed out" after 21 years -- even at $43,000 a year for life -- he was reassigned to the New Haven Animal Shelter and required to "stay abreast of trends in animal epidemiology" and design a system of "intake-to-release paperwork for all dogs."
The Chief also earned the enmity of many officers by ejecting them from desk jobs to street duty.
Some quit.
A One-Man Operation The Chief Meets In the Shadows
In the spring of 1990, the Chief began an unusual operation of his own, one that would arouse the curiosity of a department lawyer and the Connecticut state police but was never made public.
He rented rooms at the Holiday Inn in nearby Milford and met there with someone he later described as an informant on Mafia activities.
At the same time, he said last week, he used other rooms at the motel for personal purposes, putting up friends at a special rate he was granted and using the swimming pool, sometimes with his granddaughter.
According to bills reviewed by The New York Times, the informant operation cost the department thousands of dollars.
The Chief said he never told anyone whom he was meeting with -- he gave conflicting descriptions of the person -- and never stayed overnight.
He saved no notes or other record of the meetings but, he said last week, passed on to his aides information that became the basis of a continuing undercover operation into mob control of several small New Haven businesses.
That operation produced several drug buys and would lead to arrests, the Chief said.
But Assistant Chief Esserman said in a separate interview that the operation had been of little value and should be shut down.
An inquiry into the motel expenses began last fall after a lawyer for the Police Department was shown some of the bills by a disaffected police major, Thomas P. Muller, who questioned whether the chief was using the rooms for personal reasons.
The lawyer, Glenn Coe, a former state prosecutor now in private practice in Hartford, was concerned enough to pass the matter on to the state police.
Bernard Sullivan, who was then State Police Superintendent, said recently that at a meeting in his office last November, he was told in general terms by the New Haven State's Attorney that Chief Pastore was engaged in a law-enforcement operation and so, before starting an investigation, dropped the matter with the questions unresolved.
The New Haven prosecutor, Michael Dearington, declined to comment on the matter last week, and it remains unclear what he knew of Chief Pastore's use of the rooms.
If some officers question the wisdom of a police chief meeting on his own with mob informants, Chief Pastore has no qualms.
He boasts he had 108 informants when he was detective commander years ago.
"I go anywhere in this community and speak to anyone at any time," Chief Pastore said.
"A Mafioso, a drug dealer, a whore, a pimp."  The Future Nightsticks To Plowshares
The Chief created a sensation by giving an interview on drugs to a journalist who later sold the article to High Times, a magazine about the drug culture.
In the interview, published in the August 1990 issue, the chief dismissed interdiction as a failure and urged: "Let's decriminalize and medicalize the problems." Going further, the Chief has discouraged his officers from arresting first-time drug offenders, attempting to steer them toward treatment while helping to clear clogged court calendars.
"To this day," he said in an interview in his office, "we don't police with tenderness, kindness, understanding. In fact, much of the problem in American society has been caused by mean policing that exacerbates, perpetuates and results in mean streets." 'Service-Oriented' Officers
So the Chief is looking for more than a few good women -- along with more black and Hispanic recruits.
The department now has 77 vacancies out of 417 slots, and the Chief has told the union he would welcome another hundred openings -- jobs that generally would not be filled, he said, with "young white males from the suburbs" or "adventure-type individuals."
The Chief's aim is to fill the ranks with "service-oriented" officers who would staff the 12 permanent police substations he intends to open throughout New Haven -- the heart of his community policing program.
From here, the officers would fan out through the neighborhoods, getting to know the residents, winning their trust and spotting problems before they fester.
In Chief Pastore's vision of "21st century policing," Yale would replace jail.
"You're not going to spend $30,000 for one black inmate," he said.
"You're going to send him to Yale. You're going to send him to the University of New Haven. Quality of life, that's the change."
"Talk about the criminal mind," he said.
"If we could rechannel that into positive behavior. That's what I try to do all the time, modify people's behavior."
After less than two years, the payoff from the Chief's approach is difficult to read from crime figures, which can be skewed by inaccurate reporting and are subject to differing interpretations.
But overall the data show complaints are down.
With the 28th murder of the year on Monday, the city's homicide toll may top last year's 31 and approach or surpass 1989's record 34.
On the positive side, reported robbery complaints were down 24 percent, rape complaints were down 21 percent and burglary complaints were down 14 percent, comparing the first eight months of 1991 to 1990.
Assault complaints were level.
But in recent years the percentage of robberies with guns has increased from about a fifth to over a third.
And the high number of assaults, 2,008 in 1990, contributed to making New Haven the most violence-ridden American city of 100,000 or over, per capita, after Miami, Atlanta, Newark, St.
Louis, and Tampa, according to figures supplied to the F.B.I.
New Haven had 3,059 reported violent crimes -- homicides, rapes, robberies and assaults -- per 100,000 people.
New York City was far down on the list, with 2,384.
The Chief's program, real on the streets or still on the drawing board, has heartened many New Havenites.
John R. Williams, a defense lawyer and longtime police critic who represented the plaintiffs in the wiretapping suit, has become -- somewhat to his amazement -- an admirer of Chief Pastore, calling his appointment "a brilliant move." The Chief returns the compliment by saying that without Mr.
Williams "us scoundrels would be out of control."
To Bea Dozier-Taylor, a gallery and bookstore owner in the crime-scarred Dwight-Kensington neighborhood, where community policing has already started, the officers on patrol are forging "a unity with the community." In the past, she said, the police were seen only in emergencies.
Sgt.
Achilles Generoso, who supervises her area, said he was "no bleeding-heart liberal" but he had become a convert to community policing, describing it as "nothing more than common sense." Nevertheless, Sergeant Generoso admits to dismay over the way he said Chief Pastore had stereotyped many officers as laggard.
"I was angry with him," he said.
Sergeant Cavalier, the union president and a 25-year-police veteran, said the anger against the Chief runs deep.
"He puts officers in an area riddled with shootings and tells them to approach drug dealers to seek a better life," he said.
"The drug dealers are laughing at the police."
In his office, still unpacking his papers from New York, the new assistant chief, Mr.
Esserman, shrugged.
He had heard the complaints, he said.
He knew the problems.
And he had advised the Chief to get closer to his officers.
"Great men have great faults," he said.


Molokovo Journal; Soviet Depression Batters the Cows and Chickens
For years the Soviet Union has held out the 5,000-acre collective farm here as a model, but now even this sprawling assemblage of barns, chicken coops and potato fields finds itself dragged down by the nation's agricultural crisis.
The farm, which has 1,000 workers, 1,200 dairy cows and 30,000 chickens, cannot get the feed it needs because of the nation's poor harvest and the chaos in its distribution system.
As a result, milk production at this farm a dozen miles south of Moscow is down by 11 percent so far this year.
Managers here say they fear that the feed situation will grow worse this winter.


A Nose Is a Nose Is A Nose: Just Ask The Jets' Mersereau
He was a nose tackle in the middle of a 3-4 defensive alignment before the Jets switched to a 4-3 setup last year, but Scott Mersereau, now a defensive tackle, still considers himself a nose tackle.
His job just isn't as hard as it once was.
In the past, Mersereau had to play head-up on the opposing center and deal with triple-team blocks from both guards and the center.
Now, Mersereau is shaded to the left or the right of the center and in most instances has to deal with only two blockers -- the center and one guard.
It's as if his job was reduced by one-third.
Still, his job title has not changed, at least not in his mind.


A Woman Who Says She's 'In Shape'
The baby, Eilish, was unplanned, a definitive break in the training schedule of world-class runner Liz McColgan.
McColgan had entered the hospital in Dundee, Scotland, 11 months ago, having begun labor early on a Friday afternoon.
Her abdominal muscles were so strong, so tight, that the blonde baby girl required 46 hours of labor before she was born on Sunday, without so much as an apology.


Knowledgeware Merger Canceled
A planned merger between the software maker Knowledgeware Inc. and Intellicorp of Mountain View, Calif., has been called off in the wake of a steep decline in Knowledgeware's stock price.
The companies announced on Wednesday that the stock-swap deal was off, though no reasons were given.


Art in Review
'Painting Culture'  Fiction/Nonfiction Gallery 21 Mercer Street SoHo Through Nov. 9
This provocative and lively exhibition presents the work of six artists, all women.
Their subjects include sexism, child abuse, pop culture, religion and the art world, sometimes in combination.
Subtlety is not the goal except in the case of Mary Weatherford's "Violetta," an abstraction that seems entirely lost in the context of such satirical paintings by Julia Wachtel, Jane Hammond, Kathe Burkhart, Deborah Kass and Sue Williams.


BRIEFS
Debt *
City of Rochester bond anticipation notes were offered yesterday, with $40.6 million won by A. H. Williams, $30.6 million by First Boston and $4 million by Roosevelt &amp; Cross.
The notes, which are due in November 1992, were not reoffered and are unrated.
*
Nestle Holdings Inc.'s $200 million of 7.125 percent five-year bonds were offered yesterday by Credit Suisse First Boston at a price of 101.24 to yield 6.82 percent.
Nestle S.A. is the big diversified food company based in Switzerland.
Common Stock company makes products for the treatment of viral diseases and cancers. *
Liposome Technology Inc., Menlo Park, Calif., has filed for three million common shares to be sold through Oppenheimer &amp; Company, with proceeds to be used for clinical development and other corporate purposes.


The Jump, The Fall, The Return, The Hopes
The jump was one she had made "a million times" before, a triple combination that was not the sort to give her celebrated grand prix horse, Special Envoy, any nightmares.
But the result of the fall she took after Special Envoy clipped the third rail and went to his knees was one in a million: it caused a cerebral hemorrhage that nearly killed a rider who, with 35 years of experience and an unprecedented three rider-of-the-year titles, had never suffered even a minor injury.


Anthony J. Parisi, 48, Business Week Editor
Anthony J. Parisi, an assistant managing editor of Business Week since 1985, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 48 years old.
He died of metastatic skin cancer, said his wife, Elaine Keane.
He worked until mid-August.


Art in Review
Rackstraw Downes  Hirschl &amp; Adler Modern 851 Madison Avenue (at 70th Street) Through Nov. 16
The environmentalist tone in Rackstraw Downes's realist paintings is stronger than ever here.
His decidedly antiheroic landscapes include panoramic paintings of oilfields in Texas and the town dump of Rockland, Me., as well as the images of downtown Manhattan for which he is best known.
Mr.
Downes seems to want not only to depict scenes in careful detail, but also to explain the social forces that have shaped them; to this end he adds lengthy titles to several of the images.
A long panorama of a cove on the Arthur Kill between Staten Island and New Jersey, for example, subtitled "A Discharged Oil Tanker Prepares to Pass the World's Biggest Dump," shows a red-and-black tanker near the edge of the painting, floating surreally above a delicate profusion of marsh grasses, while the brown hillside of the landfill rises beyond.


Suns Suspend Dumas
RICHARD DUMAS, a Phoenix Suns rookie whose career at Oklahoma State was cut short by alcohol-related problems, was suspended yesterday after testing positive in a random drug test, the team said.
As a rookie, according to league rules, he will not be allowed to play in the N.B.A. before next season. (AP)


Corrections
An article on the Health page on Wednesday about a new way to remove precancerous cells misstated the location of McGill University Medical School.
It is in Montreal.


We Don't Need Additional Gun Laws; A Strange Conversion
To the Editor:
An archconservative on most issues, yet a supporter of gun control, I feel compelled to respond to the purported conversion of Representative Chet Edwards, whose district includes Killeen, Tex., from being an opponent of gun control to America's newest advocate, in view of the mass murders in Killeen Oct. 16 ("My View on Guns Changed," Op-Ed, Oct. 19).


UAL's Profit Off; Continental's Loss Thins
The UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, yesterday reported sharply lower third-quarter earnings and Continental Airlines Holdings Inc., parent of Continental Airlines, reported that third-quarter losses had narrowed substantially.
Both airline companies are struggling to recover from the severe downturn in passenger traffic that began in January with the Persian Gulf war, which also doubled fuel prices.


Gorbachev, the Memorist, Agitates France
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev returned home today after talks with President Francois Mitterrand, but he left behind him a continuing debate over whether he criticized the French leader in his just-published account of the failed Soviet coup in August.
In a news conference here today, Mr.
Gorbachev reiterated that his book describing his three-day detention in his Crimea dacha did not contain a much-publicized lament that Mr.
Mitterrand did not telephone him after his release.
"This is not in my book," he said.


9 City Council Members Press Plan to Curb Speaker's Power
Pressing for a more open New York City Council on the eve of its expansion, nine Council members proposed rule changes yesterday that would lessen the Speaker's control by giving more power to committee heads and individual Council members.
The group was led by Sal F. Albanese of Brooklyn and Ronnie M. Eldridge of Manhattan, two dissident members who lost their committee assignments earlier this year after a bruising run-in with Speaker Peter F. Vallone.
Both voted against a plan to expand the Police Department that Mr.
Vallone successfully championed.


Review/Film; Flashbacks Proliferate. Also Murk.
"As our financial paths intertwine," say the production notes for Hiroaki Yoshida's "Iron Maze," which is about troubled relations between Americans and Japanese, "the widening cultural gap between us stretches over a dangerous abyss."
"Iron Maze" is this week's leading entry in the looniest movie of the year sweepstakes.
Using the same Ryunosuke Akutagawa story that was the basis for Akira Kurosawa's "Rashomon," Tim Metcalfe has written a screenplay of epic confusion and unintentional hilarity.


Hialeah Journal; Where Politics Is Down and Dirty
Mayor Raul Martinez, was convicted of extortion and racketeering in March after a jury found he had accepted $1 million in cash and property from land developers.
His replacement, Julio Martinez, complains that his efforts to clean up the city and pass a new budget have been thwarted because the police Chief and the majority of the City Council defy his orders and remain loyal to the man he replaced.
"It's just a dispute between politicians, no different than what goes on in New York, Chicago, Washington or New Orleans," Julio Martinez said this week.


Review/Art; Americana With Benign and Sinister Side by Side
As has been her custom since the mid-1980's, Ida Applebroog has mounted an exhibition at the Ronald Feldman Gallery in SoHo that scrutinizes the dark side of American life while also pushing at the possibilities of painting.
Her latest strategy is to situate a number of paintings in the middle of the gallery as well as on the walls, so that freestanding, sometimes two-sided canvases surround and confront the viewer at every turn.
These "Marginalia," as the artist collectively titles them, include a painting of an overweight man tottering on a child's tiny scooter; it stands near a canvas that depicts a seemingly handicapped girl who eats by holding a spoon with her foot.
The two images -- the first ridiculing the powerful, the second rooting for the vulnerable -- are quintessential Applebroog.
So is the way the emotional and interpretive tables can turn, with the scooter rider suddenly seeming the vulnerable pathetic figure, the child the one who is capable and in control.


Bayard Ewing, 75, Ex-U.S. Chairman Of the United Way
Bayard Ewing, a former national chairman of the United Way and longtime chairman of the Rhode Island School of Design, died Monday at Rhode Island Hospital in Providence.
He was 75 years old.
Mr. Ewing, a resident of Providence, died of cancer, his family said.


Philips Lighting Selects McKinney &amp; Silver
After a review that included at least five agencies, Philips Lighting, the nation's third-largest lightbulb maker, has moved its advertising account to McKinney &amp; Silver, Raleigh, N.C., from Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners, New York, advertising executives said yesterday.
Along with those two shops, the review finalists were Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York; D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, and Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Boston.


Corrections
A picture caption in some editions on Wednesday about the Pennsylvania Senate contest misidentified the woman campaigning with Dick Thornburgh on a Philadelphia street.
She was Judy Reedman, a longtime supporter, not Mr.
Thornburgh's wife, Ginny.


Pentagon May Give Moscow $1 Billion
In a novel effort to accommodate a changing world, the Pentagon is nearing agreement with Congress to transfer up to $1 billion from its budget to give the Soviet Union food and medical aid and help convert Soviet military industries into civilian projects, senior Bush Administration and Congressional officials say.
The plan, which has the support of the White House and Congressional leaders, would be incorporated in the $291 billion 1992 Pentagon budget nearing final approval in Congress.


Art in Review
Scott Burton 'The Last Tableau'  Whitney Museum of American Art 945 Madison Avenue (at 75th Street) Through Dec. 8
The distinctive blend of sculpture and furniture that was Scott Burton's primary achievement began in performance art, specifically in a series of nearly motionless tableaux involving a few actors and a few pieces of furniture that, if they moved at all, did so in the blackouts between scenes.
Charged with a Hopperesque sense of isolation, these silent slow-moving affairs had great style but gave little indication of Burton's profound humor.


Sounds Around Town Sounds Around Town
Gary Bartz Improvises
Gary Bartz, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Manhattan, (212) 228-6440.
One of John Coltrane's most able students, Gary Bartz is a searing saxophonist with a hard, unforgiving tone.
This is modern improvising at its best: Harmony is a playground, and dissonance is just another color to be fooled with, not feared.
Mr.
Bartz is at that awkward age for jazz musicians, between their early 30's and late 50's, when they tend to be overlooked.
It's also the age of their greatest strength, when technique and knowledge combine to produce the best playing of a musician's career.
Shows tonight and tomorrow start at 10; there is a $12 cover charge, plus an $8 minimum.
Abbey Lincoln
Abbey Lincoln, Condon's, 117 East 15th Street, Manhattan, (212) 254-0960.
Drama, drama, drama.
Abbey Lincoln can make people cry.
She's an expansive performer working with a limited technique, but that gives her a forthrightness that makes her material seem all that much more heartfelt.
It might all be performance rhetoric, but she is as convincing as any other singer working, and she can make an audience believe that her song selections are based on personal experience.
Sets tonight and tomorrow are at 9:30 and 11:30.
There is a $20 cover, plus a two-drink minimum.
Beauty in the Blues
Shirley Horn, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street, Manhattan, (212) 255-4037.
Shirley Horn is all understatement, and she turns all her performances into sly blues vignettes.
Neither her sophisticated piano playing nor her clipped singing style calls attention to itself; together they manage to make pieces of real blues beauty.
Sets tonight, tomorrow and Sunday are at 9:30 and 11:30.
There is a $15 cover, plus a $7.50 minimum.


Cuomo Is Courted by Congressional Chorus
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's tantalizing hems and haws about his Presidential plans have set off an a cappella chorus of Congressmen calling on him to run.
The latest to join the chorus of liberal Democrats, most of whom are from the Northeast, is Representative Thomas M. Foglietta of Pennsylvania, who campaigned in 1988 with Mr.
Cuomo on behalf of Gov.
Michael Dukakis, then the Democratic Presidential nominee.


Vaccine Seen as Preventing Shingles
An experimental vaccine that protects against chicken pox also protected against shingles in a small, federally sponsored study, scientists reported yesterday at a meeting in New York.
The finding goes a long way toward answering a central question about the vaccine.
Before the study was conducted the scientists said they did not know whether a vaccine for chicken pox would protect against shingles, a usually painful rash that primarily affects older adults, or whether it might increase the frequency of shingles.


Prices Already Soaring in Soviet Shops
Even before the enactment of a new plan for sharp price rises, the cost of food and other necessities are booming upward along with the anxiety level in this battered capital city.
Chronic shortages of the most basic foods -- sugar and eggs, and in some neighborhoods even bread -- are proving extremely worrisome as Russian consumers attempt to adjust to the announcement by Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Russian federated republic, who said this week that there is no alternative to a painful plunge into free marketry in which most state subsidies must be ended.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.00
3.00
8.00
3-MO. TREAS.
4.84
4.83
7.06
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.85
4.84
7.03
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.13
7.14
8.38
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.91
7.89
8.67
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
8.90
9.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.85
6.86
7.67
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Market Place; Reynolds's Armor May Wear Thin
WHILE Alcoa has spent the last few years retreating from an ambitious diversification strategy to concentrate on aluminum, its chief rival, the Reynolds Metals Company, has pursued the opposite tack.
Richmond-based Reynolds, the nation's second-largest aluminum producer after Alcoa, has diversified into plastics, gold and consumer products, and its stock has risen impressively, from around $45 in the middle of 1988 to the current $55.


Church and State Should Stay Separate
To the Editor:
On Oct. 18, under the banner of choice and intense White House pressure, the House Education and Labor Committee passed the comprehensive neighborhood schools revitalization bill, which allows Federal dollars to pay tuition at private schools.


Focus Is on a Few Close Races for New Jersey Legislature
The biggest share of an estimated $14 million that the two major parties and their candidates are spending in quest of victory in Tuesday's election for 120 seats in the New Jersey Legislature has been channeled to a handful of races.
Campaign consultants, pollsters, graphics designers, printers, radio and cable television stations, the post office and the telephone company will get the money.
What the two parties want is control of the State Senate and the State Assembly.
The winning candidates will get $35,000 a year for a part-time job and, of course, the opportunity to serve their neighbors.


Breeders' Cup: Lure of Money Gives It an International Tone
Nobody hoisted an alarm saying: "One if by land, two if by sea." But everybody knew that a record total of 21 horses from Canada and Europe were among the 91 horses entered in the Breeders' Cup series of championship races on Saturday, giving the strongest international spin yet to the major event of the American turf.
For the first time since the series was inaugurated eight years ago, horses either bred or trained in other countries were entered in all seven races.
And racing officials predicted the invasion would grow in future years and would include horses from Eastern Europe, Japan, Australia and South America.


On Stage, and Off
Wasserstein on a Reunion of Sisters
Let the celebrations begin.
Wendy Wasserstein has finished writing a new play, Andre Bishop finished reading it on Monday morning, and on Monday afternoon decided to produce it at Lincoln Center next fall, with Daniel Sullivan directing.
Mr.
Sullivan, the artistic director of the Seattle Repertory Theater, directed Ms.
Wasserstein's Pulitzer Prize- and Tony-winning play, "The Heidi Chronicles," and will have a workshop production of the still untitled play at his theater in April.
Mr.
Bishop, who becomes the artistic director at Lincoln Center on Jan. 1, says the eight-character play will probably go into the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater.


On My Mind; We Are Warned
Once more we have been clearly warned, and once more we have a choice.
We can accept the plain warning of mass murder to come and act to prevent it.
Or we can say again that no man could be that evil, no nation could follow his madness, he is bluffing -- and do nothing.


Buck Has No Apologies for Series
Despite rumblings that Game 7 of the World Series was Jack Buck's last as a CBS baseball announcer, Buck is unruffled and unapologetic.
"I haven't heard a thing," said Buck, whose option for 1992 must be picked up by CBS by Nov. 26 if the network wants to keep him.
"You can't force anyone to do anything," said Arthur Friedman, Buck's attorney, "but Jack's a Hall of Famer and they had a great World Series."


For Ex-Judge, a Lonely Crusade to Clear His Name
Once he was at the top of New York City's political life, rising to become president of the City Council.
Later he became one of the city's most powerful judges.
And for decades he was a prominent, well-connected figure in his native Queens.
But Francis X. Smith now devotes much of his life to one goal: clearing his name.
He is trying to convince the courts, the city government and the press that his 1987 conviction on perjury charges and his resulting imprisonment were unjust.


Democrats Agree on Jobless Benefits
Spurred by a demand for quick action by President Bush, Congressional Democrats have agreed on a new plan to pay extended unemployment benefits to people out of work at least half a year, House Speaker Thomas S. Foley said tonight.
The plan, which Bob Dole of Kansas, the Senate Republican leader, said he could support because it paid for itself, may end three months of partisan wrangling over helping about three million long-term unemployed people.


Ultramar's Chairman And 2 Directors Quit
The chairman and two other senior directors of Ultramar P.L.C. in London resigned yesterday in what analysts saw as part of a desperate attempt by the British oil and gas company to fight off a takeover bid by Lasmo P.L.C., a British oil and gas exploration and production company.
Lasmo has bid $2.26 billion for Ultramar, based on its price yesterday on the London International Stock Exchange.
The shares fell 12.2 cents, to $5.546.


Agencies' Challenge Delays Lottery Review
For the second time in six months, the review on the Florida lottery's $25 million advertising account has been suspended because of protests from agencies that were eliminated.
The latest round of complaints were filed by four agencies -- the Ad Team, North Miami Beach, Fla.; Beber Silverstein &amp; Partners/Hill Holliday, Miami; Lintas/Fahlgren Martin Benito, Tampa, and Ogilvy &amp; Mather, Coral Gables -- that were dropped from the review earlier this week.
While lottery officials said the agencies' proposals had not met state requirements, agency executives complained that the officials were interpreting the regulations too strictly.


Assessing Flaws and Strengths of Cuomo, the Perpetual Potential Candidate
As Gov.
M.
Mario Cuomo of New York edges closer to a race for the Democratic Presidential nomination, some Democrats and other analysts are beginning to focus on his shortcomings as well as his strengths and the hurdles he would face in mounting a successful national campaign.
Despite the soaring expectations now surrounding him, many experts in his own party say that the transition from Governor of New York to Presidential candidate would not be painless or easy for Mr.
Cuomo.


Joseph Papp, Theater's Champion, Dies
Joseph Papp, director of the New York Shakespeare Festival and one of the most influential producers in the history of the American theater, died yesterday at his home in Greenwich Village.
He was 70 years old.
He died of prostate cancer, said Richard Kornberg, his press representative.
All Broadway theaters will dim their lights at 8 tonight in tribute to Mr.
Papp.


Review/Circus; Fondly Evoking Bygone Coney Island
Grace in motion is the key to the Big Apple Circus, whether the performers are the Flying Vazquez, six riderless Schumann horses prancing around the ring or a pair of elegant, intelligent elephants.
New York's homegrown circus is back for a seasonal visit, in residence in a tent at Lincoln Center through Jan. 5.
This year, the title of Paul Binder's small-top extravaganza is "Greetings From Coney Island," a resort that the founder and master of ceremonies remembers fondly from his youth.
Coney Island was a place, he tells us, with three entire amusement parks as well as beach, boardwalk and arcades.


INSIDE
House Votes Bank Curbs
In a setback for President Bush, the House voted to impose significant restrictions on the expansion of banks into new businesses.
Page D1.
Picking the Palm Beach Jury
As William K. Smith watched, lawyers began interviewing potential jurors for his rape trial.
Page A14.
Prayer at the High Court
The Supreme Court will hear arguments next week in a case that could undo decades of rulings on church-state separation.
Law, page B10.
The Hurdles for Cuomo
Many analysts in his own party say a Presidential race would not be easy for New York's Governor.
Page A17.


Review/Film; A Journalist, His Novel And Trouble In 70's Rome
A story of political intrigue can be set almost anywhere, provided the locale is sufficiently deceit-ridden to motivate each character to do the others in.
But the late-1970's Italian setting of John Frankenheimer's "Year of the Gun" is especially piquant, since it allows the story's hero, an American journalist named David Raybourne (Andrew McCarthy), to move between the angry, slogan-filled halls of an Italian university and the comfortable living quarters of Lia Spinelli (Valeria Golino), his well-heeled lover.
There is also much beautiful Roman scenery to accompany the film's scenes of rioting, raids by ski-masked guerrillas and other acts of violence in the street.
The story of "Year of the Gun" unfolds briskly and methodically against this vibrant backdrop, which is as it should be from Mr.
Frankenheimer, whose forte has always been the political thriller (among his credits are "Black Sunday," "The Manchurian Candidate" and "Seven Days in May").
But this film's casting problems work against the authenticity of its larger atmosphere and do a lot to trivialize the material.
The smoothly unctuous Mr.
McCarthy is never convincing or sympathetic as the rakish, much-in-demand American writer whose activities eventually stir the Red Brigades into a frenzy.


Fund-Raising Speech by Bush Becomes Attack on Congress
President Bush effectively opened his re-election campaign at a political fund raiser here with a fiery denunciation of Congress, calling its Democratic lawmakers "old thinkers with tired old ideas" who have been captured by special interest groups.
In an apparent preview of his 1992 re-election strategy, Mr.
Bush depicted Congress as dominated by "liberal carpers" and "small-bore" partisans who are ethically aimless and intellectually bankrupt.
He maintained repeatedly that the Congress hads blocked his own legislative program of "new ideas," and declared: "I'm sick and tired of it."
His attacks drew fierce applause from a hotel ballroom filled with Texas Republicans who each paid $1,000 for dinner and a chance to hear Mr.
Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle.
Unofficial Kickoff
The event, which the White House called the unofficial kickoff of Mr.
Bush's re-election effort, raised more than $1 million before expenses for the Bush-Quayle campaign treasury.
It was the first in a series of political appearances by Mr.
Bush and his Vice President that were expected to raise nearly $3 million for the Presidential race and for Texas Republicans.
Between now and mid-December, the two men will stage at least 13 more such fund raisers across the country, a White House official said today.
Mr.
Bush has said that only ill health will prevent him from seeking re-election but has indicated that his formal declaration of candidacy will not come until late this year at the earliest.
Tonight's address was originally billed by the White House as a 10-minute pep talk on "the greater glories of Republicanism." But by the time Mr.
Bush delivered it, it had metamorphosed into a biting 50-minute defense of his domestic policy, which has become the focus of Democratic attacks.
The speech cast the President, a fixture of Washington politics for 15 years, as a lone gun from Texas who sought to protect average Americans from what he called the "old thinkers" in the Democratic-controlled House and Senate.
"Lately the opposition says we don't have an agenda," he said, "but I've noticed their agenda fron Congress is stopping our agenda for America. They're old thinkers -- tired old ideas, and all they want to do is block" Administration programs.
Mr.
Bush drew the loudest cheers when he noted that the Senate had, until Thursday, exempted itself from the same sexual harassment laws that were invoked by critics of the President's Supreme Court nominee, Clarence Thomas.
"It's time that those who make the laws live by the laws that they make others live by," he said.
At the same time, Mr.
Bush's personal praise of Justice Thomas drew the evening's weakest applause.
Mr.
Bush also offered a new response to a common Democratic assertion: that his obsession with foreign issues has caused him to neglect domestic problems.
"We live in an integrated world," Mr.
Bush said.
"In that world, you can't divide foreign policy from domestic policy."
On Friday, Mr.
Bush plans visit Dallas for a $25,000-a-plate lunch for Texas Republicans at the home of the industrialist and financier T. Boone Pickens and for a campaign fund-raising dinner at a Dallas hotel.


Factories' Orders Show Drop of 1.7%
Two reports released yesterday suggested a slight slowdown in manufacturing activity, which has previously been a bright spot in the nation's wobbling economy.
A survey by the National Association of Purchasing Management, released last night, indicated that while manufacturing activity in the United States continued to expand in October, the pace of growth was slower than in the previous month.
It was the first slowdown in the growth rate in the survey since January.


CHRONICLE
OLGA HAVEL, the wife of President VACLAV HAVEL of Czechoslovakia, became known to the world as the subject of her husband's book "Letters to Olga," a compilation of his correspondence from prison while Czechoslovakia was under Communist rule.
She is now in the United States to raise money for a foundation she has established to help Czechoslovaks who are physically or mentally disabled.


Empire State Buyer Found
The Prudential Insurance Company of America has found a buyer for the Empire State Building, according to a letter the company sent to a partnership holding an 84-year lease on the property.
Peter Malkin, a New York real estate investor with a substantial interest in the partnership that controls the lease, said the buyer was listed as E. G. Holdings and the sale was scheduled to be completed on Nov. 15.
Which investors or institutions are represented by E. G. Holdings was not specified in the letter, Mr.
Malkin said, and could not be determined yesterday.


Washington Talk; Unhappy, Senators Threaten Filibuster
Today, the Senate opened debate on a major energy bill.
More accurately, the Senate opened debate on whether to debate the energy bill at all.
Several Senators, mostly Democrats, are so unhappy with a centerpiece of the measure -- drilling for oil in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge -- that they have pulled out the legislative weapon of last resort: the threat of a filibuster.


Omnicom in Profit Gain
The Omnicom Group reported yesterday that its third-quarter net income increased 15 percent, to about $7.7 million, or 28 cents a share, from about $6.7 million, or 26 cents a share, in the comparable period of 1990.
Revenues dropped 2.2 percent, to about $275.4 million from $281.6 million.
Omnicom is comprised of agencies including BBDO Worldwide and DDB Needham Worldwide.
On the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Omnicom's shares closed unchanged at $32.75.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a medical disorder, Barrett's esophagus, identified a researcher incompletely and omitted his affiliation.
He is Dr.
Richard Sampliner, chief of gastroenterology at the University of Arizona Health Sciences Center in Tucson.


Jury Hears Suspect's Tape In Slaying of Utah Tourist
One of the eight young men charged with the murder and robbery of a tourist from Utah last year admitted to taking part in the subway-platform attack in a videotaped statement shown to the jury yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
The defendant, Pascal Carpenter, said in the videotape that he was watching for the police when a relative of the victim ran up to him on the subway platform "screaming for help" in the mistaken belief that he was a bystander who would come to her aid.


3 Speeches: The Area Is 'a Dangerous Battleground' - The Syrians 'Have Never Carried the Banner of War'
Following are excerpts from speeches delivered yesterday at the Middle East peace conference by the Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir; the leader of the Palestinian delegation, Haidar Abdel-Shafi, and the Syrian Foreign Minister, Farouk al-Sharaa.
Mr.
Shamir's speech was recorded by Reuters.
The Associated Press recorded the speech by Mr.
Abdel-Shafi, who spoke mainly in English.
Mr.
Sharaa's remarks were translated from the Arabic by the conference's organizers and provided by The A.P.
YITZHAK SHAMIR
It is an honor to represent the people of Israel at this historic moment and a privilege to address this opening of peace talks between Israel and its Arab neighbors.
I would like to express our profound appreciation to our Spanish hosts for their hospitality, and for making this gathering for peace possible.
In its 2,000 years of wandering, the Jewish people paused here for several hundred years until they were expelled 500 years ago.
It was in Spain that the great Jewish poet and philosopher, Yehuda Halevi, expressed the yearning for Zion of all Jews, in the words, "My heart is in the East, while I am in the uttermost West."
I would also like to extend our appreciation to the co-sponsors of this conference -- to the U.S., which has maintained a strong friendship with Israel in an alliance that has overcome occasional differences.
And to the Soviet Union, which saved the lives of many Jews during the Second World War and has now opened its gates to the repatriation of Jews to their ancient homeland.
The people of Israel look to this palace with great anticipation and expectation.
We pray that this meeting will mark the beginning of a new chapter in the history of the Middle East, that it will signal the end of hostility, violence, terror and war.
That it will bring dialogue, accommodation, coexistence and, above all, peace.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
To appreciate the meaning of peace for the people of Israel, one has to view today's Jewish sovereignty in the Land of Israel against the background of our history.
Jews have been persecuted throughout the ages in almost every continent.
Some countries barely tolerated us, others oppressed, tortured, slaughtered and exiled us.
This century saw the Nazi regime set out to exterminate us.
The Shoah, the Holocaust, the catastrophic genocide of unprecedented proportions which destroyed a third of our people, became possible because no one defended us.
Being homeless, we were also defenseless.
But it was not the Holocaust which made the world community recognize our rightful claim to the Land of Israel.
In fact, the rebirth of the state of Israel so soon after the Holocaust has made the world forget that our claim is immemorial.
We are the only people who have lived in the Land of Israel without interruption for nearly 4,000 years.
We are the only people, except for a short crusader kingdom, who have had an independent sovereignty in this land.
We are the only people for whom Jerusalem has been a capital.
We are the only people whose sacred places are only in the land of Israel.
. . .
No nation has expressed its bond with its land with as much intensity and consistency as we have.
For millennia our people repeated at every occasion the cry of the psalmist,: "If I forget thee, Jerusalem, may my right hand lose its cunning!." For millennia we have encouraged each other with the greeting, "Nnext year in Jerusalem.!" For millennia our prayers, literature and folklore have expressed powerful longing to return to our land.
Only Eretz Israel, the Land of Israel, is our true homeland.
Any other country, no matter how hospitable, is still a diaspora, a temporary station on the way home.
To others, it was not an attractive land.
No one wanted it.
Mark Twain described it only a hundred years ago as "a desolate country, which sits in sackcloth and ashes, a silent mournful expanse, which not even imagination can grace with the pomp of life."
The Zionist movement gave political expression to our claim to the Land of Israel.
And in 1922 the League of Nations recognized the justice of this claim.
It understood the compelling historic imperative of establishing a Jewish homeland in the Land of Israel.
The United Nations Organization reaffirmed this recognition after the Second World War.
Regrettably the Arab leaders, whose friendship we wanted most, opposed a Jewish state in the region.
With a few distinguished exceptions, they claimed that the Land of Israel is part of the Arab domain that stretches from the Atlantic to the Persian Gulf.
In defiance of international will and legality, the Arab regimes attempted to overrun and destroy the Jewish state even before it was born.
The Arab spokesman at the U.N. declared that the establishment of a Jewish state would cause a bloodbath which would make the slaughters of Ghengis Khan pale into insignificance.
In its declaration of independence on May 15, 1948, Israel stretched out its hand in peace to its Arab neighbors, calling for an end to war and bloodshed.
In response, seven Arab states invaded Israel.
The U.N. resolution that partitioned the country was thus violated and effectively annulled.
The U.N. did not create Israel.
The Jewish state came into being because the tiny Jewish community, in what was Mandatory Palestine, rebelled against foreign imperialist rule.
We did not conquer a foreign land.
We repulsed the Arab onslaught, prevented Israel's annihilation, declared its independence and established a viable state and government institutions within a very short time.
After their attack on Israel failed, the Arab regimes continued their fight against Israel with boycott, blockade, terrorism and outright war.
Soon after the establishment of Israel, they turned against the Jewish communities in Arab countries.
A wave of oppression, expropriation and expulsion caused a mass exodus of some 800,000 Jews from lands they had inhabited from before the rise of Islam.
Distortion of History
Most of these Jewish refugees, stripped of their considerable possessions, came to Israel.
They were welcomed by the Jewish state.
They were given shelter and support, and they were integrated into Israeli society together with half a million survivors of the European Holocaust.
The Arab regimes' rejection of Israel's existence in the Middle East and the continuous war they have waged against it are part of history.
There have been attempts to rewrite this history, which depict the Arabs as victims and Israel as the aggressor.
Like attempts to deny the Holocaust, they will fail.
With the demise of totalitarian regimes in most of the world, this perversion of history will disappear.
In their war against Israel's existence, the Arab governments took advantage of the cold war.
They enlisted the military, economic and political support of the Communist world against Israel, and they turned a local, regional conflict into an international powder keg.
This caused the Middle East to be flooded with arms, which fuelled wars and turned the area into a dangerous battleground and a testing arena for sophisticated weapons.
At the U.N., the Arab states mustered the support of other Muslim countries and the Soviet bloc.
Together they had an automatic majority for countless resolutions that perverted history, paraded fiction as fact and made a travesty of the U.N. and its charter.
Arab hostility to Israel has also brought tragic human suffering to the Arab people.
Tens of thousands have been killed and wounded.
Hundreds of thousands of Arabs who lived in Mandatory Palestine were encouraged by their own leaders to flee from their homes.
Their suffering is a blot on humanity.
No decent person, least of all a Jew of this era, can be oblivious to this suffering.
Several hundreds of thousands of Palestinian Arabs live in slums known as refugee camps in Gaza, Judea and Samaria.
Attempts by Israel to rehabilitate and house them have been defeated by Arab objections.
Nor has their fate been any better in Arab states.
Unlike the Jewish refugees who came to Israel from Arab countries, most Arab refugees were neither welcomed nor integrated by their hosts.
Only the kingdom of Jordan awarded them citizenship.
Their plight has been used as a political weapon against Israel.
The Arabs who have chosen to remain in Israel -- Christian and Muslim -- have become full-fledged citizens enjoying equal rights and representation in the legislature, in the judiciary and in all walks of life.
We, who over the centuries were denied access to our holy places, respect the religion of all faiths in our country.
Our law guarantees freedom of worship and protects the holy places of every religion. . . .
I stand before you today in yet another quest for peace, not only on behalf of the State of Israel, but in the name of the entire Jewish people, that has maintained an unbreakable bond with the Land of Israel for almost 4,000 years.
. . .
We have always believed that only direct, bilateral talks can bring peace.
We have agreed to precede such talks with this ceremonial conference, but we hope that Arab consent to direct, bilateral talks indicates an understanding that there is no other way to peace.
In the Middle East, this has special meaning, because such talks imply mutual acceptance, and the root cause of the conflict is the Arab refusal to recognize the legitimacy of the State of Israel.
The multilateral talks that would accompany the bilateral negotiations are a vital component in the process.
In these talks, the essential ingredients of coexistence and regional cooperation will be discussed.
There cannot be genuine peace in our region unless these regional issues are addressed and resolved.
We believe the goal of the bilateral negotiations is to sign peace treaties between Israel and its neighbors, and to reach an agreement on interim self-government arrangements with the Palestinian Arabs.
But nothing can be achieved without good will.
I appeal to the Arab leaders, those who are here and those who have not yet joined the process: Show us and the world that you accept Israel's existence.
Demonstrate your readiness to accept Israel as a permanent entity in the region.
Let the people in our region hear you speak in the language of reconciliation, coexistence and peace with Israel.
Renouncing the Uprising
In Israel there is an almost total consensus for the need for peace.
We only differ on the best ways to achieve it.
In most Arab countries the opposite seems to be true: the only differences are over the ways to push Israel into a defenseless position and, ultimately, to destruction.
We would like to see in your countries an end to poisonous preachings against Israel.
We would like to see an indication of the kind of hunger for peace which characterizes Israeli society.
We appeal to you to renounce the Jihad against Israel.
We appeal to you to denounce the P.L.O. covenant which calls for Israel's destruction.
We appeal to you to condemn declarations that call for Israel's annihilation, like the one issued by the rejectionist conference in Teheran last week.
We appeal to you to let Jews, who wish to leave your countries, go.
And we address a call to the Palestinian Arabs: renounce violence and terrorism, use the universities in the administered territories -- whose existence was made possible only by Israel -- for learning and development, not agitation and violence, stop exposing your children to danger by sending them to throw bombs and stones at soldiers and civilians.
Just two days ago, we were reminded that Palestinian terrorism is still rampant when a mother of seven children and a father of four were slaughtered in cold blood.
We cannot remain indifferent and be expected to talk with people involved in such repulsive activities.
We appeal to you to shun dictators like Saddam Hussein who aim to destroy Israel, stop the brutal torture and murder of those who do not agree with you, allow us, and the world community, to build decent housing for the people who now live in refugee camps.
Above all, we hope you finally realize that you could have been at this table long ago, soon after the Camp David accords were first concluded, had you chosen dialogue instead of violence, coexistence instead of terrorism.
. . .
We know our partners to the negotiations will make territorial demands on Israel.
But, as an examination of the conflict's long history makes clear, its nature is not territorial.
It raged well before Israel acquired Judea, Samaria, Gaza and the Golan in a defensive war.
There was no hint of recognition of Israel before the war in 1967, when the territories in question were not under Israeli control.
We are a nation of four million.
The Arab nations from the Atlantic to the gulf number 170 million.
We control only 28,000 square kilometers.
The Arabs possess a land mass of 14 million square kilometers.
The issue is not territory but our existence.
It will be regrettable if the talks focus primarily and exclusively on territory.
It is the quickest way to an impasse.
What we need, first and foremost, is the building of confidence, the removal of the danger of confrontation and the development of relations in as many spheres as possible.
Site of Talks
The issues are complex, and the negotiations will be lengthy and difficult.
We submit that the best venue for the talks is in our region, in close proximity to the decision makers, not in a foreign land.
We invite our partners to this process to come to Israel for the first round of talks.
On our part, we are ready to go to Jordan, to Lebanon and to Syria for the same purpose.
There is no better way to make peace than to talk in each other's home. . . .
For many hundreds of years, wars, deep antagonisms and terrible suffering cursed this continent on which we meet.
The nations of Europe saw the rise of dictators and their defeat after lengthy and painful struggles.
Now, they are together -- former bitter enemies -- in a united community.
They are discussing the good of the community, cooperating in all matters, acting almost as one unit.
I envy them.
I would like to see such a community rise in the Middle East.
And I believe that, despite all differences between us, we should be able, gradually, to build a united regional community.
Today it is a dream, but we have seen, in our own lifetime, some of the most fantastic dreams become reality.
Today, the gulf separating the two sides is still too wide, the Arab hostility to Israel too deep, the lack of trust too immense, to permit a dramatic, quick solution.
But, we must start on the long road to reconciliation with this first step in the peace process.
HAIDAR ABDEL-SHAFI
Once again, Christian, Muslim and Jew face the challenge of heralding a new era enshrined in global values of democracy, human rights, justice and security.
From Madrid, we launch this quest for peace, a quest to place the sanctity of human life at the center of our world and to redirect our energies and resources from the pursuit of mutual destruction to the pursuit of long prosperity, progress and happiness.
We, the people of Palestine, stand before you in the fullness of our pain, our pride, and our anticipation for we have long harbored a yearning for peace and a dream of justice and freedom.
For too long, the Palestinian people have gone unheeded, silenced and denied, our identity negated by political expediency, our rightful struggle against injustice maligned, and our present existence subsumed by the past tragedy of another people.
For the greater part of this century, we have been victimized by the myth of a land without the people and described with impunity as the invisible Palestinians.
Before such willful blindness, we refused to disappear or to accept a distorted identity.
Our intifada is a testimony to our perseverence and the resilience waged in a just struggle to regain our rights.
It is time for us to narrate our own story, to stand witness as advocates of a truth which has long lain buried in the consciousness and conscience of the world.
We do not stand before you as supplicants, but, rather, as the torchbearers who knew that in our world of today ignorance can never be an excuse.
We seek neither an admission of guilt after the fact nor vengeance for past inequities, but, rather, an act of will that would make a just peace a reality. . . .
The co-sponsors have invited us here today to present our case and to reach out to the others with whom we have had to face a mutually exclusive reality on the land of Palestine.
But even in the invitation to this peace conference, our narrative was distorted and our truth only partially acknowledged.
Palestinian people are one fused by centuries of history in Palestine, bound together by a collective memory of shared sorrows and joys and sharing a unity of purpose and vision.
Our songs and ballads, our . . . children's stories, the dialect of our joys, of our jokes, the image of our poems, . . . which colors even our happiest moments, are as important to us as the blood ties which link our families and clans.
Yet, an invitation to discuss peace, the peace we all desire and need, comes to only a portion of our people.
It ignores our national, historical and organic unity.
We come here wrenched from our sisters and brothers in anxiety to stand before you as the Palestinians under occupation, although we maintain that each of us represents the rights and interests of the whole.
We have been denied the right to publicly acknowledge our loyalty to our leadership and system of government, but allegiance and loyalty cannot be censored or severed.
Our acknowledged leadership is more than just the democratically chosen leadership of all the Palestinian people.
It is the symbol of our national unity and identity, the guardian of our past, the protector of our present and the hope of our future.
Brutality of Occupation
Our people have chosen to entrust it with their history and the preservation of our precious legacy.
This leadership has been clearly and unequivocally recognized by the community of nations with only a few exceptions, who had chosen for so many years shadow over substance.
The governance of the nation and conditions of our oppression, whether the disposition and dispersion of exile or the brutality and repression of the occupation -- the Palestinian people cannot be torn asunder.
They remain united, a nation, wherever they are or are forced to be.
In Jerusalem, ladies and gentlemen, the city which is not only the soul of Palestine but the cradle of free-world religions is tangible, even in its claimed absence from our midst at this stage.
Its apparent, though artificial, exclusion from this conference is a denial of its right to seek peace and redemption for it, too, has suffered through more an occupation.
Jerusalem, the city of peace, has been barred from the peace conference and deprived of its calling.
Palestinian Jerusalem, the capital of our homeland and future state, defines Palestinian existence past, present and future, but itself has been denied a voice and an identity.
Jerusalem defies exclusive possessiveness or bondage.
Israel's annexation of Arab Jerusalem remains most clearly illegal in the eyes of the world community and an affront to the peace that this city deserves.
We come to you from a tortured land and a proud, though captive, people, having been asked to negotiate with our occupiers, but leaving behind the children of the intifada and the people under occupation and under curfew, who enjoyed us not to surrender or forget.
As we speak, thousands of our brothers and sisters are languishing in Israeli prisons and detention camps, most detained without evidence, charge or trial, many cruelly mistreated and tortured in interrogation, guilty only of seeking freedom or daring to defy the occupation.
We speak in their name, and we say, "Set them free."
. . .
As we speak, the eyes of thousands of Palestinian refugees, deportees, and displaced persons since 1967 are haunting us for exile as a cruel fate.
Bring them home.
They have the right to return.
As we speak, the silence of demolished homes echoes through the halls and in our minds.
We must rebuild our homes and our free state.
And what do we tell the loved ones of those killed by army bullets?
How do we answer the questions and the fear in our children's eyes for one out of three Palestinian children under occupation has been killed, injured or detained in the past four years?
How can we explain to our children that they are denied education or schools so often closed by the army . . . or why their life is in danger for raising a flag in the land where even children are killed or jailed?
What requiem can be sung for trees uprooted by army bulldozers?
And, most of all, who can explain to those whose lands are confiscated and free waters stolen?
. . .
Remove the barbed wire, restore the land and its life-giving water.
The settlements must stop now.
Peace cannot be waged while Palestinian land is confiscated in myriad ways and the status of the occupied territories is being decided each day by Israeli bulldozers and barbed wire.
This is not simply a position.
It is an irrefutable reality.
Territory for peace is a travesty when territory for illegal settlement is official Israeli policy and practice.
Settlements must stop now.
Equal Partnership
In the name of the Palestinian people, we wish to directly address the Israeli people, with whom we have had a prolonged exchange of pain.
Let us share hope, instead.
We are willing to live side by side on the land and the promise of the future.
Sharing, however, requires two partners willing to share as equals.
Mutuality and reciprocity requires -- must replace domination and hostility for genuine reconciliation and coexistence under international legality.
Your security and ours are mutually dependent, as entwined as the fears and nightmares of our children.
We have seen some of you at your best and at your worst, for the occupier can hide no secrets from the occupied, and we are witness to the toll that occupation has exacted from you and yours.
We have seen you anguish over the transformation of your sons and daughters into instruments of a blind and violent occupation, and we are sure that at no time did you envisage such a role for the children whom you thought would forge your future.
We have seen you look back in deepest sorrow at the tragedy of your past and look on in horror at the disfigurement of the victim turned oppressor.
Not for this have you nurtured your hopes, dreams and your offspring.
. . .
To the co-sponsors and participants in this occasion of awe and challenge, we pledge our commitment to the principle of justice, peace, and reconciliation, based on international legitimacy and uniform standards. . . .
We shall pursue our people's right to self-determination, to the exhilaration of freedom and to the warmth of the sun as a nation among equals.
This is the moment of truth.
You must have the courage to recognize it and the will to implement it, for our truth can no longer be hidden away in the dark recesses of inadvertency or neglect.
People of Palestine look at you with straightforward, word-for-word, direct gaze, seeking to touch your heart, for you have dared to stir up hopes that cannot be abandoned.
You cannot afford to let us down, for we have lived up to the values you espoused and we have remained true to our cause.
We, the Palestinian people, made the imaginative leap in the Palestine National Council of November 1988, during which the Palestine Liberation Organization launched its peace initiative based on Security Council Resolution 242 and 338 and declared Palestinian independence based on Resolution 181 of the United Nations, which gave birth to two states in 1948, Israel and Palestine.
Mutual Recognition
In December 1988, a historic speech before the United Nations in Geneva led directly to the launching of the Palestinian-American dialogue.
Ever since then, our people have responded positively to every serious peace initiative and has done its utmost to insure the success of this process.
Instead, on the other hand -- Israel, on the other hand, has placed many obstacles and barriers in the path of peace to negate the very -- the validity of the process.
Its illegal and frenzied settlement activity is the most glaring evidence of its rejectionism, the latest settlement being erected just two days ago.
These historic decisions of the Palestine National Council wrenched the course of history from inevitable confrontation and conflict toward peace and mutual recognition.
With our own hands and in an act of sheer will, we have molded the shape of the future of our people.
Our parliament has articulated the message of the people, with the courage to say yes to the challenge of history, just as it provided a reference in its resolutions last month in Algiers and in the Central Council meeting this month in Tunis to go forward to this historic conference.
We cannot be made to bear the brunt of other people's no.
We must have reciprocity.
We must have peace.
. . .
Our homeland has never ceased to exist in our minds and hearts, but it has to exist as a state on all the territories occupied by Israel in the war of 1967, with Arab Jerusalem as its capital in the context of that city's special status and its nonexclusive character.
This state, in a conditional emergence, has already been a subject of anticipation for too long.
It should take place today, rather than tomorrow.
However, we are willing to accept the proposal for a transitional state, provided interim arrangements are not transformed into permanent status.
The time frame must be condensed to respond to the dispossessed Palestinians' urgent need for sanctuary and to the occupied Palestinians' right to gain relief from oppression and to win recognition of their authentic will.
During this phase, international protection for our people is most urgently needed, and the -- the dual application of the Fourth Geneva Convention is a necessary condition. . . .
Bilateral negotiations on the withdrawal of Israeli forces, the dissolution of Israeli administration, and the transfer of authority to the Palestinian people cannot proceed under coercion or threat in the current asymmetry of power.
Israel must demonstrate its willingness to negotiate in good faith by immediately halting all settlement activity and land confiscation while implementing meaningful confidence-building measures.
. . .
We are here today with the support of our people, who have given itself the right to hope and to make a stand for peace.
We must recognize as well that some of our people harbor serious doubts and skepticism about this process.
Within our democratic social and political structures, we have evolved a respect for pluralism and diversity and we shall guard the opposition's right to differ within the parameters of mutual respect and national unity. . . .
The process launched here must lead us to the light at the end of the tunnel.
And this light is the promise of a new Palestine -- free, democratic, and respectful of human rights and the integrity of nature.
Self-determination, ladies and gentlemen, can neither be granted nor withheld at the will of the political self-interests of others.
For it is enshrined in all international charters and humanitarian law.
We claim this right.
We firmly assert it here before you and in the eyes of the rest of the world.
For it is a sacred and inviolable right which we shall relentlessly pursue and exercise with dedication and self-confidence and pride.
Let's end . . . this unnatural condition of occupation, which has already claimed too many lives.
No dream of expansion or glory can justify the taking of a single life.
Set us free to re-engage as neighbors and as equals on our holy land.
To our people in exile and under occupation who have sent us to this appointment, laden with their trust, love and aspirations, we say that the load is heavy and the task is great, but we shall be true.
In the words of our great national poet, Mahmoud Darwish, "My homeland is not a suitcase and I am no traveler."
To the exiled and the occupied, we say you shall return and you shall remain and we will prevail, for our cause is just.
We will put on our embroidered robes and kaffiyehs and in the sight of the world and celebrate together on the day of liberation.
Refugee camps are not fit for people who had been reared on the land of Palestine in the warmth of the sun and freedom.
The hail of Israeli bombs almost daily pouring down on our defenseless civilian population in the refugee camps of Lebanon is no substitute for the healing rain of the homeland.
Yet the international will had insured their return in United Nations Resolution 194, a fact willfully ignored and unenacted.
Similarly, all other resolutions pertinent to the Palestinian question, beginning with Resolution 181 through Resolutions 242 and 338, and ending with Security Council Resolution 681, have until now been relegated to the domain of public debate rather than real implementation.
They form the larger body of legality, including all relevant provisions of international law within which any peaceful settlement must proceed.
FAROUK AL-SHARAA
The peoples of the entire world and not only the peoples of our region are buffeted by conflicting feelings toward this conference, feelings fluctuating between success and failure, between optimism in achieving peace and the pessimism of a regression to conflict and confrontation.
It is no exaggeration to state that the continuing intransigent Israeli position which is bereft of any justification is the one that places the world on the brink of incalculable dangers and prevents the region from enjoying peace.
The Arabs throughout their long history have always advocated peace, justice and tolerance.
Their history, both ancient and modern, abounds with evidence to that effect.
The Jews and oriental Jews in particular know better than anyone that they have lived among Muslim Arabs throughout history, wherever they happen to coexist, without ever suffering any form of persecution or discrimination, either racial or religious.
Rather, they have always lived in grace and dignity, participating in all walks of life.
The Jews have never known a level of security, tolerance and equality approximating the security, tolerance and equality they have enjoyed in the lands of Arabs and Muslims.
Anyone perusing the pages of history today would realize the blatant contrast between this tolerance and full equality with which the Arabs treated the Jews for hundreds of years on the one hand, and the persecution, injustice and discrimination inflicted on the Arabs and particularly Palestinian Arabs languishing on the Israeli occupation on the other.
Suffice it to recall if only such a reminder were heeded, that had Israel's political orientation since 1948 been humane, millions of Arabs, Palestinians, Syrians and Lebanese would not have been uprooted from their homes nor -- nor would they have been denied, until today, their right to return.
Had Israel's policies not been settler-colonialist, Palestinians languishing in the Israeli occupation since 1967 would not have been denied all their fundamental rights, foremost among which is their right to self-determination. . . .
The list of evidence of inhumane Israeli practices is long and well documented.
These are practices which were condemned by dozens of resolutions adopted by the United Nations.
These are practices of which the Israelis are tacitly cognizant themselves.
They are known to many a fair-minded historian and journalist in the West.
Although some do not dare address these practices frankly and unequivocally, for reasons which are, regrettably, not known to wide sections of European and U.S. public opinion.
First, among these reasons is that Jewish extremists, both inside and outside Israel, harass those writers and journalists and jeopardize their livelihoods and future.
If they happen to be Christian, they're accused of being anti-Semitic, but if they are Arabs and Muslim, it is easiest to accuse them without any evidence whatsoever of terrorism and the intention of destroying Israel.
Usurping Aggressors
Contrary to every law known, the burden of proof in the minds of these extremists is incumbent on the accused.
Thus, the innocent becomes a suspect in the eyes of a large sector of Western public opinion.
The aggressors who have usurped the land of others by force, thus, become the advocates of peace.
Whereas, the victims of aggression, who demand the return of their occupied land and their usurped rights, become terrorists and destructive warmongers.
Distinguished co-chairmen, we have never carried the banner of war and destruction.
Syria has consistently called for the achievement of comprehensive and just peace on the basis of United Nations resolutions.
We have always emphasized our sincere intention and serious desire for peace.
. . .
Peace and the usurpation of the land of others cannot coexist.
For peace to be stable and durable, it must encompass all parties to the conflict on all fronts.
Developments in our region have proved this fact.
Israel exploited the signing of its peace with Egypt in 1979 to then proceed to annexing Jerusalem in 1980, the Golan in 1981 and invading Lebanon in 1982.
It is clear that Israel perpetrated this series of aggressive acts at a pace that exceeds the pace of its withdrawal from the Egyptian Sinai.
In the aftermath of each act of aggression, the Security Council was called upon to convene and resolutions were unanimously adopted: Resolution 476, declaring the annexation of Jerusalem as null and void, Resolution 497, declaring the imposition of Israeli laws in the Golan as being null and void and with no international legal validity, and Resolution 425, calling for unconditional Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon.
However, as was the case with Resolutions 242 and 338, these resolutions were not implemented at the time, due to Israel rejection and intransigence and due to the atmosphere of the cold war between East and West. . . .
It is noteworthy to point out in this context the Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338, on the basis of which the peace conference is being convened, were adopted as a compromise between the permanent member states of the Security Council.
As is well known, the majority of those states have been sympathetic to Israel since its creation.
Hence, the implementation of these two resolutions should not be the subject of new bargaining during bilateral negotiations.
Rather, they should be implemented in all provisions and on all fronts.
Resolution 242 emphasizes in its preamble the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war.
This means that every inch of Arab land occupied by the Israelis by war and force, the Golan, the West Bank, Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip, must be returned in their entirety to their legitimate owners.
International public opinion is aware more than ever before, and especially following the gulf crisis, that double standards are no longer acceptable in this age, that the principles of international law, not the law of the jungle, must be respected and that United Nations resolutions, not brute force, must be applied.
Uprooting of Syrians
At last, the states of the world have also come to realize that Israel alone resists the efforts for peace with all the influence it can muster.
It is Israel which perpetuates its occupation of the territories of others by force.
All have come to realize that Israel follows a futile and obsolete ideology based on annexation, the building of settlements and the uprooting of Arabs from land in which they had lived for centuries in order to replace them with new immigrants who have never lived in this region.
In this regard, Syria would like to remind the co-sponsors of the conference and through them the international community that Israeli occupation of Syrian and Palestinian territories has resulted in uprooting approximately half a million Syrian citizens from the Golan who have to date not been able to return.
The occupation has also resulted in the presence of over a quarter-million Palestinian refugees in Syria who are denied the right to return to the homeland of their fathers and forbears in Palestine.
The claims invoked by Israel for the migration of world Jewry to it at the expense of the native Arab population are not sanctioned by any legal or humanitarian principle.
If the entire world were to adopt such claims, it would have to encourage all Christians to emigrate to the Vatican and all Muslims to emigrate to Holy Mecca.
. . .
In order for a just peace to be established, no Arab land must remain under Israeli occupation, nor can the rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination remain denied.
If the objective is truly for the peoples and the states of the region to co-exist, to enjoy security, peace and prosperity, to place their plentiful energies and resources at the service of their . . . development, how can such a desirable objective logically be realized without eliminating occupation and restoring legitimate rights?
. . .
This firm Syrian position, whose every element is anchored in the principles of international legitimacy and the resolutions of the United Nations -- that position deems it imperative for Israel to withdraw from every inch of the occupied Syrian Golan, the West Bank, Jerusalem, the Gaza Strip and the south of Lebanon.
This position also deems it imperative to safeguard the legitimate, political and national rights of the Palestinian people, foremost among which is their right to self-determination.
The building of settlements in the occupied Arab territories is an illegal action.
It is considered null and void, and it stands as a major obstacle in the way of peace.
Thus, it is imperative that the settlements be removed.
The continuation of settlement activity in the Arab-occupied territories, particularly since the peace process has commenced, is tangible evidence that Israel does not want to reach genuine peace.


Treasuries Mixed in Slow Session
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed in slow trading yesterday, as credit market participants waited for the release of October's employment statistics this morning and wondered how the Federal Reserve Board might respond.
The Fed, which was thought by many to be easing monetary policy on Wednesday, did nothing yesterday to discredit the notion that it had indeed lowered its target for the overnight Federal funds rate to 5 percent from 5.25 percent.


Dr. R. Adams Cowley, 74, Dies; Reshaped Emergency Medicine
Dr.
R.
Adams Cowley, whose pioneering development of modern emergency medicine helped save countless thousands of lives around the world, died Sunday at his home in Baltimore.
He was 74 years old and died of heart failure, his family said.


Senate Fought for Six Months Over Brandeis; 'And Smell of Calumny'
To the Editor:
During the Senate hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas, Senator Alan K. Simpson read out a few familiar lines from "Othello" -- about damaged reputations -- to awaken our sympathy for the Judge.
What a pity that no one thought to quote some far more apposite lines from "Measure for Measure" -- a play built round the issue of sexual harassment.
Nothing much has changed in 400 years.
Shakespeare cuts to the heart of the problem still facing witnesses who testify to sexual harassment today.
In Act II, scene iv, Isabella says to Angelo:
. . . with an outstretched throat I'll tell the world aloud
What man thou art.
Angelo replies:
Who will believe thee, Isabel?
My unsoil'd name, th'austereness of my life
My vouch against you, and my place i' th' state
Will so your accusation overweigh
That you shall stifle in your own report,
And smell of calumny.
BARBARA OTTEWELL Greenville, S.C., Oct. 18, 1991


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
President Bush received conflicting recommendations from his top economic and political advisers about how the Administration should respond to the weakness of the economy.
The division was over whether to answer challenges from Democrats with bold proposals or to keep on a steady economic course.  [ A1. ]


At the Bar; One night at Kennedy estate sets off a business boom for lawyers and lawyers' lawyers.
On March 31, before settling in for a game charades, Senator Edward M. Kennedy called an old friend, a Miami lawyer named Marvin Rosen, to wish him a happy Passover.
The next day Mr.
Kennedy called Mr.
Rosen again, and not for holiday pleasantries.
It was to find a defense lawyer for William K. Smith, his suddenly notorious nephew.
Thus began the deluge.
The charge of rape against Mr.
Smith has provided employment opportunities for, it seems, every trial lawyer from here to Lake Okeechobee and a few beyond.
Nearly everybody connected to the case, however remotely, has hired representation.


Auto Spots Focus on the Road Again
MANY of the advertising campaigns for 1992 model automobiles are trying an even more ambitious task than selling cars during a recession: They are trying to rekindle America's love affair with the open road.
In television and radio commercials, print advertisements and billboards, auto makers like Buick, Chevrolet, Lexus, Mazda and Saturn are seeking to restore some of the excitement and "searchlights outside the showroom" glamour that typified car campaigns in the 1950's and 1960's, when Mercury offered buyers "more of everything" and Pontiac promised drivers they would be "riding high."


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day yesterday about executive changes at the Cablevision Systems Corporation misidentified the arriving president.
He is James A. Kofalt.


Art in Review
Joel Meyerowitz 'The Bay Sky Series'  James Danziger Gallery 415 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Nov. 23
Joel Meyerowitz is a luminist through and through.
Whether in his street photographs from the 1970's or in the large-format color pictures of Cape Cod collected in the book "Cape Light" (1978), Mr.
Meyerowitz has long paid close attention to the subtle shifts in mood that the changing light of the passing day or of different atmospheric effects can produce.


Art in Review
'Plastic Fantastic Lover (Object A)'  Blum Helman Warehouse 80 Greene Street SoHo Through Nov. 16
This show of work by 21 women ranges from well-known artists like Rebecca Horn and Rosemarie Trockel to emerging artists like Angela Bulloch, Paula Hayes and Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster.
Overall, it suggests that the medium of sculpture is attracting women in the 1990's much the way photography did in the 1980's, because it is rich in formal and often feminist possibilities.


Winter Olympics Promise to Be a Really Big Show
A hundred days from now, a grand experiment in outsized Olympic Games begins across 600 square miles of French Alpine countryside, where thousands of athletes, officials and spectators will be ready to prove that traipsing has been made an official Winter Olympic sport.
Oh, the places they'll see.


Sports of The Times; Survival Of the Fittest
THERE are a number of intriguing questions surrounding the National Basketball Association as it begins its 46th season this evening.
In Chicago, Bulls fans, who went 25 years without a championship, are asking the defending champions, "Can you do it again?"


Barbara Jean Fox
Barbara Jean Fox, a retired employee of the New York City Human Resources Administration, died of cardiac arrest on Wednesday evening.
She was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Data General Posts Profit
The Data General Corporation yesterday reported a profit of $18.4 million, or 50 cents a share, for its fourth fiscal quarter, ended Sept. 30, against a loss of $89.3 million in the 1990 quarter.
The computer maker, based in Westboro, Mass., continued to buck the industry trend by turning in its fourth consecutive profitable quarter and its first full year of profit since 1985.


Daly Blasts Himself Into Tie For Lead
John Daly, the man who gave golf its biggest moment of 1991 by winning the P.G.A.
Championship, put himself in position to take a season-ending curtain call today by gaining a share of the lead after the first round of the Tour Championship.
On a classically designed Pinehurst No. 2 course that allows room for Daly's monstrous length off the tee but also demands tremendous judgment and touch, the burly 25-year-old played an explosive but tightly controlled round of three-under-par 68 to tie Russ Cochran, Craig Stadler and Ian Baker-Finch.


Queens Man Held in Ex-Officer's Slaying
A Queens man was arrested on Wednesday in the murder and attempted robbery of a retired New York City police detective two weeks ago outside the bar where the former officer worked, the police said yesterday.
The suspect, Kevin Kennedy, 33 years old, of 35-45 Crescent Street in Astoria, who the police identified as a drug user who lives much of the time in the street, was arrested on charges of second-degree murder, robbery and criminal possession of a weapon.


McCaw Has 3d-Period Profit
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., the nation's largest provider of cellular telephone service, reported yesterday that it posted a third-quarter profit of $77 million, or 39 cents a share, in contrast to a loss of $80 million in the year-ago quarter.
The most recent period included a one-time gain of $243 million, equivalent to $1.28 a share, from the sale of cellular operations in the Midwest to BellSouth, a regional Bell operating company.
Third-quarter revenue rose 25 percent, to $350.7 million from the year-ago $280.5 million.


Frederick Hartt, 77, Dies; Expert on Michelangelo
Dr.
Frederick Hartt, a widely published scholar of Renaissance art who became embroiled in a dispute over a small plaster statue that he said was the model for Michelangelo's David, died yesterday at the Washington Hospital Center.
He was 77 years old and lived in Washington.
Dr.
Hartt died of complications after triple bypass surgery, said his companion, Eugene D. Markowski.


Tax Increase Turns a Once-Confident New Jersey Senator Nervous
For the first time since voters in his blue-collar and traditionally rock-solid Democratic district sent him to Trenton 14 years ago, Senator Laurence S. Weiss is uncertain about his chances for re-election.
"There was a time when a Democrat couldn't lose around here, but now . . .," Mr.
Weiss said, finishing the sentence with a shrug of his shoulders, during a recent day of campaigning.


For Palestinians, a Seat At the Table Is a Victory
Just before the international peace conference on the Middle East began here on Wednesday, Sameh Kanaan, a member of the Palestinian delegation who spent more than 10 years in Israeli jails, asked a friend to take his picture in the conference hall from an angle that shows him in the same frame with the Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir.
"He told me, 'Please record that I have sat face to face with him around that table as a free man, because the only time I have been with Israelis is when they were my jailers or came to arrest me,' " said the friend, Daoud Kuttab, a Palestinian who came to observe what he and most Palestinians here unreservedly describe as a historic event.


RJR Nabisco Issue Receives Ratings
Moody's Investors Service assigned a B2 rating yesterday to the preferred equity redemption culmulative stock, or Percs, of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation, and it placed the $1.9 billion issue on its review list with the possibility of an upgrade.
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, meanwhile, gave the issue a BB- rating and also said it would consider an upgrade.


The Fight Over God's Place in America's Legacy
In retrospect, the words that Rabbi Leslie Gutterman addressed to the class of 1989 at Nathan Bishop Middle School in Providence, R.I., take on an unintended meaning.
Invited by the public school's principal to offer a nondenominational blessing at the graduation ceremony, the rabbi gave thanks to God for an array of civic goods: for "the legacy of America where diversity is celebrated and the rights of minorities are protected," for "the political process of America in which all its citizens may participate," and for the "court system where all can seek justice."


CIT/Factoring Official Reflects on His New Job
Despite the bleak forecasts for the retail industry and its suppliers, Lawrence A. Marsiello says he is looking forward to taking the helm of the CIT Group/Factoring, the country's largest factoring business.
He will add the title of chief executive to his current title of president when Francis X. Basile, CIT/Factoring's chairman and chief executive, retires on Dec. 31.
The company has not announced who will be chairman.


LAWMAKERS DEAL A CRIPPLING BLOW TO THE B-2 BOMBER
Congressional negotiators dealt the Stealth bomber a nearly fatal blow today by effectively blocking the purchase of any new planes this fiscal year and giving its primary manufacturer, the Northrop Corporation, money only to make parts for future aircraft, planes that may never be built.
The decision leaves Northrop with the Pentagon's initial order for 15 of the radar-evading planes, known as the B-2 bomber, but little prospect for the sale of additional bombers.
Each plane costs $865 million.


THE MIDDLE EAST TALKS: New Talks, Old Words; Rivals Unsheathe Timeworn Swords
The wildly conflicting and at times even insulting speeches which Israeli and Arab delegates exchanged today in Madrid raised some doubts about the thinking behind Washington's peace strategy: that if the parties can just be brought together for direct talks they will begin to shed hard-line positions and define common ground.
Today, left to talk to one another on their own without the firm hand of the United States defining the agenda and terms of reference, the Syrians, Israelis, Palestinians, Jordanians and Lebanese wandered from one minefield to another.


Economic Malaise Across the Midwest
Throughout the American Midwest, traditional home of industry and can-do optimism, a mood of hestiancy, mistrust and disorientation seems to have taken hold.
Nebraska still welcomes travelers with a billboard saying "The Good Life," but interviews in four states suggest a deep malaise about the nation's leadership and economy.
Purchases of goods from cars to combines are bring postponed.
It is not merely that nobody believes Vice President Quayle's statement that "the country is out of the recession." It is that few perceive the Administration to have the means to revive the economy.
Business Day, page D1.


Putting Song On Hold For Ballet
Maxene Andrews has been a singing star for a half-century, first as one of the three singing Andrews Sisters and later as a solo act.
But she now finds herself a star of the dance stage, too, with the immense popularity of Paul Taylor's new "Company B."
The dance, which is set to nine of the Andrews Sisters' most popular songs, is to be performed by the Taylor company at City Center tonight, tomorrow afternoon and on Sunday afternoon and evening.
Miss Andrews said she saw it at its premiere by the Houston Ballet at the Kennedy Center in June, then traveled to Houston for its home premiere and to New York last week to attend its first performance by the Taylor dancers.


One Boat for Conner
DENNIS CONNER announced in San Diego late yesterday that he cannot afford to build a second boat for his 1992 America's Cup campaign.
With only one boat, Conner is likely to be at a disadvantage among teams with multiple-boat programs.
Conner is skipper of Stars &amp; Stripes, a new 75-foot International America's Cup Class yacht he built for trial races beginning Jan. 14 in San Diego.
Each of the I.A.C.C. yachts costs about $3 million to build.
Conner has been able to raise only $10 million for his defense effort, about half the amount he said last year he needed to compete.


Corrections
The "On Stage, and Off" column in Weekend on Oct. 11 misidentified an organization that honored Tommy Tune.
It is the Stage Directors and Choreographers Foundation.


King Denies Mob Ties
DON KING, the boxing promoter, denied yesterday allegations in Sports Illustrated that he has ties to organized crime.
JOE SPINELLI, a former F.B.I. agent who conducted a four-year investigation into corruption in boxing, says the promoter's name kept surfacing as the inquiry looked into the role of organized crime in the sport.
Spinelli, now the Inspector General of New York State, recounted his findings in this week's issue of the magazine.


Big Banks Set Back By House
Handing a defeat to the White House and the nation's largest banks and a victory to the securities and insurance industries, the House of Representatives narrowly voted today to impose significantly more restrictions on the expansion of banks into new businesses than President Bush had sought.
In a vote that essentially preserves the division of financial services that has prevailed since the Depression, the House decided, 216 to 200, to allow banking companies and securities companies to merge, but only if they keep fire walls between the activities so high that, the big banks assert, they cannot offer securities services on a competitive basis.


For the New City Council
In overwhelmingly Democratic New York City, the winners of September's Democratic primary are all but guaranteed victory in Tuesday's general election.
In a few districts, though, Republicans have mounted strong challenges, a hopeful if modest sign of change.
Here are The New York Times's recommendations for those races, based on interviews with candidates and reviews of their records and campaigns.
Our most urgent recommendation is to vote.
This election creates the first Council enlarged to 51 members from 35.
That means smaller districts and so, more than ever, one vote can make a difference.
Manhattan


Music for a New Season
The Ascension Music Chorus and Orchestra is to open its season of four concerts at 8 P.M. on Sunday at the Church of the Ascension, Fifth Avenue at 10th Street, Manhattan.
Dennis Keene is to conduct the program, which includes Mozart's "Litaniae Laurentanae" and Haydn's "Lord Nelson" Mass.
The soloists are to be Beverly Myers, soprano; Elizabeth Norman, mezzo-soprano; Thomas Allen, tenor, and Kevin Deas, baritone.
Tickets are $12 in advance, or $15 at the door.
Information: (212) 254-8553.


Wheat Rebounds on Signs Of Higher Soviet Demand
Wheat prices rebounded yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade amid new signs of rising Soviet demand for grain and worries about cold-weather damage to the young winter wheat crop.
Soybean futures also rose, while corn and oat contracts finished little changed.


TRANSACTIONS
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
NBA -- Suspended Richard Dumas, Phoenix forward, for the 1991-92 season for violating the league's substance abuse policy.
ATLANTA HAWKS -- Waived Paul Graham, forward.
BOSTON CELTICS -- Placed Stojko Vrankovic, center, on the injured list.
CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Claimed Greg Grant, guard, off waivers from the Indiana Pacers.
Waived John Crotty and Byron Dinkins, guards.
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Placed John Battle and Mark Price, guards, on the injured list.
DETROIT PISTONS -- Placed Bob McCann, forward, on the injured list.
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Placed Jim Petersen, forward, and Les Jepsen, center, on the injured list.
MILWAUKEE BUCKS -- Waived Billy Thompson, forward.
Placed Bobby Phills, guard, on the injured list.
NEW JERSEY NETS -- Waived Melvin Newbern, guard, and Ray Tolbert, forward.
NEW YORK KNICKS -- Placed Patrick Eddie, center, on the the injured list.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Waived Rickey Green, guard.
Placed Manute Bol, center, on the injured list.
SEATTLE SUPERSONICS -- Placed Quintin Dailey, guard, on the suspended list.
WASHINGTON BULLETS -- Signed Andre Turner, guard.
Waived Corey Gaines, guard.
Global Basketball Association
GREENSBORO CITY GATERS -- Named Jim Price assistant coach.
FOOTBALL National Football League
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Waived Rich Bartlewski, tight end.
Activated George Thomas, wide receiver, from injured reserve.
BUFFALO BILLS -- Waived Reggie Rogers, defensive end.
CHICAGO BEARS -- Placed Ron Morris, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
Activated Ron Cox, linebaker, from injured reserve.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Released Doug Wellsandt, tight end.
Claimed Arthur Cox, tight end, off waivers from San Diego.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Waived Mike Withycombe, lineman.
Activated Ariel Solomon, offensive tackle, from the practice squad.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Released Greg Joelson, defensive end.


Intel to Cut Jobs At Oregon Plant
The Intel Corporation said it would eliminate 225 jobs at its Hillsboro OEM Products division, which assembles computers for other companies to sell.
Intel cited rising competition and falling prices in the worldwide personal computer market.
The affected employees may stay on the payroll for at least four months while they look for jobs inside Intel or elsewhere, said Elizabeth McElfish, human resources manager for Intel's Oregon operations.


Mr. Bush Ducks on Mr. Duke
President Bush remains disturbingly equivocal about David Duke, a Republican and former Ku Klux Klan Grand Wizard who could well become the next governor of Louisiana on Nov. 16.
Prompted by reporters, Mr.
Bush last week said the minimum expected of him.
"I'm not going to support David Duke because of the racism," the President said.
He begged off further comment because, he said, he didn't want to be drawn into local politics.


Critic's Choice/Dance; A Return Engagement
Ballet Concierto, which performs downtown at the Triplex Theater tomorrow and Sunday, was one of Puerto Rico's best-kept secrets until it made its New York City debut last summer at the Lincoln Center Out-of-Doors festival.
The cognoscenti talked of the expertise and sense of style of Lolita San Miguel, who founded the San Juan-based troupe in 1978 after a career of performing with the Metropolitan Opera and Joffrey Ballet, among other companies.
But from their first moments onstage, the dancers stood out for the simplicity and elegance of their dancing, as well as for their strong classical technique and eloquent acting.


As Selection of Smith Jurors Begins, Focus Is on History of the Kennedys
As the accused man himself sat nearby, lawyers in the William K. Smith rape trial began the laborious process of selecting the six jurors who will decide the case.
Every potential juror questioned knew the basic facts of the case, including details that could be ruled inadmissible in the trial.
Some of the questions they were asked concerned that knowledge, and whether they thought they could fairly judge Mr.
Smith, the 31-year-old Kennedy heir who has been charged with raping a Florida woman at the Kennedy family's estate here over Easter weekend.


Traffic Alert
New York City Marathon: Several streets will be closed for much of Sunday, including, in Manhattan, First Avenue from 76th to the Willis Avenue Bridge; Fifth Avenue from 102d to 120th Street, and Central Park South from Fifth Avenue to Columbus Circle.
In Brooklyn, parts of Fourth Avenue from 84th to Flatbush Avenue will be closed.
In addition, some lanes on the Queensboro, Willis Avenue and Madison Avenue Bridges will be closed for parts of the day.
The upper level of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge will be closed in both directions from midnight to 2 P.M., and the westbound lower level from 9:30 A.M. to noon.


Crime Rate Could Claim Longtime Houston Mayor
After leading this city through a decade marked by a spectacular economic boom and an equally spectacular bust, Mayor Kathryn J. Whitmire is trying to persuade voters that she can deal with the commonplace problems like street crime.
In a nonpartisan election Tuesday, Mrs.
Whitmire faces her toughest challenge since she was elected Mayor of the nation's fourth-largest city in 1981.
With two strong contenders running against her, a runoff election may be necessary.


CHRONICLE
MARY TRUMP, the 79-year-old mother of DONALD TRUMP, was mugged while shopping on Union Turnpike in Jamaica Estates, Queens, yesterday afternoon, the police said.
She was knocked down and beaten, and "sustained broken ribs and very bad bruises to the face," said Lieut.
RAYMOND O'DONNELL, a spokesman for the Police Department.


THE MIDDLE EAST TALKS: In Israel and Arab Nations: Hostility and Skepticism, Fascination and Hope; For Both Israelis and Palestinians, Memory's Burden
It just isn't the same, Shlomo Bar-Eli decided today.
With a clarity as rich as the blue sky sheltering Jerusalem, he recalled the still-astonishing day in 1977 when President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt came calling on Israelis, saying the time had come to study war no more.


Randolph a Free Agent Again
Willie Randolph, who went from semi-retirement to No. 3 among American League hitters this year, set out on the free agent trail again yesterday.
Randolph, a 37-year-old second baseman, was one of 17 players who filed for free agency, raising to 57 the number who have filed in the first four days of the filing period.
Also among the new free agents were Ron Darling, who pitched for three teams in two leagues this year; his former teammate, Daryl Boston of the Mets, and Mitch Williams, the Philadelphia relief pitcher, who in a five-week period late in the season amassed nine victories and seven saves.


At the Bar; One night at Kennedy estate sets off a business boom for lawyers and lawyers' lawyers.
On March 31, before settling in for a game charades, Senator Edward M. Kennedy called an old friend, a Miami lawyer named Marvin Rosen, to wish him a happy Passover.
The next day Mr.
Kennedy called Mr.
Rosen again, and not for holiday pleasantries.
It was to find a defense lawyer for William K. Smith, his suddenly notorious nephew.
Thus began the deluge.
The charge of rape against Mr.
Smith has provided employment opportunities for, it seems, every trial lawyer from here to Lake Okeechobee and a few beyond.
Nearly everybody connected to the case, however remotely, has hired representation.


Pop/Jazz; An Underground Teeters On Edge of Respectability
Choose your favorite guitar noise: homey folk-rock finger-picking, cheerful pop strumming, bludgeoning power chords, dizzying echoes, slabs and blotches of distortion.
This weekend, New York City's clubs will be full of guitar bands, in town to be heard by the 5,000 people attending the 11th annual C.M.J.
Music Marathon, which grew out of a 100-person conclave called the College Radio Brainstorm.
While conventioneers will be comparing haircuts and networking, the marathon offers people outside the music business a chance to hear, in concentrated form, what's considered up to the minute on college-rock radio.
The Music Marathon differs from its larger competitor, the New Music Seminar, in its concentration on the collegiate sphere; the seminar, held every July, has something for many market segments, from dance music to new age.
Although its setup is similar -- panel discussions and hustling by day for those who can afford passes, with shows by night in more than two dozen clubs -- its scope is deliberately more limited.


Restaurants
Azzurro
Just when the plethora of northern Italian restaurants in Manhattan suggested that everything south of Florence was gastronomically primordial, along came the Sindona family, offering expressive, sun-ripened Sicilian fare.
The mother, Maria, and her sons, Marcello and Vittorio, opened their first restaurant on Second Avenue in 1985 in a space so narrow that when one party rose to leave, diners at adjacent tables had to inhale deeply.


Abroad at Home; Where There Is Hope
The first sessions of the Middle East talks in Madrid have raised an unexpected and intriguing possibility.
Progress may be most likely where it was least expected: between Israel and the Palestinians.
That has to be said with all the caution required in any expression of hope for the Middle East.
The emotions separating the parties were all too clear in their statements.
But there was also, in the Israeli-Palestinian context, a certain encouraging realism.


Don't Make Us Pay for a Prairie Park
To the Editor:
A tall-grass prairie park in Kansas sounds good to folks who haven't lived there.
The Sierra Club and other conservation groups want us, the taxpaying citizens, to pay for an 11,000-acre bankrupt ranch outside Strong City, Kan., so they can put buffalo and elk on it, and call it a park.


Blue-Chip Stocks Flat as Dow Falls 2.68
Blue-chip stocks finished flat in moderate trading yesterday, but the broader market continued to show strength.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed down 2.68, to 3,069.10.
Economic data relased yesterday -- like the report that factory orders were down in September for the second consecutive month -- had little impact.
Investors found few incentives to buy aggressively, especially ahead of today's employment report, analysts said.


Battle of TV Protests Is Considered a Draw
The battle of the television switchers has unofficially been declared a draw.
Overnight ratings from A. C. Nielsen indicate that the percentage of households watching television on Tuesday was no different from the same day last year, despite efforts by two groups to influence viewing levels.
One, Concerned Viewers for Quality Television, urged people to turn off their sets to show disapproval of what it considers objectionable programming, while the other, the New York chapter of the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation, encouraged people to turn on their sets in a counter-protest.


Accounts
*
Esso U.K., an Exxon subsidiary, to J. Walter Thompson, London and Manchester, as expected, from McCann-Erickson and Cogent, both London.
Billings are expected to reach about $27 million.
McCann, which had worked for Esso for 63 years, had handled the bulk of the account.
Thompson now has Esso accounts in 26 countries. *
New York Puerto Rican Parade to Agencia de Publicidad Rivera &amp; Rivera Advertising, New York, for advertising and public relations, from in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


Tough Goings Prevail on the Jersey Side of Basketball
It is not easy being the New Jersey Nets, the team from that proud megalopolis of intersecting roadway just west of the Lincoln Tunnel.
Whom do the Nets represent and just what do the Nets represent?
Sadly, there is no sure answer to the first part of the question.
The second would be the tossup worth five points on any self-respecting game show.
The Nets are a synonym for losing.
Their 15-year National Basketball Association record is 472-758.
They have been a plus-.500 team four times and have won 26 or fewer games eight times.
They won 26 last season, a dramatic improvement over their 17 victories in 1989-90.
For their lifetime, they have been in the Knicks' shadow in the New York metropolitan area and virtually ignored nationally.


EXECUTIVES
*
Champion Products, Rochester, a division of Sara Lee Corp., named Susan E. Engel president and chief executive. *
Communications Satellite Corp., Washington, named Robert E. Dupuis vice president-sales, marketing and business planning in its world systems business unit.


Nameless Storm Swamps the Shoreline
A ferocious nameless Atlantic storm masquerading as a Halloween hurricane battered coastal areas of the Northeast and mid-Atlantic states again yesterday and left widespread flooding, smashed homes, boats and sea walls, and heavy property damage.
A Long Island fisherman was drowned and at least two people were missing.
The storm -- a monster hundreds of miles wide that lashed like a hurricane but was born in Canadian waters, not the tropics, and fell just short of a hurricane's 74-mile-an-hour winds -- struck late Tuesday, bludgeoned the coast Wednesday and yesterday with seas as high as a two-story house and was wobbling back out to sea last night, centered 300 miles off Virginia.


Miscellany
*
Arnold Fortuna Lane, Boston, has acquired the Boston unit of Rapp Collins Marcoa, a direct marketing firm.
Karen Zahorsky, Rapp's executive vice president and general manager, will continue in charge of the unit, which will be renamed RCM &amp; Partners.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.


Optimistic Knicks Set For Opener
For the Knicks' fans, the waiting is almost over.
After months of anticipation and four weeks of preseason preparation, the Knicks open the regular season Friday night in Orlando, Fla., against the Magic.
Optimism is high throughout the Knicks' organization, mainly because of the arrival of Coach Pat Riley in May, coupled with the October acquisition of small forward Xavier McDaniel.
But coming off last year's 39-43 season, this current cast of Knicks has much to prove.


420 Fires in West Virginia
A total of 420 brush and forest fires have burned across 100,000 acres in West Virginia since last Saturday, doing damage estimated at $30 million.
Arsonists have been blamed for many of the blazes, and at least three people have been arrested.
Gov.
Gaston Caperton today called out the National Guard to assist firefighters.


THE MIDDLE EAST TALKS: Reporter's Notebook; Behind the Conference Babel, A Battle for the High Ground
There they stood, on the fringes of the Middle East peace conference today, an Israeli and a Palestinian, with nothing but history and a television camera between them.
"You are not a threat to me," the Israeli said.


No N.B.A. for Hunt And No Sympathy
He was the only underclassman among the starters on the acclaimed 1990-91 University of Nevada-Las Vegas basketball team, and, like his senior teammates, all of whom are now on National Basketball Association teams, guard ANDERSON HUNT was convinced that he, too, could make an immediate mark on the N.B.A.


Review/Film; Portrait of Frank and the Other Pesces
What kind of person throws snowballs at a church on Christmas Eve, especially after he's just learned his winning lottery ticket is worth more than $6 million?
On the evidence of the sentimental family comedy "29th Street," about a lottery winner named Frank Pesce Jr., it's a person who connects lottery winnings with love.
The film, which greatly embroiders the story of Mr.
Pesce's life, creates an O. Henry-style ending in which hitting the jackpot allows Frank to express his feelings about his big, blustery father, who happens to have a gambling problem.
Doing its very best to give Mr.
Pesce's story a movie gloss, the film makes sure that this all works out for the best.


Joe Papp's Golden Gift
Joseph Papp died yesterday at his home in Greenwich Village, only a few miles from the Brooklyn in which he grew up.
From beginning to end, Joe Papp was a New York boy.
He must have loved New York; he gave so much to it.
The son of a pushcart vendor, he got his musical education at the Goldman Band concerts in Prospect Park, and his theatrical education out of -- what? -- perhaps the highly charged air that infuses this city.
Too poor to go to college, he managed nonetheless to spill pure gold over Broadway and its offshoots and, indeed, over the entire American theater.


Diner's Journal
River Cafe Loses Chef
David Burke has left the River Cafe in Brooklyn to pursue other career options.
"I've been at the cafe for seven years, four as chef," he said.
"I think it's time to try something else." Buzzy O'Keeffe, who owns the River Cafe and the Water Club in Manhattan, said he and Mr.
Burke may become involved in a restaurant project.
Mr.
Burke, however, declined to discuss his specific plans.


As Selection of Smith Jurors Begins, Focus Is on History of the Kennedys
As the accused man himself sat nearby, lawyers in the William K. Smith rape trial began the laborious process of selecting the six jurors who will decide the case.
Every potential juror questioned knew the basic facts of the case, including details that could be ruled inadmissible in the trial.
Some of the questions they were asked concerned that knowledge, and whether they thought they could fairly judge Mr.
Smith, the 31-year-old Kennedy heir who has been charged with raping a Florida woman at the Kennedy family's estate here over Easter weekend.


IRAN DENIES DEALS TIED TO ATOM ARMS
Iran acknowledged today that it had purchased nuclear technology for what it called "peaceful purposes" from China and strongly denied having developed nuclear weapons, the official Iranian press agency reported.
Iranian officials said today that China had accepted the restrictions set by the International Atomic Energy Association on the sale of nuclear weapons technology to other countries and "could not overlook those commitments."


Borland's Stock Soars At Lotus's Expense
Rave reviews for several new software products being developed by Borland International caused fireworks in the stock market yesterday.
When the smoke cleared, the price of Borland's shares was up nearly 17 percent, while the shares of its rival, Lotus Development, fell almost 12 percent.
The new Borland products, all intended for use with the popular Windows software program from the Microsoft Corporation, were demonstrated at Borland International Inc.'s headquarters in Scott's Valley, Calif., on Wednesday night.
The audience: analysts attending the American Electonics Association meeting held in nearby Monterey.


Review/Film; Art Meets Death In the Most Artful Way
In Walter Salles Jr.'s moody, ambitious "Exposure," Peter Coyote plays the world-weary photographer Peter Mandrake, a man given to Greek poetry, supersensitive reflections ("All my life my eyes have searched for something different") and slow, lingering smiles.
Living temporarily in Rio de Janeiro, Mandrake is drawn into a network of violent crime once he determines to solve the murder of Gisela (Giulia Gam), a sweet-looking prostitute whose killer has carved his initial onto her face.
Even when Mandrake finally corners this villain, the film sustains its preoccupation with art.
"Don't you sign your work too, Mr. Mandrake?" the killer tauntingly inquires.
"Exposure," which opens today at the Angelika Film Center, would take the high ground more legitimately if it were not also a frequently gruesome thriller, one that vacillates oddly between studied reflectiveness and sadism.
One typically unsettling episode finds Mandrake on a train, peering soulfully out the window with a woman he has just met.
"This place is beautiful -- it's endless," he says of the landscape.
"That's exactly why I don't like it," she replies.
Very quickly this exchange gives way to sex and then to death, two things that Mr.
Salles frequently intermingles.
One memorably ghoulish episode shows a man being knifed so expertly that neither of the women sleeping beside him wakes up to notice.


Germany Wins Europe's Backing For Tougher Controls on Migrants
Germany, whose process of unification began two years ago with the opening of Eastern Europe's long-sealed borders, gained the approval today of Eastern and Western European governments for tougher border controls to check a surge in illegal East-West migration.
A communique issued here at the end of a two-day conference listed the steps, which include a crackdown on gangs smuggling refugees for fees, standardized border controls, mobile forces to be deployed in remote frontier areas, and stiff penalties for airlines that fail to check the papers of travelers adequately at their point of departure.


Art in Review
Wallace Putnam  Luise Ross Gallery 50 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Nov. 16
This exhibition brings to light once more the intuitively stylish modernism of Wallace Putnam, an American artist who may be destined for perpetual rediscovery.
Putnam died in 1989 at the age of 90; his last show in New York City was in 1978.


Sounds Around Town
Rodgers and Hart
"The Rodgers and Hart Revue," Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, (212) 632-5000.
The veteran musical comedy star Elaine Stritch makes a sensational cabaret debut in a show that brings her together with Margaret Whiting, Judy Kuhn, Jason Graae and a pop-jazz trio led by Fred Wells.
Miss Stritch's tough-funny renditions of "10 Cents a Dance" and "Zip" are each spectacular star turns that are almost matched in bravura by Mr.
Graae's playful "You Mustn't Kick It Around," Miss Kuhn's delicate "Lover" and Miss Whiting's lusty "Bewitched." It is the best revue of its type to be seen in New York City in years.
Shows are at 9 and 11:15 P.M. tonight and tomorrow.
There is a $35 charge and no minimum.
Afghan Music
Shah Wali Tranasaz and the Amir Ali Vahabzadegan Ensemble, Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street, Manhattan, (212) 545-7536.
Regional songs of Afghanistan will be performed by Shah Ali Taranasaz, a well-known Afghan radio performer who now lives in the United States.
He is noted for his renditions of songs from his village in northern Afghanistan.
Spiritual and folkloric music from various regions of Iran and part of Turkey will also be performed by the New York-based Amir Ali Vahabzadegan Ensemble.
The repertory of Mr.
Vahabzadegan, who plays several kinds of lutes, includes Persian, Turkish and Kurdish songs, many of which are rarely heard in concert.
The evening is a benefit for the World Music Institute.
Show time is tomorrow at 8 P.M., and tickets are $15.


We Don't Need Additional Gun Laws
To the Editor:
Following the tragedy in Killeen, Tex. (front page, Oct. 17), in which a gunman killed 22 people and himself, every news organization brought out the usual articles and reports saying that there would be no crime if we would only pass more gun laws.
Imagine my shock and pleasant surprise when I read the refreshing viewpoint outlined in "Get Guns Off the Street" (editorial, Oct. 21).


Pasta Aside, Marathon Is Still Pure at Heart
I RUN a little; this is part boast, part confessional.
Because I started all alone, 30 years ago, in combat boots, I never take personally the brie and chardonnay slurs leveled at runners by slobs.
Because I dropped out to swim for 15 years, I missed the good times when running seemed political, and there was a collective joy in taking control of one's body, in believing that running could Fixx anything.
Now we have the New York City Marathon on Sunday with almost 26,000 entrants running for Ronzoni and Seiko and Vermont Pure Natural Spring Water as well as for themselves.
Somehow it's O.K.
Perhaps this is why the Marathon is among the most beguiling of events -- beneath its dandy's clothes still beats a pure heart.
"The race itself is still pristine," says Dr.
George Sheehan, the shaman of the sport.
"The hype is there but you can get past it. Where you place doesn't matter. It's you and your digital watch."


The Art Market; A Crucial Auction Test: Will Prices Keep Falling?
THE art world is holding its breath.
The outcome of the next two weeks' New York auctions of Impressionist, modern and contemporary art will reflect the current state of what has decidedly been a precarious market.
Given declining auction prices, the big question is whether things have finally hit bottom.
The auction houses are estimating that these sales will total $250 million, as compared to the $358 million brought in last year.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Top 3 Lose in Paris Stefan Edberg, Boris Becker and Jim Courier -- the three highest-seeded players in the Paris Open -- were eliminated yesterday in the third round, but Courier moved up to No. 2 in the world ranking despite his loss.
Boris Becker, seeded second, withdrew from the tournament because of the flu.
He will be No. 3 when the next computer ranking of the Association of Tennis Professionals is released.
Michael Chang was a 2-6, 6-1, 6-4 winner over Edberg, who is the defending champion and who is ranked No. 1.
Omar Camporese beat the third-seeded Courier, 7-6 (7-4), 6-3.
In the best match of the day, Pete Sampras outgunned Goran Ivanisevic, 6-3, 6-7 (5-7), 7-6 (7-5), in a battle of booming services.
Ivanisevic had 26 aces, but none in the deciding tie breaker. (AP) COLLEGE FOOTBALL Detmer Sparks B.Y.U.
Ty Detmer passed for 337 yards and three touchdowns last night to lead Brigham Young over Colorado State, 40-17, at Fort Collins, Colo.
The Cougars, who lost their first three games of the season, have won six straight and lead the Western Athletic Conference with a 5-0 record.
In the first half Detmer completed 20 of 24 passes for 299 yards, staking the Cougars to a 26-3 lead.
C.S.U. (3-6 over all and 2-4 in the W.A.C.) suffered its third consecutive loss and fifth in a row to B.Y.U. (AP)


Good News for Bills
If the Buffalo team physician knows his knees, All-Pro defensive end BRUCE SMITH, who has played only one game since undergoing preseason knee surgery, should be able to rejoin the team before the end of the season.


Dick Bailey; Television Executive, 80
Richard E. (Dick) Bailey, a pioneer in independent sports-television in the 1950's, died on Oct. 25 at Bayshore Community Hospital in Holmdel, N.J.
He was 80 years old.
In 1956, Dick Bailey created Sports Network Incorporated to fill the voids in sports coverage by the Big Three networks.
After 12 years, the network was sold to Howard Hughes and became the Hughes Television Network, with Mr.
Bailey as president.


Review/Film; Naivete and Sophistication Join in a 1929 Silent
Made in the days when a country gentleman could affectionately address his farm-girl sweetheart as Baa-Baa, Frank Borzage's 1929 silent film "Lucky Star" has an obvious and charming naivete.
It is also a work of remarkable sophistication, both for Mr.
Borzage's highly developed storytelling skills and for the remarkably genuine and touching performances he elicited from Janet Gaynor and Charles Farrell, who had great screen chemistry long before there was a name for such a thing.
Think of the Film Forum's showing of a mint-condition print of "Lucky Star" with live musical accompaniment as a special presentation.
Better still, think of it as a rare treat.
"Lucky Star," which was made in the brief transitional period between silent and sound films, included a few isolated and hastily added lines of dialogue when it opened "on the Broadway screen," as a 1929 review put it.
But it is abundantly clear from this silent version, which was recently located in the vaults of the Netherlands Film Museum in Amsterdam, that this dialogue must have sounded superfluous, since the story unfolds so well without it.


Atlantic Storm Batters the Northeast Again


Our Towns
When Mike Peragino first became a volunteer fireman that was back in August of '47 -- the sudden sound of the siren wailing down by the firehouse galvanized the entire town.
Thirty, maybe 40, men would drop everything in the fields, the barns or at the counter.
With lights flashing and canvas coats flapping, the community's guardians against conflagration raced off to the fire.
It was a civic duty.
Everyone understood that for a few hours normal life would be suspended in the absence of the shoe repairman, the farmers, the insurance agent and the garage mechanic.
Today there are many more people living in Sussex County in northwestern New Jersey.
But there are fewer volunteer firefighters.


Zambian Vote With a Twist: Choice
Fraxen Jere, a 31-year-old cotton farmer, rode his bike over a rutted dirt track to his polling place here today to cast the fourth presidential vote in his life, but the first in which he had a real choice.
As he pedaled closer to the Kagunda schoolhouse in a remote corner of eastern Zambia, where he would mark his ballot in an iron-framed booth covered by a cloth, Mr.
Jere seemed to relish the prospect.


Dollar Is Mixed as Traders Await Economic Reports
The dollar was mixed against other major currencies yesterday as traders anticipated further cuts in American interest rates.
Gold prices were mostly lower.


Panel Votes to Delete Curb on Abortion Counseling
A House-Senate conference committee voted Tuesday to overturn the Federal regulation that forbids doctors and other counselors at federally supported family planning clinics to tell pregnant women that abortion is one of their choices.
The provision that would void the rule was part of a $204 billion bill to finance three Government departments in the fiscal year that began Oct. 1.
The entire bill is now expected to win easy approval in both houses of Congress but to be vetoed by President Bush because of the abortion counseling provision.


3-Story Waves Heavily Damage Bush Vacation Compound in Southern Maine
President Bush's home and vacation compound were severely damaged by the North Atlantic storm that struck the Northeast on Wednesday.
Waves as high as his three-story house filled the house with sea water and caused extensive damage to the retreat on Walker's Point in southern Maine.


At the Movies
At the Grown-Ups' Table
Scott Frank, who wrote the screenplays for two of the more popular films of recent months -- "Dead Again" and "Little Man Tate" -- has signed a deal to make his debut as a director.


REview/Film; Dutch Schultz's World Of Kill and Be Killed
THE people at Touchstone Pictures can relax.
Their screen adaptation of E. L. Doctorow's best-selling novel "Billy Bathgate" is not the disaster that Hollywood insiders had predicted when the shooting schedule was extended, rumors of personality clashes were reported and a new ending was shot.
After all of that negative expectation, the movie is a sort of reverse letdown.
It is not a disaster, but neither is it a milestone in motion-picture art.


People
*
Robert Dilenschneider, the former president and chief executive of Hill &amp; Knowlton Inc., New York, has opened a public relations company, called the Dilenschneider Group, in New York.
Mr.
Dilenschneider said he planned to represent only a few clients and was working on his own.


Seagram Is Selling 7 Liquor Brands
The Seagram Company yesterday agreed to sell a group of well-known liquors to American Brands Inc., a diversified company and the maker of Jim Beam bourbon, for $372.5 million.
Analysts said the deal signaled a move by Seagram to build a war chest for an acquisition.
But Seagram said it was simply selling brands with lower profit margins and less growth potential than its costlier offerings, like Chivas Regal.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Challenged by Foes on Economy, Bush Wonders Whether to Answer
At an unusually tense meeting in the White House this morning, a frustrated President Bush received sharply conflicting recommendations from his top economic and political advisers about how the Administration should respond to the weakness of the economy on the verge of an election year.
Toward the end of his meeting with Cabinet secretaries, other senior Administration officials, political counselors and Republican Congressional leaders, according to people who were there, Mr.
Bush said that he felt as if he were in the middle of a hurricane where all he could hear was noise, and he wished aloud that those around him would give him cohesive advice instead of bickering among themselves in the Cabinet Room.
Answering the Democrats
The division was over political strategy, not economic policy, over whether to answer the challenge from Democrats in Congress with seemingly bold proposals or to keep on a quiet and steady economic course.
All the advisers accept the fundamental Republican principles of a lower capital gains tax and tight reins on social spending.
And with the country facing a budget deficit of about $350 billion this year, cutting taxes sharply or increasing Government spending, the steps Administrations normally take when the economy looks bad in an election year, are out of the question.
The President did not tip his hand.
But he was quoted as saying that Democrats were approaching economic issues as if the political campaign had begun and that the White House needed to respond in kind.
Mr.
Bush, who has been heavily criticized by the Democrats for his opposition to a bill that would extend unemployment benefits for three million Americans, today accused the Democrats of holding up the bill.
In response, Congressional Democrats agreed on a new version.  [ Page A18. ]
At the meeting, Vice President Dan Quayle and Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher were said to have strenuously argued that Mr.
Bush should press hard now for a lower capital gains tax and other measures, even at the risk of losing, so the public would see that the President was fully engaged in dealing with the economy.
They were reported to have quoted public opinion polls showing that most people believe the President has not paid enough attention to the economy and that the people gloomiest about the economy are those who most blame the President for the problem.
But Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady, Richard G. Darman, the budget director, and Michael J. Boskin, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, argued just as strongly that the President should sit tight for the rest of the year and not risk a battle he could not win with Congress over taxes.
Democrats have the votes in Congress, they were said to have asserted, and if the President reopens tax and spending questions, Democrats will turn it to their advantage.
The White House is not the only place in town with serious splits over the economy.
Speaking at a Capitol Hill hotel today, Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Democratic leader, compared Mr.
Bush's stewardship of the economy with that of Herbert Hoover before the Great Depression, and he said the economy needed "action not just words" from Congress.
But in his office at the Capitol, Thomas S. Foley of Washington, the Speaker of the House, said he did not think action on taxes and other economic issues was likely or wise this year.
Risk to Bush
The chief Senate Democrat on tax issues, Lloyd Bentsen of Texas, chairman of the Finance Committee, started much of the economic debate last week with his proposal to give families a $300 tax credit for each child.
His counterpart in the House, Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, opposes that plan and any action on taxes this year.
Republican leaders in Congress are also divided.
Senator Phil Gramm of Texas and Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia are determined to fight for lower capital gains taxes and more favorable deductions for individual retirement accounts.
But two of the most respected Republican voices in Congress on economic matters, Senator Pete V. Domenici of New Mexico and Representative Bill Gradison of Ohio, have argued against those proposals.
The tension in the Bush Administration and Congress reflects the consensus in political circles that the main threat to the President's re-election is the prospect of a sour economy.
This summer, Mr.
Bush and his advisers felt the economy was out of the woods.
The recession seemed to have ended and the country seemed to be poised for strong growth in 1992.
A Mysterious Relapse
But for reasons not yet clear, the recovery stalled this fall.
Some Administration economists say the forecast made in July that the economy would grow by a rather healthy 3.6 percent next year no longer looks realistic.
And Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board and a strong political ally of the Administration, said in a speech at the University of Rhode Island this week that the economy was "demonstrably sluggish" and no longer had the "spark" it showed over the summer.
He said he could not tell whether the slowdown would end soon or drag into next year when the political damage would be most serious.
After his meeting in the Cabinet Room, Mr.
Bush spoke to a group of small-business executives who had been invited to the White House.
During a photo session, the President said the economy had "turned the corner" and was "headed for recovery," but he quickly added, "I'm still concerned about the economy and that it's not as strong as obviously we'd like it to be."
Most Presidents have preferred dealing with foreign policy, where a national consensus can often be found, than economic policy, where almost all steps generate vocal opposition.
But Mr.
Bush has spent so much time on foreign affairs that his advisers now feel it is essential for him to be seen as coming to grips with the economy.
As a consequence, his first meeting Wednesday afternoon after he got off the plane from Madrid was with economic advisers, and on a political fund-raising trip to Texas he intends to visit a factory Friday and talk about how he plans to make the United States more competitive.
Last Year's Bruises
The Bush advisers who counseled against confronting Congress over the economy had two different arguments.
Mr.
Boskin, who is on leave from Stanford University, was said to have asserted that the economy would satisfactorily rebound without further action by the Bush Administration and that tax-cutting measures could lead to higher interest rates and thus be counterproductive.
Mr.
Brady and Mr.
Darman were said to be more concerned that the President would be badly bruised again as he was in the fight over the budget last year.
Then, Democrats managed to portray Mr.
Bush as a patron of fat cats who was concerned only with helping the wealthy.
Many of the scars from the budget battle remain.
John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff, who was criticized then for dragging the President on an unpopular course, had almost nothing to say at today's meeting.
And Representative Gingrich, who was burned last year when he led the Administration charge for a capital gains tax only to have the President drop the idea, reflected some of his resentment.


House Votes Generics Bill
The House today voted unanimously to give the Food and Drug Administration more power to regulate the scandal- plagued generic drug industry.
By a vote of 413 to 0, the House passed a bill that would give the F.D.A. authority to bar individuals and companies from applying for generic drug approvals and to suspend or withdraw generic drugs from the market for violations of the approval process.


White House May Finish B.C.C.I. Inquiry Soon
The White House counsel, C. Boyden Gray, hopes to complete this week a review of the actions of a former White House aide who represented a key figure in the criminal investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, an Administration official said today.
The White House has been under pressure from members of Congress to conduct the review after the aide, Edward M. Rogers Jr., a former assistant to John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff, announced that he had canceled his firm's $600,000 contract with Sheik Kamal Adham.


Halloween for the 90's: Serious Tricks and Treats
Cavorting in the twilight on West 69th Street last night were werewolves and witches, ghoulish ghosts and ghastly goblins and bloody monster corpses in a car.
These last had an instructive purpose: introducing young trick-or-treaters to the evils of drunk driving.
"We have to have some kind of a moral theme, with all this blood," said Jessica Porter, who had stuffed the monsters into a sedan and poured fake blood all over them, creating something that was supposed to look like the horrible twisted aftermath of a high-speed crash.


For Children
As the holidays inch closer, families often think about attending a Broadway or Off Broadway show.
This roundup of plays pays particular attention to the comfort level for children, including the work's running time and attention spans after the first act.
Ticket availability is also addressed.
Children might also benefit by listening to a musical's score before seeing it.
Tickets for the shows below are sold through the theaters' box offices and the TKTS booths in Duffy Square, Broadway at 47th Street, and on the mezzanine level at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets from TKTS are sold at half the regular ticket price, with the highest price at TKTS at $32 (prices fluctuate); a $2 service charge per ticket is added.
On a recent Friday at 6:30 P.M., tickets were available to all the plays mentioned below except "Cats." (There were also very short lines.) The situation was the same at the downtown TKTS booth at 11 A.M. on a recent Saturday, though the lines were considerably longer.
TKTS information: (212) 354-5800.  'Cats'  Winter Garden Theater Broadway at 50th Street Manhattan (212) 239-6200 Recommended ages: 4 and up
"Cats" recently celebrated its ninth birthday on Broadway, which gives yet another generation of children a chance to experience this megamusical.
The play, based on T. S. Eliot's "Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats," introduces a dozen eccentric and eclectic feline personalities.
Children of all ages are likely to identify with at least one of the Jellicle cats, who range from the notorious to the nefarious to the misbegotten.
The rakish Rum Tum Tugger affects leopard-skin boots and a well-gelled palomino hairdo; children usually keep their eyes glued to him.
Grizabella is a skinny gray matted feline who has seen better days but still commands attention with her resonant rendition of the now classic song "Memory." Mr.
Mistoffelees leaps around the stage in shimmery black and is cool and slick but not scary.
Some children are startled at first by the cats' predilection for prowling around the audience; the cats often stop and stare ominously.
But eventually some youngsters hope that they'll catch the eye of a cat to be able to, say, stroke its back.
For many children, "Cats" is a riveting spectacle, though the first act pushes the attention span of some, most likely because the play has a minimal plot.
The second act, however, revives waning interests; by the finale, young theatergoers seem to develop a strong affection for the cast.
The show runs 2 hours and 25 minutes, with a 15-minute intermission, during which youngsters can stroll on the stage or buy a poster, mug or T-shirt.
Tickets, at $42.50 to $60, are available for most shows throughout the next two months; Saturday evenings (and the day after Thanksgiving) sell out quickly; better bets are on weekdays or weekend matinees.
Evening tickets are harder to get through TKTS than matinee tickets; all are $32.
No one under 4 years old is permitted in the theater.
Performances are Mondays through Saturdays (except Thursdays) at 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday matinees are at 2 P.M., and Sunday matinees are at 3 P.M. 'The Good Times Are Killing Me'  Minetta Lane Theater 18 Minetta Lane (near Avenue of the Americas) Manhattan (212) 420-8000 Recommended ages: 8 and up
Edna Arkins, the young main character and narrator in this Off Broadway play written by the cartoonist Lynda Barry, has the uncanny ability to sympathize with adults and her peers at the same time.
She is a mature but complicated white pre-teen growing up in the mid-1960's befuddled by her parents and seeking friendship, in this case, with a black girl next door named Bonna Willis.
Older children will find Edna's and Bonna's growing pains comforting and reassuring: they both manage to rise above the quiet chaos around them.
The play lovingly brings to life familiar childhood idiosyncrasies: the fantasy of having one's own nightclub in a basement, the thrill of saying a curse word, hating one's pious aunt, the importance of pop music.
And the racial tension that flares up between Edna and Bonna, a result of peer pressure, is timely and enlightening.
Children with older siblings will identify with Lucy Arkins, Edna's younger sister, who is used to being mocked and left behind.
The theater's intimacy allows the audience to sit close to the stage, which Yvette Grant, a 9-year-old, said made her "really feel part of the play, as if it's really happening." The play's credibility is enhanced by abrupt active scenes that recall MTV as well as family arguments.
The play is 2 hours long, with a 15-minute intermission.
T-shirts designed by Lynda Barry are sold for $15.
Tickets are available for the next two months, though Saturday evenings sell out quickly.
Performances are Tuesdays through Fridays at 8 P.M., Wednesdays at 2 P.M., Saturdays at 6 and 9 P.M. and Sundays at 3 and 7 P.M. (After Nov. 3, there will be only a 3 P.M. performance on Sundays.) All seats are $35 except Saturdays at 6 P.M. and Wednesday and Sunday matinees, which are $30. (TKTS tickets are about $20.) Discount tickets for children under 18 years old are $20 at the 6 P.M.
Saturday shows, with the purchase of a $30 ticket.  'Once on This Island'  Booth Theater 222 West 45th Street Manhattan (212) 239-6200 Recommended ages: 4 and up
This musical's island scenery, featuring spidery palm trees, flowering hibiscus and spooky mountains, lifts young theatergoers from an urban setting into an earthy close-knit Caribbean island.
Based on the novella "My Love, My Love," by Rosa Guy, a Trinidadian, and also based loosely on Hans Christian Andersen's "Little Mermaid," this youthful love story builds slowly and absorbingly to a strong and moving ending.
It centers on the tenacious Ti Moune, a girl orphaned by a tropical storm and brought up by her fellow island peasants.
She grows from a wiry, willful girl into a loving, kind woman who falls in love with a "grand homme," a member of the ruling class.
Children become swept up in the gentle but powerful narrative, as Ti Moune and the other peasants sing their beautiful songs and sway to the lusty music.
Children follow Ti Moune closely: her fiery soul makes her hard to ignore.
The 90-minute play, which has no intermission, delivers touching moments; when a storm hits, the thunder and lightning cause some youngsters to squirm, yet they seem to relish the effects.
The characters often speak in a patois, making the dialogue hard for youngsters to understand.
But the story is so simple and basic that the dramatic action often conveys the plot.
Tickets, which are $32.50 to $50, are more difficult to obtain on weekend nights, particularly on the day of performance, but all seats are available through December.
As with other plays, tickets to matinees are easier to buy.
TKTS tickets are usually $27.
Adult-size T-shirts, for $12, are sold in the lobby.
No one under 4 years old is permitted in the theater.
Performances are Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 P.M., Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 P.M. and Sundays at 3 P.M.  'The Secret Garden'  St.
James Theater 246 West 44th Street Manhattan (212) 239-6200 Manhattan Recommended ages: 7 and up
The elegiac "Secret Garden" has two main themes: death and revival.
Many children might agree with 9-year-old Kristen Checkosky, who said the play was "happy and sad." Some children, however, find the subject of death disturbing.
One child sobbed recently after the first act.
Yet many youngsters still find the play mesmerizing, with its Victoriana scenery and Monet-like dreaminess in the final secret garden scene.
Daisy Eagan, who plays the recalcitrant but endearing Mary Lennox, whose parents die within the first few minutes of the play, is a character children seem proud of: she is not swayed by adults.
As a heroine, Mary rouses her bedridden cousin, Colin, out of his down-filled bed and startles her despondent Uncle Archie out of his miasma.
Mary herself is transformed, like the roses in the secret garden.
The first act is composed of eight scenes and four opening short scenes that whirl like a Viennese waltz.
Men and women in fancy dress act as ghosts; they are not terribly scary to youngsters because they seem so real.
For children unaware of the book's plot, the diffusive first act can be confusing.
The narrative stirs up their emotions, but it isn't very clear to some youngsters.
Some explaining by parents, for example, about who Colin is, why he is in bed, who Archibald is and why Mary is sent to him, may be needed.
The second act, with 10 short scenes, is more understandable to young theatergoers, with Mary's need for love and friendship satisfyingly resolved.
The play runs 2 hours and 40 minutes, with a 15-minute intermission; T-shirts and refreshments are sold in the lobby.
The theater provides cushions to sit on during the show.
Young theatergoers are likely to benefit from reading Frances Hodgson Burnett's novel before they see the show or hearing a plot synopsis from parents.
And because the play is long, it may be best to see matinees.
Tickets for most performances over the next two months are available, though the weekend evening shows, along with the orchestra seats, sell out first.
Tickets will probably become scarcer on holiday weekends.
Tickets are $35 to $60; the TKTS price is usually $32.
Performances are Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 P.M., and Sundays at 3 P.M.
Miss Eagan does not perform on Tuesday or Wednesday evenings; Kim Mahon appears instead.
Keep in Mind
ANNUAL HAWK WATCH, where participants will visit the upper terrace of the Boathouse to look for red-tailed hawks, kestrels, ospreys and other birds of prey.
Tomorrow, 1 to 4 P.M., sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meeting place: Prospect Park Boat house, Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue entrance, East Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Free.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
"THE WORLD'S TOUGHEST RODEO," with activities including bareback riding, calf roping, saddle-bronco riding, steer wrestling, bull riding and cowgirl barrel racing.
Tonight at 7:30; tomorrow at 1:30 and 7:30 P.M.
At Madison Square Garden.
Tickets, $12.50 to $25.
Information: (212) 465-MSG1.
"THE JEWS OF NEW AMSTERDAM," a new children's book about 23 Jews who arrived in New Amsterdam in 1654 after escaping persecution in Brazil, to be read by Eva Costabel, the author of the book.
Sunday at 2 P.M. at the Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street.
Free with museum admission, $4 for adults, $2 for children and $6 for families.
Information: (212) 534-1672.
"RAINBOWS, RABBITS AND RIDDLES," Theaterworks/USA's newest show, featuring the puppeteer Marshall Izen's giant-size hand puppets performing original stories, including "The Circus," "The Paper Bag Tree" and "The Belvedere Riddle." Tomorrow and Sunday at 12:30 P.M. at the Promenade Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street.
For ages 5 and up.
Tickets, $13, $15.
Information: (212) 677-5959.
"JACOB LAWRENCE: THE FREDERICK DOUGLASS AND HARRIET TUBMAN SERIES OF NARRATIVE PAINTINGS," an exhibition of 63 figurative paintings by the artist Jacob Lawrence (with narrative captions) that document the lives of Harriet Tubman and Frederick Douglass.
At the Studio Museum in Harlem, 144 West 125th Street, through Nov. 10.
Museum hours: Wednesdays through Fridays from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., Saturdays and Sundays from 1 to 6 P.M.
Admission, $3 for adults, $1 for children.
Information: (212) 864-4500.
HARLEM SCHOOL OF THE ARTS OPEN HOUSE, with continuous performances by the school's choir, dance and music classes.
Tomorrow from 1 to 5 P.M. at the school, 645 St.
Nicholas Avenue, at 141st Street, Manhattan.
Admission, free.
Information: (212) 926-4100.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-13
Israel and its Arab neighbors divided over almost every issue they discussed -- who was responsible for the problems in the Middle East, what to do about it, even where further peace talks should be held.
They did agree that they all hoped to end the bloodshed in their region.
Page A1
The encounters of Israelis and Arabs at the fringes of the peace conference were marked by people talking past each other and rushing to claim exclusive access to history's just causes and moral heights.
A1


Senate Fought for Six Months Over Brandeis
To the Editor:
You suggest (The Week in Review, Oct. 20) that one approach to end Presidential-senatorial bickering over Supreme Court nominees "might be to find nominees of such eminence that few people would dare oppose them -- senior politicians like governors or senators, or widely admired judges." You give Louis D. Brandeis, appointed by Woodrow Wilson in 1916, as an example.


Beyond Belligerency in Madrid
Of course the old belligerents, newly gathered in Madrid, spent yesterday restating familiar grievances.
More hopeful and far more interesting were the doors left open for serious diplomacy by Israeli and Palestinian leaders.
Both sides spoke with a dignity and seriousness befitting a tragic conflict, qualities grievously absent in the truculent posturing of the Syrian Foreign Minister, Farouk al-Sharaa.
Without reciprocal concessions there can be no enduring peace between Israel and its Arab neighbors.
This imperative message was articulated Wednesday by Presidents Bush and Gorbachev, Madrid's co-sponsors.
Yet Syria yesterday offered nothing more than a boilerplate assault on Zionism and a demand for the return of "every inch" of Arab land occupied by Israel since 1967 -- thus staking a position in which any compromise might seem a sellout to unprepared Syrians.


Pentagon Would Aid Soviets
In a new twist to the post-cold-war era, the Pentagon may transfer up to $1 billion from its budget to aid the Soviet Union, officials say.
Page A12.


The Spoken Word
READING, the Writer's Voice, 2 West 64th Street, Manhattan.
The singer and songwriter Lou Reed is to read from his forthcoming book, "Between Thought and Expression: Selected Lyrics of Lou Reed," Thursday at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $12.
Information: (212) 875-4124.
LECTURE, Mainstage Theater of City Center, 130 West 56th Street, Manhattan.
Jennifer Tipton, resident designer for the Paul Taylor Dance Theater, is to present a lecture and demonstration, today at 5:30 P.M.
Tickets are $10.
Information: (212) 581-7907.


As Selection of Smith Jurors Begins, Focus Is on History of the Kennedys
As the accused man himself sat nearby, lawyers in the William K. Smith rape trial began the laborious process of selecting the six jurors who will decide the case.
Every potential juror questioned knew the basic facts of the case, including details that could be ruled inadmissible in the trial.
Some of the questions they were asked concerned that knowledge, and whether they thought they could fairly judge Mr.
Smith, the 31-year-old Kennedy heir who has been charged with raping a Florida woman at the Kennedy family's estate here over Easter weekend.


CHRONICLE
There were probably more lawyers per square inch on the 50th floor of the Equitable Building on Wednesday evening -- some 450 of them -- than at any recent social gathering.
The magnet: the 15th anniversary celebration of New York Lawyers for the Public Interest.


MIDEAST FOES LIST DEMANDS AND TRADE ANGRY CHARGES ACROSS CONFERENCE TABLE
In salvos of intransigent oratory, Israel and its Arab neighbors said today that they all hoped to end the bloodshed in their region, but disagreed about almost everything else -- who was at fault, what to do about it, even where further peace talks should be held.
On a day when the Palestinians at last found their place at a major Middle East peace conference, the Arabs demanded that Israel stop creating settlements in occupied territories and give up territory it had taken from Arabs in 1967.
The Israelis in turn demanded that the Arabs recognize Israel's right to exist.


Coe and Waitz Called Best in 25 Years
Who are the premier runners of the last 25 years?
According to Runner's World magazine, they are Sebastian Coe, the British middle-distance champion, and Grete Waitz, the nine-time winner of the New York City Marathon.
The two were named last night as the male and female runners of the quarter century at a ceremony and reception sponsored by the magazine, which, not coincidentally, is celebrating its 25th anniversary.


At the Bar; One night at Kennedy estate sets off a business boom for lawyers and lawyers' lawyers.
On March 31, before settling in for a game charades, Senator Edward M. Kennedy called an old friend, a Miami lawyer named Marvin Rosen, to wish him a happy Passover.
The next day Mr.
Kennedy called Mr.
Rosen again, and not for holiday pleasantries.
It was to find a defense lawyer for William K. Smith, his suddenly notorious nephew.
Thus began the deluge.
The charge of rape against Mr.
Smith has provided employment opportunities for, it seems, every trial lawyer from here to Lake Okeechobee and a few beyond.
Nearly everybody connected to the case, however remotely, has hired representation.


Seaver Hospitalized
TOM SEAVER, the Yankee broadcaster and former Mets pitcher, has been admitted to Greenwich Hospital near his home in Connecticut for treatment of Lyme disease, but apparently has a comparatively mild case.
"He gave me a statement to release, so if he's able to do that, he's not critically ill," said the hospital's public relations director, MIMI GRADY.


No Headline
Harry Packard, a collector and dealer in Japanese art who sold the Metropolitan Museum of Art the largest group of objects it has ever bought, died on Thursday at the Rakuyo Hospital in Kyoto, Japan.
He was 77 years old and lived in Ohara, Japan.
His lawyer, William L. Johnson, said he had died of pneumonia.


Coming Back; The Business of Business
Political leadership alone can't do it.
Managerial discipline alone can't do it.
For New York City to work its way back from the present economic slump, it needs the help of business leaders, as leaders and as individuals.
The 1970's fiscal crisis was impossible for business leaders to ignore; the city faced bankruptcy.
When Gov.
Hugh Carey asked for help, he got it.
The 1991 crisis is less acute yet no less a crisis.
It presents itself in the form of troubled schools, crime and drugs, snarling panhandlers, pitiable homelessness, slipping services and, worst, in glib pessimism.


William B. St. John, Business Executive, 84
William B. St.
John, who supervised major business ventures in Latin America for the billionaire Daniel K. Ludwig, died on Wednesday at Laurel Lake retirement community in Hudson, Ohio.
He was 84 years old.
Mr.
St.
John, who had moved to Ohio from Old Greenwich, Conn., died of heart failure, his family said.


Bristol-Myers Gets Approval on Drug
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company has received Food and Drug Administration approval to market Pravachol, or prevastatin sodium, a new one-a-day tablet to reduce cholesterol levels.
Pravachol will compete with Merck &amp; Company's Mevacor, which analysts said would have $1.08 billion in sales this year, and Merck's Zocor, which is awaiting F.D.A. approval.
Bristol-Myers, based in New York, said Pravachol's factory price would be $1.33 a day for a typical 20-milligram dose, or 5 to 10 percent lower than Mevacor.
Marc O. Mayer, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein, said Pravachol, which is already on sale in 21 foreign countries, would have $150 million in 1991 sales and exceed $1 billion by 1995.
He said Merck's Zocor, which is also on sale overseas, could have $360 million in worldwide sales this year if it gets F.D.A. approval.


Joe McCarthy, Back in Style
All right, who started it?
Was it Senator Warren Rudman of New Hampshire when he thundered "It's McCarthyism!" at the critics of Robert Gates?
Or was it the legion of the right-minded who whooped "It's McCarthyism!" as they stampeded the so-called politically correct?
Maybe it was artists who were denied Federal funds; maybe it was Ed Koch, who screamed everything at everybody.
But when supporters of both Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill cry "It's McCarthyism!" -- and Senator Alan Simpson of Wyoming goes into hiding -- it's time to shout above the din, "
So what did you expect?
"


Convicted Killer Curses Court and Attacks Lawyer
A 20-year-old man about to be sentenced for the rape and murder of a pregnant woman followed up his lawyer's plea for leniency yesterday by cursing the court and then knocking the lawyer to the ground with a punch in the face.
After the man, Matias Reyes, was removed from court by bailiffs, he was sentenced to 33 1/3 years to life in prison.


Mexican President Outlines Program for Changes
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari unveiled plans today for Mexico's continued transformation in the second half of his term, promising sweeping changes in agriculture, in education, and in the distant relations between church and state.
After three years in which he has concentrated on modernizing the economy and laying the groundwork for free trade with the United States, Mr.
Salinas turned in his annual State of the Nation address to themes of social change.


Classical Music in Review
Jorg Demus  Weill Recital Hall


Nuclear Bomb Plant Is Delayed by U.S.
The Energy Department postponed a decision on how and where to build a new reactor to produce tritium for nuclear bombs for at least two years, saying the Administration's latest arms control initiatives had made it less urgent.
The reactor is one of the costliest and most complex projects envisioned in a comprehensive rebuilding of the nation's nuclear bomb manufacturing industry, and until recently it had been a priority.
In the last two years the program has cost $678 million; it was to cost $1 billion more in the next two years.
Article, page 9.


Compact Disks and Players for the Eyes as Well as the Ears
Suppose for a research project you wanted to hear part of John F. Kennedy's inaugural address, then see pictures of all the United States Presidents.
Now you can do just that at home or in the office with a new souped-up personal computer and a single new compact disk.
These new computers and disks are the latest generation of equipment for storing and portraying information electronically, or what the computer and electronics industries call electronic publishing or multimedia computing.
By taking advantage of the massive storage capacity of compact disks, a single disk, or electronic book, is able to store what would take 250,000 pages in ordinary books.
And some even offer video.


U.S. Delays Decision on New Reactor for Nuclear Bomb Materials
Saying the Bush Administration's latest arms control initiatives had made the move much less urgent, the Department of Energy today postponed for at least two years its decision on how and where to build a new reactor to produce materials for nuclear bombs.
The production reactor is one of the costliest and most complex projects envisioned in a comprehensive rebuilding of the nation's nuclear bomb manufacturing industry, and its construction until recently had been a priority of the department.
In the past two years the program has cost $678 million, and it was to cost $1 billion more in the coming two years.


Patents; Developing 'Smoke-Free' Cigarettes
In what may portend a new attempt to sell "smoke free" cigarettes, three leading tobacco companies obtained patents this week for different approaches to products that mimic the sensation of smoking without actually burning tobacco.
Cigarette makers have been trying to develop a less-objectionable product to contend with declining sales and the rapid spread of smoking bans.
In general, smoke-free cigarettes heat tobacco rather than burn it and produce a vapor that resembles smoke but does not contain the thick tar that coats a smoker's lungs.
The first attempt to market a smoke-free cigarette, by R. J. Reynolds, flopped two years ago.


SPORTS LEISURE: Countdown to the Marathon; What You Eat Tells How You'll Finish
Preparing for an endurance run such as tomorrow's New York City Marathon has as much to do with eating as it does with working out.
It is no time to go on an ice cream binge, nor is it a time to go on a crash diet.
You need energy, but it should be the lasting kind.
Deciding on what's best to eat is like settling on the right octane level for your car.
Either way, you must be ready to go the distance.


Martinelli in Yonkers, Halpin in Suffolk
Tuesday's elections offer two hotly contested suburban races.
For the first time in 50 years, residents of Yonkers, N.Y., having replaced the city manager form of government, will select a mayor with stronger powers.
That's a chance to end years of political turmoil.


Body of Girl Is Found In Bag in Queens Park
The body of a 6-year-old girl, wrapped in a black plastic bag, was found late last night in a deserted park near Kennedy International Airport, the police said.
The girl, whose body was found at 10:25 P.M., had been stabbed repeatedly, a police spokesman, Sgt.
Edward Burns, said.
He said that investigators knew who the girl was, but he would not disclose her identity.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Qual-Med Inc., an owner of health maintenance organizations, and Preferred Health Network Inc., Long Beach, Calif., a managed-care organization, said they would merge.
Qual-Med will pay $2.25 million at closing and the remainder will be based on pretax earnings of Preferred Health and other performance criteria up to a maximum price of $10 million. *
Softech Inc., Waltham, Mass., a software and engineering company, will close its Compass Inc. subsidiary and take a $1.6 million charge against earnings for its second quarter ending Nov. 29.


BUSH ADOPTS PLAN TO ATTACK CRITICS
As White House advisers fret about the sour economy and the voter discontent it has stirred, President Bush is solidly fixing the blame for both on official Washington, and especially on its Democratic majority in Congress.
The strategy, urged on Mr.
Bush for weeks by some of his leading political advisers, surfaced unexpectedly Thursday night in Houston, and the President repeated his attack on Democrats in a talk here tonight.


Bombardier Seeking Stake in Boeing Unit
Bombardier Inc., a transportation conglomerate with annual sales of $3 billion, said today that it had entered negotiations with the Ontario provincial government to acquire a stake in the Boeing Company's de Havilland aircraft unit.
Boeing, which bought Boeing Canada de Havilland from the Canadian Government in 1986 for $110 million, put the unit up for sale last year after cumulative losses of $636 million.


Twin Cities Buried in a Record Snowfall


With Allowances, Every Parent Differs
Rina Pianko of Manhattan, a homemaker with three sons, believes that children should get an allowance because it teaches them what money is and how to manage it.
"But the allowance should be flexible from year to year as a child's needs change," she said.
"This is really teaching them about themselves."


House Panel Fails to Clear Benefits Bill
House Democrats stumbled today and failed to get their new bill for extended unemployment benefits out of the House Ways and Means Committee, even though the Bush Administration endorsed it hesitantly.
But Congressional leaders of both parties and the budget director, Richard G. Darman, said they felt a program could be agreed on early next week, and that a bill providing benefits to about three million people out of work more than half a year could be passed soon.


Stadler, With Reverence, Takes a One-Stroke Lead
Even as they were forced to play conservatively and even fearfully over the course's ancient bumps and deep bunkers, the PGA Tour's best players continued to sing the praises of Pinehurst No. 2 today after the second round of the Tour Championship.
Beginning with Craig Stadler, the 36-hole leader, player after player expressed his respect for the 90-year-old Donald Ross masterpiece, as the 7,005-yard course more than held its own against the select field, the tour's top 30 money winners.


Britain Proposes Curbs on Refugee Flow
Joining other Western European nations overwhelmed by a growing tide of immigration, the British Government proposed strict new rules today to reduce the number of refugees who would be allowed to settle in Britain.
Introducing the legislation in Parliament, Home Secretary Kenneth Baker said the new rules would try to close loopholes in British immigration law, and streamline the processing of migrants' claims so as to reduce a backlog of more than 60,000 cases.


Your Taxes; I.R.S. Audit Rate Continues to Drop
Although the Internal Revenue Service gets huge amounts of information on interest, dividends and other income from banks, brokers and others, the chance of a taxpayer's being subjected to an audit continues to shrink.
The service managed to scrutinize only 80 individual returns in every 10,000 last year, down from 92 in 1989.
Despite the flood of Forms 1099 that curb opportunities to underreport, the I.R.S. frets about compliance.
Increases in work load that have outstripped resources and the ever-greater complexity of the tax law -- amended more than 100 times since 1980 -- are two of the biggest problems, it says.
"The number of returns filed, particularly business and corporate returns, has increased, while staffing has hardly grown at all," the I.R.S. stated in its annual report.


Bonds Best In Australia
Australia's bond market was October's top performer in local currency terms, while Canada led in United States dollar terms, according to the investment firm of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.
With a return of 4.23 percent in local terms, Australia's rally was fueled by the possibility of cuts in short-term interest rates to help a faltering economy, as well as lower inflation, Morgan said yesterday.


INSIDE
Deregulation in Argentina Argentina's President announced a vast economic deregulation to reverse decades of Government intervention and protectionism.
Page 3. 4 Slain on Iowa Campus
University of Iowa officials say a disgruntled graduate student from China shot four people to death before killing himself.
Page 8.
Senate Derails Energy Bill
The Senate derailed an Administration-backed bill to reduce dependence on foreign oil, blocking drilling in an Alaskan wildlife refuge.
Page 37.


Put Me In, Coach, Cadigan Says, As Jets Tune Up for the Packers
Shortly after someone stepped on his left ankle, spraining it badly during a goal-line play against Houston three weeks ago, left guard Dave Cadigan vowed he would return in time for this Sunday's game against Green Bay.
Jets Coach Bruce Coslet, on the advice of team doctors, was more cautious in his estimate, saying it could be more than four weeks.
Now, it looks like Cadigan, aided by a week off, will be closer to his time frame than Coslet's.


Excerpts From Baker-Pankin Remarks: 'They Have to Turn a Page of War'
Following are excerpts from a news conference today by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Foreign Minister Boris D. Pankin of the Soviet Union about the Arab-Israeli peace talks.
Mr.
Pankin's comments were translated by his interpreter.
PANKIN'S STATEMENT
It is a pleasure to be able to come here to share my views and impressions of the conclusion of the plenary session at the . . .
Palace.
The whole world has been following closely the developments in Madrid, which is quite understandable because Middle East means a lot from the point of view of human culture and, in terms of today's realities, also from the point of view of economics.


Critic's Notebook; In Madrid, Theatrics Lacking in TV Drama
For audiences accustomed to the heady brews of the Clarence Thomas hearings, the Moscow coup and Desert Storm, the Middle East peace conference in Madrid this week must have seemed like pale tea.
Yitzhak Shamir was not Judge Thomas and Hanan Ashrawi was not Anita F. Hill.
George Bush at the podium was not Boris N. Yeltsin atop a tank, and neither was Mikhail S. Gorbachev, who seems to be fading and shrinking before one's eyes.
Peace in the Middle East just didn't have the visual zip of war in the Persian Gulf.
This time, for all the theatrics on screen, if there was any real drama taking place it was behind the scenes.
Live coverage was spotty.
By the time Americans were brushing their teeth Wednesday morning in preparation for receiving important guests over breakfast, President Bush and President Gorbachev had already completed their performances in Madrid and were on their way home.
Instead of "You Are There," it was "They Had Gone." Viewers, left to make do with the welcome from the European Community representative on CNN, may have settled for a bowl of oat bran.


U.S.O.C. Chief Proposes Panel to Monitor Ethics
The new president of the United States Olympic Committee, who took office in September after questions of ethical behavior forced the resignation of his predecessor, presented to the U.S.O.C. executive committee tonight new procedures intended to prevent the kinds of activities that brought on the change in leadership.
William Hybl said that he had developed the proposals in consultation with Arnold Burns, an attorney hired by the U.S.O.C. to investigate the business affairs of Robert Helmick, the former president, who acknowledged serving as a paid consultant to organizations seeking larger ties to the Olympics.


YELTSIN PLAN WINS A QUICK APPROVAL
The Russian Parliament voted fast and overwhelming approval today of President Boris N. Yeltsin's emergency blueprint to free consumer prices for inevitable, painful rises in the search for economic recovery.
In addition, the Parliament, heeding Mr.
Yeltsin's warning about darker days ahead, granted the Russian leader the increased powers he had sought to overrule anticipated grass-roots opposition by hard-line remnants of the defunct Communist system.


Joseph Papp Is Remembered in Words and Song
Admirers of Joseph Papp, director of the New York Shakespeare Festival, overflowed his funeral yesterday at the Public Theater, which he founded 25 years ago.
A day after his death from cancer at the age of 70, mourners filled the seats and aisles of the Newman Theater, the Public's largest house, and watched the emotional proceedings on television monitors set up in the lobby and in two of the other theaters in the complex on Lafayette Street in Lower Manhattan.


Dinkins Says Germany, Yes; Free Trip, No
Abandoning his plan to combine a free trip to a German tennis tournament with courting European businesses next month, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he would reschedule the trip for late winter or early spring and stick strictly to business and visits to Holocaust memorials.
But Mr.
Dinkins denied that the switch was prompted by critical news coverage of his original plan to accept an expenses-paid trip from the German promoter of the Compaq Grand Slam Open in Munich, which was announced last Sunday.
He said he wanted more time to plan a business trip, as the guest of the City of Frankfurt and possibly other Eastern or Western European governments.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the Senate's passage of a civil rights bill misstated the vote.
It was 93 to 5; Senators Harris Wofford, Democrat of Pennsylvania, and Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, were absent.


2 Inquiries Clear Former Official in B.C.C.I. Case
After weeklong internal investigations, the White House and the Justice Department said today they had found no evidence of ethics law violations by a former Administration official who represented a leading figure in the investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commmerce International.
But the office of Representative Charles J. Schumer, the Brooklyn Democrat who had set off the two investigations of the former official, Edward M. Rogers Jr., immediately questioned whether the inquiries had been sufficiently broad or detailed.


Mental Illness?
To the Editor:
Your series on private mental hospitals -- the first installment of which (front page, Oct. 22) airs the characteristic charge that a chain of such hospitals "systematically misdiagnosed, mistreated, and abused patients to increase its profits" -- rests on the seemingly unshakable assumption that the phenomena psychiatrists call "mental illnesses" exist.
Of course, the unwanted behaviors, and the unwanted people who exhibit them, exist.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.00
5.00
7.87
3-MO. TREAS.
4.76
4.84
7.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.78
4.85
7.05
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.13
7.13
8.39
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.92
7.91
8.68
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.92
8.90
9.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.81
6.85
7.66
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Next Computer To Cut 30 Jobs
Next Computer Inc. said it would lay off about 30 people, or 5 percent of its work force.
Most of Next's 600 employees are based at the company's headquarters in Redwood City, Calif.
Next also has a manufacturing plant in Fremont, Calif.
Steven P. Jobs, Next's founder, chairman and chief executive, said in a telephone interview that the layoffs were because of a rethinking of Next's business plan that focuses more on corporate customers creating their own software programs rather than using off-the-shelf products.


Anita Hill Is Welcomed As a Heroine
Anita Hill stood before a microphone in the Rainbow Pavilion and looked out at the crowd with the calm, impassive gaze she had directed at members of the Senate Judiciary Committee three weeks before in an appearance that riveted and divided the country.
But last night she was treated to an unequivocal heroine's welcome, as elegantly dressed guests jostled for a glimpse.


Dow Drops 12.75 on Program Selling
Stocks fell in heavy trading yesterday after a late series of program trades and a weak bond market pushed prices lower.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed down 12.75 for the day, at 3,056.35, but it was up 51.43 for the week.
Many investors stayed on the sidelines, awaiting a cut in the discount rate after the Labor Department reported that employment had declined, contrary to expectations.


A Quarrel Obscured
No matter what the diplomats say, the dispute about the site of continuing Middle East peace negotiations, which threatened tonight to disrupt the whole process, is neither a technical matter nor a question of picayune detail.
It cuts to the very heart of the dispute that has poisoned relations and caused violent strife between the Arabs and the Israelis for 40 years.


Nigeria Seeks Phibro Deal
The Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation has discussed buying part of the four refineries owned and operated by Salomon Inc.'s Phibro Energy Inc. unit, an official of the Nigerian state-owned company said this week.
"There are discussions going on; there's no doubt about it," said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Payroll jobs failed to rise in October, and the unemployment rate edged back up to its August level of 6.8 percent, Labor De partment figures showed, reflecting an eco nomic recovery that has slowed to a near standstill.
Although the report was only mod estly worse than expected despite sharp job losses in manufacturing, retail trade and construction, economists said it added to fears that the midyear rebound had given way to stagnation.  [ Page 1. ]  In Allentown, Pa., some of the faces behind the layoff notices.  [ 49. ]


Harlem Hospital Death Ruled an Accident
The death of a 74-year-old man found in a Harlem Hospital steam-pipe shaft after being missing for a week was an accident, the Medical Examiner's Office has ruled.
An autopsy determined that the man, Clarence Pompey, died of the extreme heat from the pipes, Ellen Borokove, a spokeswoman for the Medical Examiner, said on Thursday.


Holders Back Bank Mergers
Shareholders of four large East Coast banks yesterday approved plans for two separate mergers that will create the nation's third- and fourth- largest banking companies.
In New York, the merger of the Chemical Banking Corporation and Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company received the blessing of shareholders and the new bank will operate under the Chemical name.
The new Chemical will be second in size to Citicorp in the New York consumer market, and have large banks in northern New Jersey and Texas.


Kentucky Race for Governor Leaves Voters Yawning
Democrats have had an electoral stranglehold on the Kentucky governorship for the past 20 years, and 1991 does not appear to be the year Republicans will break that hold.
If the polls and pundits are correct, the Democratic candidate, Lieut.
Gov.
Brereton C. Jones, will sweep past his Republican opponent, Representative Larry J. Hopkins, in Tuesday's election.
The incumbent, Wallace G. Wilkinson, a 49-year-old Democrat, is barred by state law from succeeding himself.


Zambian Voters Defeat Kaunda, Sole Leader Since Independence
One of Africa's longest-serving leaders, Kenneth D. Kaunda, President of Zambia since independence from Britain 27 years ago, was resoundingly defeated in a multiparty election, partial but clear results indicated today.
The balloting on Thursday was the first such contest here in more than two decades and a rare defeat by popular vote of a senior African head of state.


Sun Is a Late Entry on Eve of Breeders' Cup
After a night and morning of heavy rain, the sun finally shone today on 90 of the best race horses in Europe and America as they prepared to take the track Saturday at Churchill Downs and shoot for $10 million in seven races in the Breeders' Cup championships, racing's richest day.
D.
Wayne Lukas, the most successful trainer in modern times, who often turns a ringing phrase, considered the dimensions of the occasion and said, "The whole world is watching."


George Eastman, 79, Expert on Police Work
Dr.
George D. Eastman, an authority on law enforcement who drew on his experience as a former police chief in his later career as a professor and consultant, died Wednesday at his home in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 79 years old and died of a heart ailment, said a spokeswoman for Kent State University in Kent, Ohio.


Classical Music in Review
Rian de Waal  Pianist Alice Tully Hall


Gloom Seems to Deepen For Allentown's Jobless
Shirley George survived the first three rounds of layoffs at the Unisys Corporation's branch office here.
But not the fourth.
"I figured I'd get it sooner or later," said Mrs.
George, 52 years old, who kept the company's records and archives.
"Let's face it: Unisys is unloading a lot of people. It's going to catch up with you eventually."


Auto Safety vs. Fuel Economy: Questions of Size and Design
Big cars are usually safer in crashes than small cars, highway statistics indicate.
But tests also suggest that the safety of any car, large or small, is a very relative affair.
That may be the real issue in the current debate over car size and safety.
This week, some advocates of safer cars accused Federal Department of Transportation officials of unfairly manipulating a crash test that was subsequently seen in a television commercial.


Soybean Prices Up Sharply On Expectation of Aid Plan
Soybeans for near-term delivery rose sharply yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade amid expectations for an announcement soon on Soviet food aid and worries about the availability of near-term supplies.
Grain futures also settled mostly higher in Chicago.


Public &amp; Private; The Right Questions
From the public address system of the number 1 train came the voice of civility.
"Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen," said the voice, "and welcome to the Broadway local. I don't know whether you're interested in this sort of thing or not, but the number 2 and 3 trains may be boarded just across the platform. In fact, downtown transfers are on the house. Our final destination is South Ferry. This involves closing the doors." The woman to my left snapped out of her commuter fugue state and laughed.
A soothing voice of civility on the subway -- it was wonderful.
And weird.
Just a few stops south, four men were on trial, charged with another sort of subway story, the one that included the brutal murder of a tourist from Utah a year ago.
The voice of civility continued to come over the P.A., faintly British, so at odds with the usual sullen crackle of the speakers.
But it was difficult not to think of blood on the station floor.
This is what it is like to be a New Yorker, to have to stop and constantly acknowledge pain.


Elizabeth M. Cahill, Governor's Wife, 79
Elizabeth M. Cahill, wife of William T. Cahill, a former Governor of New Jersey, died on Wednesday at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia after a brief illness.
She was 79 years old and lived in Haddonfield, N.J.
Mr.
Cahill, a Republican who had served in the House of Representatives, was Governor for four years, starting in January 1970.


Arafat as Ben-Gurion?!
The question was startling, incongruous at first.
"Do you think that Yasir Arafat will be the Palestinians' Ben-Gurion?" an aide to the Palestine Liberation Organization leader asked me in Tunis just before the Madrid conference opened.
The difference between the personalities of the leader who declared Israel's independence and the P.L.O.'s chairman is great.
David Ben-Gurion was a decisive man, steeped in classical culture, straightforward and -- to Palestinians -- the enemy incarnate.
Mr.
Arafat is wily, certainly persistent and stubborn, gleefully adept at evasion.


Leon M. Nad, 63, Dies; Expert on Tax Policy
Leon M. Nad, a national expert on taxes and a retired partner of the Price Waterhouse accounting firm in New York City, died on Thursday at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
A resident of West Orange, N.J., Mr.
Nad was 63 years old.
He died of complications of cancer and an aneurysm, his family said.


Dunnock Memorial
A memorial service for the actress Mildred Dunnock is to be held on Monday at 1 P.M. at the Actors Studio, 431 West 44th Street.
Among those scheduled to speak are Arvin Brown, artistic director of the Long Wharf Theater, and the actors Joyce Ebert, Frank Langella and Maria Tucci.
Miss Dunnock died on July 5 at the age of 90.


No Fine for Being Nice
After reviewing the jeers and catcalls that greeted the suggestion that Chicago Bear safety MARK CARRIER would be subject to an automatic $1,000 fine for handing the ball to a paralyzed fan in a wheelchair last Sunday, the National Football League has decided no fine would be imposed.
"There was no intention to fine him," said GREG AIELLO, a league spokesman.


Citibank Names Head Of Foreign Debt Panel
Citibank, the largest American bank lender to Latin American countries and the leader in negotiations to reorganize those countries' debts, yesterday named Mike de Graffenried chairman of the bank's debt-restructuring committee.
Mr. de Graffenried, 42 years old, will replace Robert A. McCormack, who moved to a new position in the bank to help resolve its problems with commercial real estate loans.


EXECUTIVES
*
Baroid Corp., Houston, a supplier of petroleum services and equipment, named P. Anthony Lannie vice president, secretary and general counsel. 1*
Bibb Co., Macon, Ga., which produces towels and sheets, named Zenon S. Nie president of its consumer home fashions division.


Dutch Study Is Issue in Euthanasia Vote
As the voters in Washington State consider whether doctors should be allowed to end the lives of terminally ill patients who have asked to die, people on both sides are bolstering their arguments with a new study from the Netherlands, where euthanasia is illegal but widely tolerated.
Opponents of the measure, which appears on next Tuesday's ballot, say the Dutch study shows that unless euthanasia is strictly forbidden, some doctors will kill patients without their consent.
Supporters say it shows that such fears are greatly exaggerated.


We're Ready to Go Beyond Incineration
To the Editor:
Regarding "Incineration Must Remain a Waste Option" (letter, Oct. 12): Other than a nuclear reactor, incineration is perhaps the most fearful word to communities, yet it is worshiped by the oil and gas industry.
When the oil and gas industry considers the fuel market that could be lost to clean-burning incineration, it's enough to frighten the industry into taking steps to make sure that it never happens.


Earl Robinson Memorial
A memorial service for the composer and folk singer Earl Robinson is to be held on Monday at 7:30 P.M. at the Village Gate, Bleecker and Thompson Streets.
Among those scheduled to participate are the singers Pete Seeger, Harry Belafonte and Oscar Brand.
Admission is free.
Mr.
Robinson, who wrote "Joe Hill" and other songs about the American labor movement, died in a car accident on July 20 at the age of 81.


Congressman's Son Held on Drug Charges
The son of a powerful Congressman was arrested Thursday on charges of possessing crack and selling the drug to an undercover police officer, the authorities said today.
The suspect is John M. Murtha, 33-year-old son of Representative John P. Murtha, the Pennsylvania Democrat who heads the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Defense.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day on Thursday, about the varied evaluations of a cable television deal, misidentified the company that sold 18 percent of the American Television and Communications Corporation to the public in 1986.
It was Time Inc., not Warner Communications.


2 More T.S. Eliot Poems Found Amid Hundreds of His Letters
From an apple crate in a widower's attic in Hampshire has sprung one of the most delightful poetic surprises since T. S. Eliot's "Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats": hundreds of unpublished Eliot letters and two newly discovered poems.
The British Library, which has bought the collection for an undisclosed sum from the widower who found the papers in his loft early this year, plans to put some on display.
They will be shown in the manuscript saloon near Magna Carta just as soon as Sally Brown, the curator of modern literary manuscripts, can prepare the exhibit.


Auburn Under Investigation After N.C.A.A. Hears Tapes
The National Collegiate Athletic Association has begun a preliminary investigation of Auburn's football program after an enforcement officer listened for the first time to secretly recorded conversations between a former Auburn football player and three assistant coaches.
David Berst, the assistant executive director for enforcement for the N.C.A.A., said that William Saum on Thursday listened to three hours of recorded conversations between Eric Ramsey, the former Auburn player, and three assistant coaches.


In New Jersey, 'Hands' Is Lightning Rod No More
For more than a year following the biggest tax increase in state history, the protest group Hands Across New Jersey was the most powerful grass-roots political force in the state, holding mass rallies, circulating petitions, summoning news organizations at will and threatening to topple not only the reigning Democratic Legislature but also the Governor himself.
Today, the anti-tax fervor is still very much alive, but Hands Across New Jersey, even one of its founders concedes, is flailing and fighting for survival.


Demand High for RJR Issue
The lure of a high-yielding investment swelled demand for the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation's preferred share offering yesterday, paving the way for the company to shed its multibillion-dollar debt.
The stock offering is part of a plan to cut the food and tobacco giant's total debt load to less than $15 billion, from $29 billion.


Excerpts From Baker-Pankin Remarks: 'They Have to Turn a Page of War'
Following are excerpts from a news conference today by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Foreign Minister Boris D. Pankin of the Soviet Union about the Arab-Israeli peace talks.
Mr.
Pankin's comments were translated by his interpreter.
PANKIN'S STATEMENT
It is a pleasure to be able to come here to share my views and impressions of the conclusion of the plenary session at the . . .
Palace.
The whole world has been following closely the developments in Madrid, which is quite understandable because Middle East means a lot from the point of view of human culture and, in terms of today's realities, also from the point of view of economics.


Closing of Bilingual School Is Denounced in Bronx
The distance between their children's new school and their old one is about 30 blocks -- just over a mile through the streets of the South Bronx.
But to the parents of the 300 Hispanic pupils in grades three through seven who were transferred to a junior high in Morrisania this fall, the two schools seemed worlds apart.


New York Area Unemployment
Unemployment in New York City rose in October to 8.5 percent from 7.7 percent in September.
This rate was considerably higher than the national rate of 6.8 percent reported yesterday.
The jobless rate also jumped somewhat in New York State to 7.2 percent from 6.8 percent and in New Jersey, to 6.8 percent from 6.2 percent.


Patents; Cell Advance May Help Bone Marrow Problems
In a development with potentially revolutionary implications, Systemix of Palo Alto, Calif., a small medical research company, obtained a patent this week on isolated human stem cells, which are bone marrow cells that serve as the progenitor for all other kinds of red and white blood cells.
The cells could make it easier to carry out bone marrow transplants for cancer patients, and the company said they are likely to be important in future attempts at gene therapy, the treatment of diseases by introducing new genes into a person's body.


Energy Bill Is Derailed In Senate
The Senate derailed a major bill intended to reduce the nation's dependence on foreign oil today, effectively defeating the Administration's plan to open a vast Alaskan wildlife refuge to oil drilling.
Most Congressional officials said they thought an energy bill was likely to return to the floor in some form this year, but without the significant wildlife-refuge drilling provision.


Don't Worry, I'll Be Back, Howard Assures the Giants
With Erik Howard, a Pro Bowl player, at nose tackle, the Giants might be cruising toward the playoffs with a 6-2 record.
Instead, Howard is recuperating from back surgery, the Giants are 4-4 and someone else will have to apply pressure up the middle Monday night against the Philadelphia Eagles' patched-up offensive line.
Howard's surgery was performed Sept. 27, and the Giants said then that if all went well, he could play again in early December.
Today, a slimmer and healthy-looking Howard was in the Giants' locker room assuring everyone he would indeed be back then.


Berlin Journal; In Unified Metropolis, Lenin Icon Is Still Divisive
A Berlin court has ended a troubled debate among Berliners over symbols that lace the restored German capital by ordering the removal of a giant statue of Lenin, its gaze still beaming into a visionary future nearly two years after Communism collapsed.
This is no small event in a city torn by unification.
Although the hard-line Government in East Berlin toppled, and monuments to the founder of the Soviet state came down from Bucharest to Addis Ababa, not to mention most Soviet cities, the 60-foot red granite statue still graces circular Lenin Square near the heart of Berlin.


About New York
"They're like little soldiers in a war," the social worker said.
They looked like anything but soldiers, of course, these small human beings on the front lines of what will almost surely be a losing struggle.
The two dozen or so children -- dressed in Halloween costumes, gobbling cake and candy, laughing against tomorrow -- all have AIDS.
A boy is losing his baby teeth and the first incisor is starting to poke through.
His unsuspecting body continues to operate on the assumption that it will grow up normally.


Marzotto S.p.A.
Marzotto S.p.A., a large Italian apparel manufacturer, said it had reached an agreement with Leyton House Group, a Japanese holding company, to acquire 77.5 percent of Hugo Boss A.G., a German men's wear manufacturer, for $165 million.


Chronicle
The Ottawa Civic Hospital has just opened a new wing for heart patients, but it was so new on Tuesday, the last day of a visit to Canada by the Prince and Princess of Wales, that it did not yet have any patients.
What to do?
DIANA, the Princess of Wales, was to tour the wing, as she had other wards and clinics during the weeklong trip, so hospital authorities summoned former patients who had been treated in other sections of the hospital and asked them lie in the beds in pajamas to meet her.


Corrections
A chart on Oct. 19 comparing homicide rates in several countries misstated Sweden's rate for 1988.
It was 1.7 per 100,000 population.


Burmese Opposition Leader Learns of Nobel Peace Prize
The Burmese opposition leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, who is under house arrest in Myanmar, formerly Burma, has learned that she won the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize and is delighted, the awards committee said today.
Francis Sejersted, chairman of the committee here, said a reliable source had confirmed that Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi knows about the award that she won on Oct. 14.
He refused to give details, saying he wished to protect the source.


MIDEAST SESSION ADJOURNS, WITH PROSPECTS UNCERTAIN FOR SECOND PHASE OF TALKS
The opening phase of the Middle East peace conference ended today on a sour note, with Arabs and Israelis exchanging invective and with no indication whether sustained, direct peace talks between the old enemies will take place.
These follow-up negotiations, which are in doubt because of a dispute between Israel and the Arabs over where they should be conducted, could mark the success or failure of the whole peace conference.


Bronx Foes Try to Stop Medical Incinerator
A scowl of skepticism crosses Debra Torres's face when she is told that public officials are certain the 48-ton-a-day medical-waste incinerator five blocks from her South Bronx home will harm no one.
"My son, Michael, has respiratory problems, and I'm sure it will get worse," Mrs.
Torres said.
"The politicians say one thing, but . . ."


Guam Abortion Law Tyrannizes Women
To the Editor:
Representative Ben Blaz of Guam protests (letter, Oct. 19) that residents of Guam do not have "the same constitutional rights enjoyed by our brothers and sisters in the states." In a second letter, Gov.
Joseph Ada of Guam argues for "self-government and self-determination" through "the freedom to establish internal constitutional mechanisms." Mr.
Blaz states that "the people of Guam -- Americans all -- remain second-class citizens" and "they are denied the fundamental rights afforded their counterparts elsewhere."


Excerpts From Baker-Pankin Remarks: 'They Have to Turn a Page of War'
Following are excerpts from a news conference today by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Foreign Minister Boris D. Pankin of the Soviet Union about the Arab-Israeli peace talks.
Mr.
Pankin's comments were translated by his interpreter.
PANKIN'S STATEMENT
It is a pleasure to be able to come here to share my views and impressions of the conclusion of the plenary session at the . . .
Palace.
The whole world has been following closely the developments in Madrid, which is quite understandable because Middle East means a lot from the point of view of human culture and, in terms of today's realities, also from the point of view of economics.


Thomas's Installation Paints a New Portrait of the Supreme Court


Guidepost; Let It Snow, Let It Snow
It's November, and time to think about snow.
Hardware stores and home centers are brimming with equipment for clearing stoops, decks, sidewalks, paths and driveways.
Here are some examples. (Electric devices must be used with outdoor extension cords whose wiring is heavy enough to run the device safely; this will depend on the length of the cord and the size of the motor being run.) Snow Shovels Cost: $7 to $20.
Suitable for small and light jobs.
Types: Deep or wide scooop in lightweight highly durable plastic, from 12 to 18 inches wide.
For slightly heavier jobs use a 24-inch-wide aluminum shovel.
New: S-shaped handles to avoid bending while pushing (Ames's Lift-Rite, for $12) and manual snow movers that, like some power models, use augers to push the snow away (True Value's Snaug'r, for $39).
Electric Shovels Cost: $80 to $120.
Suitable for narrow and short pathways, patios, decks.
Will normally clear a 12-inch-wide path.
One example is the Electric Power Shovel by Toro.
Electric Snow Blowers Cost: $190 to $300.
Suitable for driveways.
Clear a 12- to 22-inch-wide path, depending upon model.
Example: Toro's 1200 or 1800 Electric Snow Thrower.
Gasoline-Powered Snow Blowers Cost: $300 to $1,200.
Suitable for long and hilly driveways without access to electrical outlet.
Clear 20- to 32-inch path.
Examples: Homelite's 3-horsepower Snow Thrower; MTD's self-propelled, 5-horsepower Snow King for steeper grades; True Value's self-propelled, 10-horsepower Snow Chief for steepest grades and heaviest snow.
Options: Drift cutters, lights, chains for tires.
Attachments for Rider Mowers Cost: $200 to $500.
Suitable for tractor-type lawnmowers.
Different types of blades or blowers available, depending on mower size and power.  (Sources: Home Depot, True Value)


Honoring Birgit Nilsson
A concert honoring the soprano Birgit Nilsson's 10th year of master classes at the Manhattan School of Music is to be held at 5 P.M. tomorrow at the school, Broadway at 122d Street.
Among the featured artists are to be the sopranos Mignon Dunn, Johanna Meier and Dawn Upshaw and the baritone Sherrill Milnes.
George Manahan is to conduct the Manhattan School's Symphony.
Tickets are $25 to $50.
Information: (212) 749-2802, Ext. 540.


Shamir States Commitment To the Mideast Peace Process
Despite the inflammatory speeches of Round 1 and the potentially crippling disputes over where Round 2 should be held, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir declared today on his return from Madrid that Israel was resolved to remain part of the Middle East peace process.
Mr.
Shamir's commitment to the peace talks engineered by the United States has often seemed wobbly, in large part because he has viewed them suspiciously as an attempt to force Israel into a room where hostile Arab neighbors could gang up on it in a single-minded pursuit of territorial concessions.


Make-or-Break Game For Buckeyes' Coach
Old coaches never die. They just have someone fill in at the book signings.
The spirit of Wayne Woodrow Hayes is nearly as visible now as it was in the 28 autumns when Hayes ruled the Ohio State Buckeyes.
His name is on street signs bordering the north end of Ohio Stadium, the old, gray horseshoe where the Buckeyes will meet Iowa on Saturday afternoon in a game that will have an impact on the Big Ten race and possibly the future of the Ohio State program.


Review/Cabaret; Film and Gershwin Songs
In an extraordinary burst of creativity, the cabaret singer Jeff Harnar has put together five completely different acts in the last three years.
His two latest, "Jeff Harnar Sings the Warner Brothers Song Book" and "Gershwin's Hollywood," can be seen at the Oak Room of the Algonquin (59 West 44th Street) through Nov. 16, with his elaborate survey of songs from Warner Brothers movies at 9:30 P.M.
Tuesdays through Saturdays and the more informal Gershwin tribute at 11:30 P.M. on Fridays and Saturdays.
"The Warner Brothers Song Book" is a breathlessly paced montage of nearly 50 movie songs, from "Tiptoe Through the Tulips" to "That's What Friends Are For," in which the singer imagines his life as a movie musical.
The show, which was directed by Sara Louise Lazarus and features Mr.
Harnar's pianist and vocal sidekick, Alex Rybeck, interweaves dozens of song fragments with snippets of famous movie dialogue and tableaus from Mr.
Harnar's own life to create a lighthearted cinematic self-portrait of someone who always seems to have longed to escape into the movies.


And if It Were an F
To the Editor:
Bravo, Prof.
Barbara Chasin (news article Oct. 19).
It takes courage to insist that students earn their grades, rather than having them awarded by the state.
It's interesting to contemplate what the political patriots would have done if the student had been running a grade of F in a course before the final exam and, in accordance with New Jersey law, had been given this grade after having been called up.
WILLIAM J. ADAMS New York, Oct. 21, 1991 The writer is professor and chairman of the mathematics department at Pace University.


Old-Movie Buffs Fighting for a Theater
The show may be over at the Biograph movie theater, but some die-hard patrons refuse to leave their seats.
Citizens for Classic Movies, an ad hoc group, has mounted a campaign to reopen the revival house on West 57th Street, which its owner, Cineplex Odeon, closed on Sept. 21.
The Toronto-based company said the theater was losing money.
Outraged volunteers from the group have been working the pavement outside the Biograph seven days a week, collecting signatures for a to-whom-it-may-concern petition and organizing rallies.
Help has come from an unlikely quarter, an anti-crack group that has agreed to lend its nonprofit status to the protesters.
At the same time, two theater chains.
Loews and City Cinemas, have rushed into the breach with plans to create revival programs at two theaters.


Water Rationed as Yugoslav City Is Shelled


Bell Atlantic Fund Move
The Bell Atlantic Corporation, the regional telephone company based in Philadelphia, said yesterday that it had agreed to merge its employee mutual funds, with assets of about $38 million, into funds managed by T. Rowe Price Associates, whose mutual fund assets total more than $20 billion.
The merger is subject to approval by the employee mutual funds' shareholders and the board, as well as by directors of T. Rowe Price, based in Baltimore.


Student Opens Fire at U. of Iowa, Killing 4 Before Shooting Himself
A distraught graduate student went on a shooting rampage in two buildings on the University of Iowa campus in Iowa City yesterday, killing four people and critically wounding two others before fatally shooting himself in the head.
A university spokeswoman, Ann Rhodes, said the student, Gang Lu, a doctoral candidate in physics from China, methodically searched out his victims.
He had been disgruntled over his failure to receive an academic award for his doctoral dissertation, she said.


White House Loses a Vote On Bank Bill
Democrats in the House of Representatives handily repelled a White House attempt today to kill comprehensive banking legislation, setting the stage for a final vote on the package as early as Monday.
In a vote that was virtually straight down party lines, a first since the package was introduced Wednesday, the House defeated a motion 243 to 158 that would have killed the measure, with two Democrats, Representative Doug Barnard of Georgia and Representative Thomas R. Carper of Delaware, voting with the Republicans, the only two to cross party lines.


One Man Against the Sea, and the Cold, and the Clock
One of the great dramas of the sea -- the search for a ditched flier adrift with little but his life jacket, wet suit and survival skills -- unfolded in the Atlantic off Long Island and New Jersey yesterday as aircraft and ships scoured 5,000 miles of tossing ocean in a race against time and hypothermia.
The flier, an Air National Guard rescue specialist whose helicopter went down on a mission in a ferocious storm Wednesday night 60 miles south of his base at Westhampton Beach, L.I., was believed to be alive last night, drifting more than 100 miles a day, lost somewhere in a vast reach of open sea.


Browning-Ferris Fills A Long-Vacant Position
Browning-Ferris Industries, the Houston-based waste disposal company, said yesterday that Bruce E. Ranck had been named president and chief operating officer.
The posts had been vacant since John E. Drury left in January.
Mr.
Ranck, 42, has spent 21 years at the company.
He had been performing many of Mr.
Drury's former duties as executive vice president in charge of North American solid-waste operations.


Syria Offers Old Photo To Fill an Empty Chair
It began three days ago, a convocation of averted gazes in the Hall of Columns of the Royal Palace.
And when its formal sessions closed today, the Middle East peace conference adjourned with emblems just as bleak -- an empty chair at the head of Israel's delegation and an old photo supposed to show that Yitzhak Shamir had been a murderer and a terrorist.
Today started as a day of rebuttals, when each of the delegations -- Israelis, Syrians, Egyptians, Lebanese and a joint team of Jordanians and Palestinians -- were given 10 minutes to respond to Thursday's acrimony.


Quotation of the Day
"This has been a start -- a good start -- but it is only a start, and that's not enough. You must not let this start become an end." -- Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.  [ 1:6. ]


Religion Notes
Environment Network
In Genesis, God tells Adam that he has "dominion" over the earth.
In the long histories of Judaism and Christianity, many have interpreted dominion as domination, giving humans license to exploit the earth for their benefit alone.
But increasingly, with the new environmental awareness, Jews and Christians are interpreting dominion as stewardship, a responsibility to care for the planet.


Sports of The Times; Viewing 'Gold' In the Rain
STRIKE THE GOLD ambled off the track in the steady rain in the early morning yesterday, a morning as gray as wet sweat socks.
The flanks of the chestnut colt glistened while the rain pelted him.
Behind him, in the misty distance, were the familiar twin steeples of Churchill Downs.
Ahead of him was the challenge of the next day, when he would be running, as his trainer, Nick Zito, said, "for his reputation."
One wouldn't think that this would be so, only six months after Strike the Gold won the Kentucky Derby, but he has not won in his six races since the Derby, and his seventh is this afternoon, in the mile-and-a-quarter Classic of the Breeders' Cup.


JACKSON TO FORGO PRESIDENTIAL RACE IN '92, ADVISER SAYS
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, whose two campaigns for the Presidency inspired blacks and bedeviled Democratic strategists, has told party officials he will not seek the nomination next year, a highly placed party strategist said today.
Mr.
Jackson told Ronald H. Brown, chairman of the Democratic National Committee, at a meeting this morning that he would stay out of the contest, the strategist said.
Mr.
Jackson is scheduled to publicly declare his intentions on Saturday at a noon rally at a public housing project near the Capitol.


Traffic Alert
New York City Marathon: Several streets and bridges will be closed for much of tomorrow.
A map appears on page 31.


The Carrot's There, But Marathoners May Not Respond
Can marathoners, those supposedly noble and romantic creatures, really be bribed into faster times with hard-cash, incentive payoffs?
The very thought is abhorrent to some participants in tomorrow's New York City Marathon, who argue that no top runner will pick up his or her pace over the treacherous 26.2-mile course merely to reap financial benefits.
But organizers of the event are betting just the opposite, linking a higher percentage of the prize money than ever to time bonuses and increasing the prize differential between first and second place.


News Summary
International 2-7
The peace conference ended sourly, with Arabs and Israelis exchanging invectives and with no indication whether sustained talks will be held after the Madrid meeting.
Page 1


Royal Opera Settles Orchestra Pay Dispute
Two weeks after it was closed by a dispute over the musicians' pay, the Royal Opera House will reopen on Monday, having lost more than $1 million in box-office receipts because of the shutdown.
The dispute ended today when the 118 members of the orchestra agreed to accept the management's original offer of a 5.5 percent increase in basic pay, said Tony Lucas, secretary of the Central London branch of the musicians' union.


The Gag Rule, Gagged
A House-Senate conference has just undone a profound cruelty and corrected a skewed reading of the Public Health Act.
It has voted to overturn the three-year-old "gag rule" prohibiting physicians in federally funded clinics from telling women that abortion is legal.
Under the rule, women are also told that clinics do not "consider abortion to be an appropriate method of family planning."
The gag rule was formulated by the Department of Health and Human Services to make it clear that Federal Title X funds can't be used to pay for abortions.
But Title X, enacted 20 years ago, was never meant to finance abortions and never has.
Its goal is to provide quality family planning services to women who have little chance of getting them elsewhere.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.  Another Shutout for Capitals


Taxpayers Raising Banner of Revolt
To the Editor:
It was refreshing to hear about groups like the New York City Chamber of Commerce calling for a four-year freeze on all taxes on businesses and property owners in the city (news article, Oct. 8).
In Connecticut, the cry against a new state income tax is reminiscent of the Boston Tea Party two centuries ago.


Student Tells CUNY Aides of Jeffries Death Threat
Two officials from the City University of New York interviewed an editor of The Harvard Crimson yesterday about his allegations that Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., the chairman of City College's black studies department, had threatened his life last month.
In addition, the editor, Eliot Morgan, said yesterday that he would go to New York City early next week to discuss his accusations against Dr.
Jeffries with the office of the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau.


Nuggets Sign Macon
Just in time for last night's opening game against the Warriors, the Denver Nuggets signed their No. 1 draft choice, guard MARK MACON from Temple.
Macon, the No. 8 draft pick over all, reportedly accepted an offer that had been on the table for weeks: a $7.5-million five-year contract (AP).


Marine Reservist Had Earned His A at Call-Up
To the Editor:
Prof.
Barbara Chasin of Montclair State College, who refused to follow a New Jersey law to give a student activated for the Persian Gulf war the grade he had when activated (news article, Oct. 19), makes me ashamed of being a college professor.


Nothing to Talk About: Nets and Anderson Apart
The basketball season starts tonight in Charlotte for the New Jersey Nets, and unsigned rookie Kenny Anderson will be in Atlanta.
The geographic distance between the two parties is not as daunting as the financial gulf in their stalled attempts to agree on a contract.
The Nets have not made an offer to Richard Howell, the player's agent, since last Friday, and the two sides did not speak yesterday and had made no plans to talk today, a person close to the negotiations said.
Since becoming the No. 1 choice in the National Basketball Association draft, Larry Johnson, signed a six-year contract with Charlotte for $3.33 million a year and the No. 4 pick, Dikembe Mutombo, signed a contract worth $2.75 million a year with Denver, simple math dictates that Anderson likely wants at least $3 million per year as the second pick over all in the draft.


Stephen Rubin, 53, Met Museum Specialist
Stephen Rubin, a research associate and specialist in American watercolors and drawings at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital after collapsing at the museum.
He was 53 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said John Howat, head of the museum's American Wing.


Review/Opera; Love and Jealousy by Way of Handel
After hearing a rare concert performance of Handel's "Alessandro" by the Concert Royal on Thursday night in Merkin Concert Hall, I found it difficult to believe that when the composer first presented the opera in London in 1726, it was an unprecedented hit, selling out 11 performances.
What could an audience have made of this puerile plot in which Alexander the Great is haplessly torn between the rival affections of a slave girl and a princess?
As for the music, the opera is less a compelling musical drama than a series of beautifully set whines in operatic form: arias complaining about love, jealousy, indecision.
By the time the second hour moved into the third and the third encroached upon a fourth, it seemed as if everything possible to say in a Baroque da capo aria, in which the singer repeats the beginning after an apparent ending, had already been said twice.


Jobless Rate Rises to 6.8%, as Economy Stalls
Underscoring that the economic recovery has slowed to a near standstill, Labor Department figures showed today that payroll jobs failed to rise in October and that the unemployment rate edged back up to its August level of 6.8 percent.
Although the report was only modestly worse than expected, despite sharp job losses in manufacturing, retail trade and construction, economists said it added to fears that the midyear rebound had stagnated.


Gap Widens Among Arab Delegations as Syria Refuses to Let Talks Budge
Gaps in the positions of the Arab delegations seemed to widen tonight after the groups failed to reach agreement on whether to go ahead as planned with direct talks with Israel on Sunday.
After a four-hour meeting of the Arab delegations, the Jordanian-Palestinian group said it would meet with the Israelis on Sunday in Madrid to discuss details like the site of further talks.


Argentina Deregulates Its Economy
The Argentine President, Carlos Saul Menem, has announced a vast deregulation of the Argentine economy in an attempt to reverse decades of Government intervention and protectionism by the state.
In a 18-minute speech in Buenos Aires on Thursday night over national television, Mr.
Menem issued a sweeping executive decree that he asserted would "cut through a spider web" of rules and regulations that is "asphyxiating" the country's economy.


Harnisch Presses His Face Up Against the Window
Pete Harnisch of the Houston Astros was one of the most consistently effective pitchers in the National League this year, and he might be one of the most pained this winter.
Because of the timing of the demotion of the Phillies' Rod Booker to the minor leagues last July, Harnisch will not be eligible for salary arbitration.
Booker's effect on Harnisch is a result of the 17 percent solution to the 1990 spring training lockout.


Review/Pop; Throwback Blues and Soul
The keyboards were contemporary, and so were the haircuts of the backup band, the Masheen Company, on Tuesday night at Chicago Blues.
But when Cicero Blake stepped onto the stage in his beige suit, it was throwback time, back to the early 1970's or before, when many more neighborhood nightclubs booked blues and soul singers.
His eyes gleaming, his voice impassioned, his face by turns cheerful and knowing and doleful, Mr.
Blake acted out the cycle of love, loss and resilience that makes up the standard club set.
Mr.
Blake's repertory held few suprises; his first set included a Ben E. King-Sam Cooke medley, "Every Day I Have the Blues," "Fever" and other chestnuts.
And he worked through venerable shtick, from stop-time exhortations of "Can I tell you about my baby?" to singing part of a song seated with a couple in the audience.


And if It Were an F
To the Editor:
Bravo, Prof.
Barbara Chasin (news article Oct. 19).
It takes courage to insist that students earn their grades, rather than having them awarded by the state.
It's interesting to contemplate what the political patriots would have done if the student had been running a grade of F in a course before the final exam and, in accordance with New Jersey law, had been given this grade after having been called up.
WILLIAM J. ADAMS New York, Oct. 21, 1991 The writer is professor and chairman of the mathematics department at Pace University.


Chambliss to Yanks: Thanks but No Thanks
Former Yankee first baseman Chris Chambliss, unable to persuade the Yankees to hire him as a third-base coach, has turned down an offer to coach at first base.
"As far as my career is concerned, it's better for me to be a manager than to coach first base," Chambliss said from his home in Florida yesterday.
"It was a great offer and it was nice of the Yankees to have thought of me and want me to coach. But, as far as my future is concerned, I've got to do what is best for what I want my future to be."


TV-Phone Link: Long Way to Go
The Jukubik family of two adults, three children and seven videocassette recorders is living the telecommunications future in its Cerritos, Calif., living room, thanks to the GTE Corporation.
A videophile of long standing (he watches a movie or two a day), Jack Jukubik was chosen last November as part of GTE's two-year-long experiment with the wiring that is the future of the telecommunications industry, fiber-optic cables.
The new wiring allows phone companies to offer home video and other types of television entertainment programs that cable television companies offer today.


Chronicle
Shortly after the nuclear accident at Chernobyl in 1986, FAINA YASHKINA, an elementary-school teacher in the nearby town of Gomel, suggested that her pupils deal with the feelings aroused by the catastrophe by writing a musical play.
Tomorrow, 24 of them, who have been visiting Queens since Oct. 6 under the auspices of the Peace Child Foundation and Public School 99 in Kew Gardens, will put on their play, "Earth Child," at the studio of the City Lights Youth Theater at City Center.


Review/Film; Mad and Bloodsucking Landlords
"The People Under the Stairs," which opened at theaters here yesterday, is an affirmative-action horror film by Wes Craven, the man who wrote and directed the first "Nightmare on Elm Street" in 1984.
Though the new movie has its share of blood and gore, it is mostly creepy and, considering the bizarre circumstances, surprisingly funny.
A little boy nicknamed Fool (Brandon Adams) has greatness thrust upon him when he does battle with some blood-sucking (literally) white landlords.
Fool, his dying mother and hooker-sister are about to be evicted from their black ghetto apartment.


Cuomo Musings Cast Pall Over Race
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's public hand-wringing about whether to seek the Presidency has slowed but not frozen the pace of the just-formed Democratic primary field, fund-raisers and campaign aides said this week.
The candidates' travels have picked up as the six major Democratic candidates have taken their campaigns to New Hampshire, Kansas, Florida, Iowa, Georgia, Maine and Arizona in the days that the New York Governor continued to tantalize political insiders with talk of the Presidency.


For Safety's Sake, Cars Need Better Headlights
To the Editor:
Progress is being made in automotive safety through increasing use of air bags and antilock brakes.
But another item of auto equipment important to safe driving has received little engineering and manufacturing concern.
Automobile headlights constitute a serious safety hazard.


Mid-Life Crisis: Dressing for Prom Night
Tenafly High's Class of 1956, the scandalous one, will finally get its senior prom.
The original was scrubbed by angry school officials after a raucous (for the mid-50's) class trip to Manhattan when a beer bottle or two -- or was it a folding chair? -- fell, or maybe was thrown, from a class bus in the Lincoln Tunnel.


Corrections
An article on Monday about a proposed curriculum change at Hunter College misstated the kinds of jobs that have been lost as a result of budget cuts.
Over three years, Hunter has lost 173 positions -- not just on the faculty but also among administrative and other staffs.


Chronicle
Fashion designers, including GIORGIO ARMANI, GIANNI VERSACE, KARL LAGERFELD, and VIVIENNE WESTWOOD, have been busily creating birdlike costumes for the dancers.
HICKEY TAYLOR, the fashion marketing director for British Vogue and a coordinator of the event, said yesterday: "The whole thing is very tight. Vivienne Westwood was still battling away with her tulle up to the last minute."


Classical Music in Review
Aida  Metropolitan Opera


Student Shot by an Intruder at a Brooklyn School
A band of intruders opened fire in a crowded Brooklyn vocational school hallway yesterday, badly wounding a 19-year-old special education student, the police said.
The wounded student, Willie Dickerson, shot in the back, underwent three and a half hours of surgery at Bellevue Hospital, where he was listed in stable condition.


Water Utility of a Thousand Faces
What a difference a decade makes.
At the dawn of the 1980's, JWP Inc. was a $40 million water utility that had lost money for eight straight years and at times teetered on the brink of bankruptcy.


Must Be Magic: New Knicks Turn Into Old Ones
Pat Riley will remember tonight, but for all the wrong reasons.
Beginning Riley's New York coaching era with a ton of errors, the Knicks dropped their regular-season opener to the Orlando Magic, 106-96, before a capacity crowd of 15,151 at Orlando Arena.
It was a discouraging beginning for the Knicks, losing a game they fully expected to win.
And it was no fluke.
Orlando outplayed New York from beginning to end, racing to an 82-70 lead after three quarters, and the Knicks never threatened in the final period.


Richmond Is Traded For Rights to Owens
The rights to BILLY OWENS, the Sacramento Kings' unsigned top draft choice, were traded yesterday to the Golden State Warriors for All-Star guard MITCH RICHMOND, center LES JEPSEN and a second-round draft pick in 1995.
Owens, a 6-foot-9 forward out of Syracuse, was the third player taken in the National Basketball Association draft.
The acquisition of his rights breaks up the Warriors' productive threesome of Richmond, CHRIS MULLIN and TIM HARDAWAY, which averaged 72.5 points a game last season.


Dollar Off in Heavy Trading On Gloomy Economic Data
The dollar plunged in heavy trading yesterday as new economic reports showing the economy has continued to decline prompted a broad selloff.
Gold prices were mixed.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, bullion for current delivery settled at $355.60 an ounce, off $2.50 from Thursday.
Republic National Bank quoted a late bid of $355, down $2.70.


Land Swap on Ballot Helps Adirondacks Area
To the Editor:
On Nov. 5, New Yorkers will be asked to vote on an amendment to the State Constitution critical to safety at a small airport in the Adirondack region.
The Piseco Airport, in Arietta in Hamilton County, is the only airport serving the southern Adirondacks, its permanent residents and more than 55,000 seasonal visitors.


Observer; Hear America Listening
My mother used to sing to herself while she ironed.
"Redwing" was a favorite, and there was another that must have dated from 1905, 1910, which went, "I wish Mama'd hold her tongue, she had beaus when she was young." Unaware that I was listening, she sang only for herself, sliding the iron back and forth and lost in good memories, I suppose, to which these old tunes transported her, far from the ironing board.
Well, everybody used to sing.
Not like nowadays.
Nowadays everybody listens.
Nowadays we let the technology do the singing for us.
It's so nearly perfect, the technology.
We couldn't hope to sound a tenth as good if we were bold enough to open the throat and assail the air.


Jury Told of Gang's Chant In Slaying of Utah Tourist
Four of the young men charged in the subway murder of Brian Watkins chanted the initials of their gang on the night of the killing as they were being taken downtown in a police wagon to be booked, a detective testified yesterday.
"They were chanting these initials, F. T. S., and one of them would place his hand upon another's, and all four of them would chant," Detective Donald Casey said just before the trial ended its first week.


Courage, and Duty, on Needles
Giving clean needles to drug addicts protects them from AIDS.
That can save lives.
Giving clean needles also abets drug abuse.
That threatens lives.
Greatly to his credit, Mayor David Dinkins of New York takes the conflict seriously.
Even more to his credit, he now states his willingness, contrary to past positions, to favor a needle exchange plan.
New York, like 10 other states, tries to block drug abuse by outlawing over-the-counter sales of hypodermic needles.
In New York City, the sharing of needles by addicts has become the leading cause of AIDS transmission, and not just to addicts.
The infected drug users may transmit the disease to innocent sexual partners and children.


Bridge
If a declarer goes down in an apparently easy contract, the most common explanation is that he has played badly.
But now and again, as in the diagramed deal, he has been the victim of some very clever defense.
The West player was a young Norwegian, Geir Helgemo, who was playing in a tournament in his home country.
In Yokohama, Japan, last month, his effort earned him the International Bridge Press Association's Precision Award for the best defense of 1990-91.
South's bidding suggested that he was trying for a slam, so West knew that his chances of defeating four hearts were poor.
Since East had not raised spades, it was likely that South had a few spades as well as length in the red suits.
West therefore rejected the obvious leads, the singleton diamond hoping for a ruff, the spade ace hoping to give partner a ruff, or a safe trump.
None of these would have given the declarer any trouble.
Instead West made an imaginative choice by underleading his club ace, believing that South had a club void and that his move could do no harm.


In the Dispute Over Land: 3 Leaders Trade Accusations and Offer Answers
Following are excerpts from speeches today at the Middle East peace conference by the Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir; the leader of the Palestinian delegation, Haidar Abdel-Shafi, and the Syrian Foreign Minister, Farouk al-Sharaa.
Mr.
Sharaa's remarks were translated from the Arabic by the conference's organizers.
YITZHAK SHAMIR Israeli Prime Minister
Let me first apologize, as I have to leave this hall immediately after my statement, together with some of my colleagues, in order to return to Israel before sunset, in time for the advent of our holy day of rest.
I trust no one will see in this a sign of disrespect.


Silver Anniversary, in Black and White
On the silver anniversary of Truman Capote's Black and White Ball for 540 "people I like," Princess Yasmin Aga Kahn gave a Black and White Ball for a charity she loves.
"And you know what?" said the television critic Joel Siegel, pointing a fork at his dinner plate.


Long Island Damage By Northeast Storm In Tens of Millions
The storm that battered the Atlantic coast this week gouged miles of dunes along Fire Island and other barrier beaches protecting the South Shore of Long Island, scores of which will have to be rebuilt at a cost of tens of millions of dollars, officials said yesterday.
Their bleak predictions came as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo appealed for Federal disaster aid and dispatched state emergency management officials to Long Island, where scores of coastal homes were swallowed up and hundreds of others damaged in the most destructive storm there in decades.


Macy's Loss Shrinks 9.5%; Slight Sales Gain Reported
Reporting a slight increase in sales for the first time in many months, R. H. Macy &amp; Company said yesterday that its losses in its fiscal fourth quarter shrank by 9.5 percent, to $72.3 million, from $79.9 million in the corresponding period last fiscal year.
When an extra gain is added in, mostly from paying off some debt at below book-value prices, Macy's losses declined to $70.7 million in the quarter, which ended on Aug. 3.


Israel's Planes and Guns Attack Party of God Forces in Lebanon
Israeli warplanes and artillery today hammered Muslim fundamentalist guerrillas in Lebanon who the Israelis say are conducting a "holy war" to sabotage Middle East peace talks.
Israel security officials said the planes had made two raids near the southern Lebanese village of Luwayza, held by the pro-Iranian Party of God, and had fired two rockets at a small bridge near the village of Arab Selim.


Classical Music in Review
Three Celebrations  The Kitchen 512 West 19th Street


13 Rescued Near North Pole After Plane Crash in Blizzard
Thirteen survivors of a military plane crash near the North Pole were being airlifted out today after enduring two days in a raging blizzard before a search-and-rescue team could reach them.
Five other passengers on the C-130 Hercules were killed in the crash Wednesday, said Lieut.
Cmdr.
Wally West of the Canadian Forces Base in Edmonton.
He said four of the survivors were seriously injured and the others suffered minor injuries.


When the Meter Is Running
If you tend to park your car and forget about it in areas where parking is restricted to an hour or less, or if you park your car in metered spaces, an alarm on your key chain may be just the thing.
Even if you have a watch alarm, a key-chain alarm could make an effective backup.
A company in West Hollywood, Calif., has a new product, a "parking timer," a digital stopwatch on a key chain.
The timer can be set for up to 15 hours.
After it is set, it will chime 10 minutes before your parking time is up, and again 5 minutes before.
That's enough time to get to your car and move it or put another coin in the meter.
It costs $4.95 plus $1 for shipping.
Write: Charles Allyn International, 9005 Cynthia Street, West Hollywood, Calif. 90069. (213) 271-0391.


Soviet Upheaval Has Little Impact On Spending Bill for U.S. Military
House and Senate negotiators today approved a $291 billion military budget bill for the 1992 fiscal year, making few changes in the Pentagon's spending plans outlined a year ago before the collapse of Communism in the Soviet Union and the diminished Soviet military threat.
The compromise bill for the year that began Oct. 1 represents a 2 percent decline after inflation from last year's military budget and follows the path that Defense Secretary Dick Cheney announced last year to cut Pentagon spending by about 20 percent over five years.


Foreign Doctors Flocking to Rescue Long-Shunned Areas of Dire Poverty
Few doctors want to build a practice or make a home in a place like this.
An economic sinkhole whose coal-mining jobs have been vanishing, Welch is a remote Appalachian outpost filled with the very poor and the very sick.
Heart attacks, breathing disorders, diabetes and depression are the doctor's daily diet, and the county hospital has had little luck luring doctors even from West Virginia's own medical schools.


Treasuries Mixed in Reaction to Jobs Data
The October employment report received a mixed reception in the credit markets yesterday, as prices of shorter-term Treasury notes improved but bond prices fell.
Immediate reaction to the report was positive, as traders bought securities after the Labor Department said non-farm payrolls contracted by 1,000 jobs and the unemployment rate rose one-tenth of a point, to 6.8 percent.


Oakland Journal; Blaze Hones a Sense of Community
The deadly firestorm that scorched the hillsides of Oakland has turned a middle-sized city into the sort of place where neighbors gather for potluck suppers and trade gossip outside the post office.
With more than 3,000 residences destroyed and 5,000 people left homeless, the ordinary webs that bind neighbors have been unraveled.
But the families who lived on the burned ravines and ridges overlooking San Francisco Bay have found new ways -- some might say old ways -- of keeping in touch.


Sports Write-Offs Give CBS Record Loss
CBS Inc. yesterday announced the largest quarterly loss in its history, $169.1 million, a result of write-offs for its costly commitments to televise Major League Baseball and the National Football League.
The company said it had reduced its earnings by $322 million before taxes, or $195.5 million after taxes, in anticipation of future losses on its professional sports coverage.
Its baseball and football contracts run through 1993.


After the Lawyers Moved On
PRAYING FOR SHEETROCK
By Melissa Fay Greene. 337 pp.
Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $21.95.


Black Tie Affair Crashes Breeders' Cup Party
Horse racing's day of $10 million championships turned into a day of upsets at Churchill Downs this afternoon when five favorites failed to win in the seven races of the Breeders' Cup series.
And the revolt of the outsiders was led by Black Tie Affair, who outran some of the superstars of the sport to win the $3 million Classic, the richest race in the world.
The upsets confounded the electoral races for the year's honors, especially the one for the Horse of the Year title.
The favorite in that race, the colt In Excess, switched out of the Classic this week and ran instead in the shorter Mile, on the grass.
But the strategy backfired when he ran ninth in a dead heat with the star turf horse Tight Spot.


Making a Difference; Genentech's Legal Coup
Stephen Raines joined Genentech Inc. as vice president of patents in 1988, just after the biotech company lost a major patent suit against the Wellcome Foundation in Britain.
Under his direction, Genentech prevailed against Wellcome later that year in a similar suit in the United States.
Last week, Mr.
Raines presided over another victory in what many experts were calling the first significant Japanese biotech patent case.


Special Glues Can Help Solve Tricky Problems
CHOOSING the correct glue can be confusing.
Multipurpose glues have been replaced by specialized types that often work better, but only if knowlegeably selected and used.
To be well stocked, one should keep these glues on hand: aliphatic resin, cyanoacrylate, epoxy and polyvinyl acetate.
Aliphatic resin glue is also called yellow woodworking glue.
It is preferred by carpenters and cabinetmakers for gluing wood, and also can be used to join other porous surfaces like leather, felt and cork.
An advantage for some projects is that pieces being glued can be repositioned for up to 15 minutes before the glue begins to harden.


Marcie Gow to Wed
William C. Gow of Darien, Conn., has announced February wedding plans for his daughter Marcie Gow and Thomas Richard Pajolek, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Chester R. Pajolek of Fairfield, Conn.
Miss Gow, 33 years old, is also the daughter of the late Nancy Henderson Williams.
A graduate of the University of Denver, she is a vice president of USGI Inc., a mortgage banking concern in Norwalk, Conn.
Mr.
Pajolek, 36, graduated from the University of Vermont and received an M.B.A. from the University of Connecticut.
He is an associate at CB Commercial Real Estate Group in Stamford, Conn.


Here's an Economic Policy
President Bush knows he's in trouble on the economy, and still doesn't know what to do about it.
The small uptick during the summer seems to have reversed direction.
Unemployment compensation claims rose in early October while durable orders fell.
Almost two-thirds of the respondents to a recent New York Times/ CBS News poll called the economy "very bad" or "fairly bad" -- eight percentage points more than in June, when the recession was thought to have hit bottom.
Unemployment, now at 6.8 percent, is edging upward and does not include millions of Americans too discouraged even to look for work or in temporary jobs when they'd rather be working full time.
With the election a year away and voter confidence in his ability to handle the economy slipping badly, Mr.
Bush can't afford a "double dip" into recession again.
He has to do something dramatic before a Democratic challenger can ask whether Americans are better off now than they were four years ago.


Lampoon Photos Of Pledge Hazing Are Investigated
New York University and its Interfraternity Council are investigating the campus chapter of Phi Gamma Delta because members of the fraternity posed for National Lampoon photographs depicting violent and sexual pledge hazing.
One photograph in the article, which is titled "Dumb Fraternity Games: Acted Out By Authentic Dumb Frat Guys," shows students in boxer shorts sliding down an ice-cube-covered bar.
Another shows students trying to stop cue balls thown against a wall with their heads.
Yet another shows the students naked from the waist down.
No genitalia are displayed.


Wall Street; Maintaining a Healthy Skepticism on HMO America
Despite lackluster performance by most health maintenance organizations -- H.M.O.'s, for short -- some brokerage houses are optimistic about the robust profits at HMO America, expected to announce quarterly results this week.
But skeptics say the Chicago-based company's earnings growth has coincided with a drop in its reserves to cover future claims.
Indeed, reserves for claims "incurred but not reported," has barely budged since 1989, despite sharp growth in revenue and membership.
David Citron, a company vice president, said the lower reserves are justified because the company is paying reported claims faster, reducing the uncertainty it faces.


Jodi Robinson Plans to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Ronald M. Robinson of Jericho, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jodi Lynn Robinson to Gary Michael Perlman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Perlman of Hewlett, L.I.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Robinson, 27 years old, is an associate in the New York law firm of Reid &amp; Priest.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received a J.D. from George Washington University.
Her father is a gastroenterologist at Winthrop University Hospital in Mineola.


Andrea I. Brumberger Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Alan Brumberger of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Andrea Ilyse Brumberger, to Richard Ernest Hutton, a son of Hubert Hutton of New York and Irene Hutton of Ossining, N.Y.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Brumberger is the advertising associate for WETA, the public television station in Washington.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father, formerly a managing director of Drexel Burnham Lambert in New York, is an investment banking consultant.
Her mother, Carol Brumberger, is a business development director for the Knoll Group, a furniture maker in New York.


And Now, Face to Face
When the Middle East peace negotiators sat down together in Madrid last week for Chapter One, they wouldn't even look at each other.
The chief Palestinian delegate, sitting opposite Israel's Prime Minister, kept his eyes fastened on the table; the Prime Minister stared off into space.
Today, there'll be no looking away.
Israelis and Palestinians will meet, face to face.
This monumental bilateral meeting may flame out quickly, in angry eruptions.
Yet there's reason to remain hopeful.
If the parties wanted excuses to stalk off in anger, they could have found them in the opening meeting.
There was plenty of heat as Arabs and Israelis recited their angry, historic grievances.
But they did not stalk off; they have gone on to start Chapter Two.


LET'S KILL ALL THE COPY EDITORS
What many people don't realize is that virtually everything that appears in print has been greatly improved by a copy editor's skill.
What is perceived as great writing is often little more than great editing.
Your headline, a play on the Shakespearean phrase "Let's kill all the lawyers," suggests a similarity between copy editors and lawyers that is inappropriate.
While lawyers are richly paid -- some would say overpaid -- and highly visible, copy editors are the invisible, underpaid, unsung heroes of literature.
CATHERINE MARENGHI
Boston


All About/Genetic Engineering; Biotech's Biggest Sales So Far Are on Wall Street
By most commercial measures, the biotechnology revolution is still in its infancy: scores of new companies continue to form each year, research spending consumes a high percentage of revenues and profits are scarce.
But biotechnology is rapidly becoming big business after years of being largely big hopes.
Last month, for example, the Food and Drug Administration approved the use of the first genetically engineered drug to treat septic shock, an often fatal bacterial infection common in hospitals.
The expected annual sales: hundreds of millions of dollars in a few years.


Playing Ball
During the almost-annual Yankee manager puppet show last week, some claim to have seen George Steinbrenner's fingers on the strings.
Though Mr.
Steinbrenner, the Yankee's principal owner, was ordered to stay out of the team's day-to-day affairs (in punishment for making baseball look bad, or something), who should be named the Yankee's new manager but Buck Showalter, who had been fired as the Yankees third base coach only three weeks before but who happened to be a Steinbrenner favorite.
Mr.
Steinbrenner still meets regularly with the Yankees' limited partners, and they were known to have recently suggested to general manager Gene Michael, who had fired Mr.
Showalter, that he might want to take another look at the former third base coach.
Mr.
Michael seemed unabashed as he introduced the team's 18th manager in 15 years.
Asked if the 35-year-old Mr.
Showalter had been his first choice, Mr.
Michael replied, "He is now."


Vanderbilt Builds Rout On Mistakes by Army
From the press box, the public-address announcer kept introducing generals and colonels in attendance at today's Army-Vanderbilt game, asking the Michie Stadium crowd to accord "warm welcomes."
While the brass got their warm welcomes, the Black Knight football team was receiving a jolt from Vanderbilt.
The Commodores (4-5) trounced Army (3-5) by 41-10, and the final score could have been worse had Vanderbilt not been used its reserves late in the game.


Special Glues Can Help Solve Tricky Problems
CHOOSING the correct glue can be confusing.
Multipurpose glues have been replaced by specialized types that often work better, but only if knowlegeably selected and used.
To be well stocked, one should keep these glues on hand: aliphatic resin, cyanoacrylate, epoxy and polyvinyl acetate.
Aliphatic resin glue is also called yellow woodworking glue.
It is preferred by carpenters and cabinetmakers for gluing wood, and also can be used to join other porous surfaces like leather, felt and cork.
An advantage for some projects is that pieces being glued can be repositioned for up to 15 minutes before the glue begins to harden.


Hilary Bass Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon A. Bass of Roslyn, L.I., have announced February wedding plans for their daughter Hilary Lisa Bass and Jonathan Graham Perkin, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Hyman Perkin of New York.
Miss Bass, 27 years old, graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She is the publicity manager at Crown Publishers in New York.
Mr.
Perkin, 30, is a vice president at the New York office of Kleinwort Benson North America, a British merchant bank.
He graduated from Skidmore College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.


LET'S KILL ALL THE COPY EDITORS
Yes, there are rulemongers out there, obsessed with forcing authors to conform to an arbitary "house style" (On Language: "Let's Kill All the Copy Editors" by William Safire, Oct. 6).
After nearly 20 years in publishing, I have seen many examples of ill-advised, heavy-handed copy editing, the sort that give all copy editors a bad name.
We become "comma chasers," meddling fools, anal-retentive autocrats.
The best and most experienced among us, however, see our work as a cooperative venture with the author in behalf of the reader.
CHARLES B. PURRENHAGE
Sparta, N.J.


Managing; Opportunity Out of Near Disaster
MOST of the world remembers Oct. 19, 1987, as the day the stock market crashed; John B. Ligas remembers it as the day
he
did.
That day, Mr.
Ligas, chief executive of Howard, Ligas, Hill, a building supplies company in Utica, N.Y., was rushed to the hospital with Guillain-Barre syndrome, a devastating disease that leaves its victims barely able to move.
It kept Mr.
Ligas, now 54, out of commission for more than a year.


1,000 Bonus Miles
To the Editor: My wife and I recently flew from Edmonton, Alberta, to Pittsburgh via Toronto on Canadian Airlines.
Due to a malfunctioning stove, our flight to Toronto was delayed an hour and we therefore missed our connection.
This meant waiting in Toronto about three hours for the next flight, not a significant hardship.
Having traveled with many carriers with many delays, we were quite surprised and very pleased when a letter came from Canadian's customer relations apologizing for the inconvenience and informing us that our frequent flyer program will be credited with an extra 1,000 points.
I wonder how many of our domestic carriers have similar policies.
DAVID B. HARTMANN  Pittsburgh


Hotel Discounts From Two Chains
MARRIOTT HOTELS is offering discounts to members of the American Association of Retired Persons at more than 190 participating hotels.
A 21-day advance purchase program affords at least 50 percent off the regular hotel rate, subject to availability.
Payment for the whole stay must be made at the time of the reservation, and is nonrefundable.
The company is also offering a 25 percent savings on meals and nonalcoholic beverages for parties of up to eight, and 10 percent savings on gift shop purchases, excluding sundries, tobacco, paper goods, food and candy; these are available to A.A.R.P. members who are not staying at the hotel.
Members also receive an automatic 10 percent off the regular room rate for any stay.
Identification is required.
Information (800) 228-9290.
INTER-CONTINENTAL HOTELS' "European Spectacular" winter program this year, available during December and January, will offer even deeper discounts in the holiday period of Dec. 14 to Jan. 12.
The price includes a double room, tax and service charge, American breakfast for two, and a number of extras.
Reservations and a two-night minimum stay are required.


Taking the Doctor's Office to the Patients
DR.
HUERTA C. NEALS, who set uppractice here in 1947, is unusual among his contemporaries: he says that if patients can't visit him, he should go to them.
Since 1971 Dr.
Neals, who specializes in cardiovascular disease, has made house calls in a mobile medical unit of his own design.
He turned a mobile home into an office on wheels and began visiting patients who found the trip to his office on Atlantic Street impossible.
He cares mainly for the elderly on his trips, which include stops at housing projects.
His 19-foot motorized office is air-conditioned and has two examining cubicles, screened with curtains, and such equipment as a portable electrocardiograph.


Homeward Bound
Awash in sentiment, Imelda Marcos began her journey home to the Philippines last week.
Before heading back, Mrs.
Marcos, who fled with her husband, Ferdinand, nearly six years ago and faces a variety of charges there, stopped at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York to repeat the tearful ritual with which she had celebrated her acquittal in a New York court last year on racketeering charges.
She walked down an aisle on her knees, dabbed her eyes as she lit a score of votive candles, and dropped a $100 bill in the offering box.
She stopped in Hawaii on her way home, but not to pick up the remains of her husband, who died there in 1989.
The Aquino Government has denied her request to allow him to be buried in Manila and ordered her not to bring his body.
Mrs.
Marcos, who faces charges of helping loot the national treasury of billions of dollars, said she would comply.
"I'm going on a mission of peace and love," she said in a television interview.
"I'm not there to be divisive."


This Week: Helpful Reading
If your house plants keep dying, it doesn't mean you're a serial killer.
You simply haven't taken the time to observe each individual as it grows -- or languishes -- inside your house.
Start with a few you fancy at a good garden center, and ask its gardener to specify their needs.


U.N. Meeting Is Urged
Shiite spiritual leaders in Lebanon today urged the Government to summon the United Nations Security Council to an emergency session to discuss what they called the Israeli aggression in the south of the country.
They also demanded that Lebanon suspend its participation in the Middle East peace conference in Madrid until Israel ceased its military activity.
President Elias Hrawi summoned the Defense Council, the country's highest military authority, to an emergency meeting today to review the situation, it was officially announced.


Dollar's Down Across the Board
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
129.85
131.55
127.75
per Dollar
German
Mark
1.674501.7000
1.4937
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1200
1.1263
1.1644
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7675
1.7130
1.9595
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$366.00
$360.25
$376.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Judicial Elections
WESTCHESTER voters will elect two justices to the State Supreme Court in the Ninth Judicial District when they go to the polls on Nov. 5, choosing from among four major-party candidates and one representative of the Right to Life Party in a district that includes Putnam, Rockland, Dutchess and Orange Counties as well as Westchester.
The two Democratic hopefuls for the top judicial posts are two acting Supreme Court justices: Anthony A. Scarpino Jr. of Mount Vernon and Alfred J. Weiner, a Rockland County resident from Monsey.


THE WORDS THEY CAN'T SAY
'Tell my mother that I love her."
"I'll die if I don't get a friend."


Helping Corporate America Hew to the Straight and Narrow
WHEN the Nynex Corporation was created along with six other "Baby Bells" by the breakup of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in 1984, the company gave little thought to the sharper ethical challenges its employees would face in a more competitive world.
But Nynex's complacency has since been dented by a troubling string of incidents including graft, trips by its purchasers to sleazy Florida parties paid for by suppliers, and questionable financial transactions between its regulated and unregulated subsidiaries.
The incidents have cost the company millions of dollars in penalties; they also generated terrible publicity last year at a time when New York Telephone, the company's largest subsidiary, was seeking its first rate increase in five years.


CAMPUS LIFE: Berkeley; 30,000 Graduates Fail to Claim Their Diplomas
After he took a last walk as an undergraduate through the University of California at Berkeley campus, John Bolton failed to complete one last task: He did not pick up his diploma.
It awaits him still, 118 years later.
Mr.
Bolton's 1873 bachelor's degree in agriculture is neatly folded in a drawer at the registrar's office in Sproul Hall, along with 20 other diplomas from the last century.


Anne L. Foxen Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Foxen of Laurel Hollow, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Louise Foxen to Dr.
Richard James Cote, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. Cote of Fullerton, Calif.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Foxen, 29 years old, is the director of special gifts at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father is the president of Foxen &amp; Fredman Advertising in Garden City, L.I.
Her mother is the municipal clerk-treasurer of Laurel Hollow.


Course Cataloguing 101
AS ANNUAL college tuition rises from the price of a Chevrolet to that of a BMW, many parents may wonder what they are getting for their cash.
A glance at their child's transcript may not necessarily enlighten them as they encounter courses that were not in the catalogue when they were in school.
While anyone could be baffled by technically specific classes such as "Biology of Fungi," "Principles of Nursery Crop Productions," "Problems in Weaving," "Ice Cream Makers' Short Course" and just about anything in computer science, many liberal arts offerings seem equally perplexing.
What follows is a sampling of occasionally Delphic catalogue descriptions of courses and their professors' comments, which may or may not clear things up.


With Pride Now and Economic Pain Ahead, Zambia Swears In New Leader
In a rare democratic transition, Frederick Chiluba, a trade union leader, was sworn in here today as President of Zambia.
Tens of thousands of people walked miles in the hot sun to a grassy square in the front of the nation's High Court to witness the inauguration.
They listened to the new President pledge that "freedom to work and freedom of speech" would replace the "corruption, repression and dictatorship" of the past.


Peru
To the Editor: Recently I returned from a three-week trip to the Cuzco area of Peru.
The good news is that it is still a safe place to visit if you take proper precautions to avoid robbery.
The cholera epidemic is well under control, and a tourist is in no danger unless you plan to visit the slums of Lima and buy food from the street vendors.
At any rate, there is no cholera in the Cuzco area.
The chance of getting caught in a cross-fire or a bombing is much less than in New York City.
I saw no evidence of guerrilla activity while I was there, though there are plenty of civil police in conspicuous places.


The Problem With Focusing on Market Growth
To the Editor:
Marie-Louise Caravatti's lament in "Business Needs More 'Dull' R.&amp; D." (Forum, Oct. 6) -- that corporate research and development spending is disproportionately and dangerously focused on product rather than process innovation -- misses the point.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Danbury, Conn. 203,000
8 Hall Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old raised ranch; new deck, swimming pool, hardwood floors, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,582.
Deep River, Conn. 900,000
287 River Road  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 40-year-old contemporary waterfront estate, carriage and tea houses, yacht slip, 3.6 acres; taxes $9,723.
Rocky Hill, Conn. 155,000
28 Gilbert Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 34-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, walk-up attic, glass-enclosed porch, 0.75 acre; taxes $2,100.
Armonk, N.Y. 420,000
14 Long Pond Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 39-year-old colonial; family room, brick fireplace, eat-in kitchen, deck, 1.8 acres; taxes $8,455.
Millwood, N.Y. 389,000
29 Overbrook
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; vaulted ceilings, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, deck; taxes not yet assessed.
New Rochelle, N.Y. 345,000
76 Mountain Avenue
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 64-year-old Norman Tudor; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, deck, beamed ceilings; taxes $4,962.
OTHER AREAS Bethpage, L.I. 175,000
6 Cole Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old split level; dining room, den, basement, attached 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.
Lakewood, N.J. 79,900
31 High Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old ranch; w/w carpeting, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $989.
Ramsey 180,000
166 Prospect Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; new deck, fenced yard, h/w floors; taxes $4,333.


Institutional Violence
To the Editor:
Your review of Tina Rosenberg's "Children of Cain" (Sept. 8) quotes admiringly her conclusions that Latin American violence is "planned" and "deliberate" and violence in the United States is not, and that most of Latin America was colonized "through violence" and, presumably, our country was not.


U.S. TO CRACK DOWN ON MEDICARE ABUSE
The Bush Administration has moved to crack down on abuses in the sale of medical equipment to elderly people for use at home, and it asserted that some suppliers were charging "outrageous prices."
Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, said Friday that the Government, for the first time, would set national standards for suppliers of medical equipment, requiring them to be more attentive to consumers' complaints and to repair or replace any defective items sold to Medicare beneficiaries.


Trial of Assembly Speaker Starts in Brooklyn
In Albany, as the Speaker of the Assembly, Mel Miller copes with the complex problems of New York State.
But most of his attention is now focused on fraud charges against him in a Federal courtroom in Brooklyn.
The jury will be selected this week for the trial of Mr.
Miller and a top aide, Jay Adolf, who were partners in a law firm that represented clients investing in cooperative apartments.
The defendants are charged, essentially, with using false documents to cheat the clients out of $300,000.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bethpage 175,000
6 Cole Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old split level; dining room, den, basement, attached 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.
Centereach 100,000
15 Stirrup Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $2,600.
East Patchogue 250,000
5 Cob Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old lakefront colonial; dining room, den, fireplace, bar, inground pool, 1 acre; taxes $6,200.
Lake Ronkonkoma 123,500
23 Center Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,500.
Levittown 140,000
23 Coppersmith Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old ranch; dining room, family room, den; taxes $3,800.
North Massapequa 192,500
599 North Suffolk Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement, c/a, skylights, new windows; taxes $5,100.
OTHER AREAS Rocky Hill, Conn. 155,000
28 Gilbert Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 34-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, walk-up attic, glass-enclosed porch, 0.75 acre; taxes $2,100.
Armonk, N.Y. 420,000
14 Long Pond Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 39-year-old colonial; family room, brick fireplace, eat-in kitchen, deck, 1.8 acres; taxes $8,455.
Edison, N.J. 225,000
32 Stephenville Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 24-year-old ranch; new heating system, finished basement; taxes $3,580.


'Rough Magic'
To the Editor:
In her Oct. 6 review Elizabeth Frank describes "Rough Magic," my biography of Sylvia Plath, as an "unadorned chronicle, with very little . . . literary discussion," and accuses me of being "remarkably careless" in my scholarship.
I will happily admit that I did not write an academic biography -- I did not set out to -- but I must refute her charges of careless scholarship.


Spices and Seasonings Enter the Mainstream
STATISTICS show that Americans have acquired a taste for spices.
Consumption of spices, especially red and black pepper, has increased dramatically in the last decade.
Several factors have contributed to the trend toward more highly seasoned food.
Spices and seasonings are essential in processed foods, they compensate for decreased use of salt and there is a greater interest in ethnic foods, especially Mexican.
Freshly ground black pepper has become the rule, not the exception, in homes and restaurants.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Rising Vacancy Rate Troubles Westport
ON Saturday afternoons the Jaguars and BMW's cruise Westport's busy Main Street, and seemingly recession-proof shoppers browse through Barney's, Laura Ashley and dozens of chic specialty shops where rents have retained their lofty levels of around $55 a square foot.
But along the Post Road a different story unfolds, a tale of empty stores and failing shopping plazas.


POSTINGS: 18 Units in Rego Park; Medical Condo Auction
Physicians and other health-care professionals who want to hang out a shingle at Health Care Place in Rego Park, Queens, can bid on 18 condominium medical offices being auctioned off next Sunday at 2 P.M. at Terrace on the Park, 52-11 111th Street in Corona.
The units, ranging in size from 488 to 1,424 square feet and averaging 1,000 feet, are part of the complex of 46 medical condominiums on the ground floors of the Rego Park Gardens co-op apartment buildings.
Nine of the units will be sold "absolute" to the highest bidders, said John Kosa, president of Kosa Properties, consultant to Philip Mactaggart, the English-born developer and president of Western Heritable Investment Company (USA) Ltd.
Mr.
Mactaggart bought the apartment complex in 1985 and then began converting it.


Q and A
Investing Co-op Funds  Question: I live in a co-op in Suffolk County.
Recently a board member made a startling remark.
In a discussion about the board's management of the co-op's money, he said that the board could invest all of the co-op's funds in junk bonds if it wanted to.
Is this true and are there any New York State co-op laws regarding a board's responsibility when it comes to investments? . . .
Howard Mafera, Patchogue, L.I.


Children Miss Night-Time Series
To the Sports Editor:
There was something missing as I sat watching the World Series.
I've noticed it for several years since becoming a father in 1978 at the age of 29.
My oldest son will be 12 in two weeks.
He's in the seventh grade.
My oldest daughter was 13 in March, an eighth grader.
When I was 11, I sat in Yankee Stadium on a bright fall Saturday afternoon and saw Bobby Richardson hit a grand slam home run against the Pittsburgh Pirates in the '60 Series.
I raced home from school just in time to be traumatized by Mazeroski in Game 7.


Melissa Duban Weds
Melissa Duban, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Duban of Purchase, N.Y., was married yesterday in White Plains to Andrew Jay Goldberg, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ross Goldberg of Binghamton, N.Y.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk officiated at the Ridgeway Country Club.
Mrs.
Goldberg, 25 years old, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is an associate account executive with Olson Advertising in Binghamton.
Mr.
Goldberg, 25, graduated from Union College and is a graduate student in business administration at the State University at Binghamton.


The Integrity Defense In Revival of 'Nuts'
"NUTS" by Tom Topor, being presented by the Great Neck Theater Guild, is not the usual run-of-the-judiciary courtroom drama.
It is a sanity hearing in the psychiatric wing of Bellevue Hospital to determine whether or not a woman is capable of standing trial for manslaughter.
A few months ago, this revival of a play filled with sex and sex issues might have been just another exploration of a woman's right to her own destiny.
Recent events, however, have added powerful political shadings to a hearing in which a woman is defending her integrity and mental health before a panel of accusatory white men.


POSTINGS: Landmarking Proposed; Historic District For Douglaston?
Something of an oddity in the urban landscape of New York City, the broad lawns, compact cottages and large Victorian and Tudor homes of two neighborhoods in Douglaston, Queens -- Douglas Manor and its neighboring enclave known as The Hill -- have survived largely intact from the turn of the century.
But not entirely.
Houses have been torn down, others reclad with more modern facades, and fences have sprouted up to divide previously unbroken expanses of grass.
Residents of the area, bounded by Northern Boulevard, Alley Pond Park, Adalls Cove and Little Neck Bay, have applied to the city's Landmarks Preservation Commission to have it designated a historic district.
They will hold a meeting on the proposal Nov. 19 at 8 P.M. at the Douglaston Community Church, Douglaston Parkway and Willow Street.


Political Talk
Getting What One Pays For
In addition to deciding whether Democrats or Republicans will control the New Jersey Senate and Assembly for the next two years, voters on Tuesday will also decide two ballot questions recognizing the rights of crime victims and asking Congress to enact a national health care program.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Fleetwood
THE "Roaring Twenties" was a boom time for Westchester County as a whole, and especially for areas along the Bronx River Parkway, which was completed in 1925.
On weekends, drivers streamed up from New York City in search of speakeasies and other attractions; soon they began settling into the apartment buildings cropping up along the parkway.


The Architectural Splendor of Big Trees
TREES are on everyone's minds these days.
If it isn't their leafy color (most of which has faded), then it is their leafy abundance that is now cluttering the lawns, gardens, driveways and paths.
But there is a plus to this autumnal ritual.
The trees become architectural features.
Their superstructures can be seen; that is, their trunks, limbs, twigs and shapes are exposed.
Some are splendid and picturesque on the landscape; others are just plain huge.
And these huge trees offer the most excitement.


Big Award in Age Bias Case
A former I.B.M. systems engineer who accused the computer giant of forcing him to take early retirement in 1987 has won $315,000 in an age discrimination lawsuit.
A jury in United States District Court granted the award for back pay late Friday after finding that Richard A. Rathemacher, 59 years old, was "constructively discharged." "They didn't fire him, but they made life so intolerable, he left," Nancy Smith, Mr.
Rathemacher's attorney, said today.


On the Street; Boots a la Brando, Dean and Harley
Zoooooom.
There goes the fashion world taking off on bikers' gear: Last year it was the black leather multizippered leather jacket; this year women in black bikers' boots are strolling on Fifth Avenue.
Maybe it started when rockers and fans in the East Village adopted biker boots as their signature.
In March, Chanel showed its version of the boots at $1,000 a pair.
Chanel's are decorated with the signature "C," and the boots appeared with evening dresses this year on the runways in Paris.
The original biker boots at $90 are now being decorated by their owners with Chanel pins.


Sampling Fine Aged Rums in Martinique
RUM, rhum, ron, the drink by any other name is still the pungent flavor of the tropics, a warm, lingering kiss to send you into the Caribbean night.
Or is it?
Wrong, they say in the French West Indies, where they turn up their noses at what they call "industrial" rums made around the world.
Made in many countries from molasses, a leftover of sugar processing, this mass-produced rum is considered lacking any nobility.
You will hear that "industrial" variety is unworthy of the name rum, suitable perhaps for pirates or pastry cooks.


Let's Start With The Fighting Irish
To the Sports Editor:
If we're going to abolish ethnic nicknames for sporting teams (Braves, Redskins, Chiefs, etc.) then let's start with the most blatant case -- the epithet Fighting Irish as it applies to the Notre Dame football team.
That term is an obvious slur.
It perpetuates negative stereotypes.
It trivializes the sacrifices of the brave men (and women) of the I.R.A.
And, as anyone can tell just by watching TV, it's a plain misnomer.
JOHN F. HELLEGERS Jenkintown, Pa.


Lynn Slonim to Wed Dr. S. M. Fine
Saul and Vera Slonim of Massapequa Park, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lynn Nancy Slonim, to Dr.
Steven Mark Fine, the son of Dr.
Paul and Rochelle Fine of Rochester.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Slonim, 24 years old, graduated from Vassar College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and is seeking a doctorate in microbiology from Washington University.
Her father is a broadcast engineer with WNET-TV in New York.
Her mother, who is retired, was a customer service representative for NYNEX in Hicksville, L.I.


Fearing Israeli Army Raid, Villagers in Lebanon Flee
Fearing an imminent attack by the Israeli Army or its Lebanese client militia, thousands of villagers fled their homes in southern Lebanon today after being told that they had 12 hours to leave.
Reports from Lebanon said the evacuation order had come from Israeli troops, who for the last five days have shelled that area to strike at strongholds of guerrillas from the pro-Iranian Shiite Muslim group known as the Party of God.


Sunday Dinner; Spots Where the Wine List Is a Good Match for the Food
In today's economy it is difficult for restaurants to stock large inventories of wine.
This may not be a bad turn of events, because it has forced many restaurants to rethink wine in relation to food.
The result has been smaller but more thoughtful lists.
Here are three restaurants in Manhattan where both the food and the wine lists are good.
Chin Chin
216 East 49th Street, (212) 888-4555 -- This may be the best-looking Chinese restaurant in town.
It is near the summit when it comes to food, too.
The cooking cuts across various ethnic borders, and while most dishes are full-flavored, few are seriously spicy.
If you like wine with Chinese food, the selection here is impressive and exceptionally well chosen.
Prices are more than fair, starting at $14.


Sunday Menu; An Empanada Unwrapped
Quick meals do not allow for dough making or empanada baking, but the filling for this dish is similar to that found in some empanadas.
The result: an uncovered empanada, or an empanada minus its wrapping.
Uncovered Empanadas  6 ounces very lean ground beef  3/4 pound new potatoes, scrubbed and cut into 1/4-inch cubes  1/2 pound chopped onion  1 clove garlic, minced  1 cup dry red wine  2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar  1/4 cup raisins  6 large Greek, Italian or French olives, rinsed, drained and pitted  1 cup frozen corn niblets  1/8 to 1/4 teaspoon hot pepper flakes  1/2 teaspoon ground cumin  Freshly ground black pepper to taste  1/4 teaspoon salt, optional.
1.
Break the beef into small pieces, and brown in a nonstick skillet.
Push the beef to one side, and drain off any excess fat.
2.
In a covered pot cook the potatoes in enough water to cover, and cook just until tender, 5 to 7 minutes.
3.
Add the onion and garlic to the beef, and cook until onions begin to soften and take on some color.
4.
Stir in the wine, vinegar, raisins, olives, corn, hot pepper flakes, cumin, pepper and salt.
Bring to a boil, and cook at a high simmer.
When the potatoes are cooked, drain them and stir them in.
Continue cooking until there is only a tablespoon or two of the liquid remaining.
Yield: 2 servings.
Orange and Fennel Salad  1 large eating orange  1 cup thinly sliced fennel  1 tablepsoon orange juice  1 teaspoon balsamic vinegar.
1.
Using a knife peel orange and remove the pith.
Cut the orange into small chunks, and mix with the fennel.
2. Stir in the orange juice and vinegar and serve.
Yield: 2 servings.


Quotation of the Day
"Dubuque missed the 50's and the 60's. We didn't go through what Selma and Montgomery went through. We watched and applauded from afar. But we didn't face it ourselves because we didn't have the numbers of black people. Now we're finding we have our David Dukes right here in Dubuque." -- Mayor Jim Brady.  [ 30:2. ]


Erin Murphy and S. C. Karzmer, Lawyers, Wed
Erin Elizabeth Murphy, an associate with Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, and Steven Charles Karzmer, an associate with Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan, both New York law firms, were married last evening at the Oak Brook, Ill., Bath and Tennis Club.
The Rev.
Lawrence Dowling, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated, and Cantor Sidney Medintz led prayers.
Mrs.
Karzmer, 27 years old, graduated summa cum laude from the University of Notre Dame and received a law degree from New York University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Murphy of Arlington Heights, Ill.


Bonjour, Bourjois!
IT WAS OPENING DAY AT GALERIES Lafayette, the new Gallic emporium in New York.
In a corner of the cosmetics department, at least 30 women and teen-age girls crowded around a counter labeled "Bourjois" in big white and shocking-pink letters.
Almost no one there had heard of Bourjois, a large, mass-market cosmetics company that is the Maybelline of France.
But word had spread that nail polish in cute little bottles cost $5 and lipsticks, including a devastating 60's pink, were $9.50 and,
mon Dieu
, the stuff was French.
"It's cooked," explained Valerie Duret-Robert, sounding a little like Julia Child.
"That's why the colors are so bright." Duret-Robert, a Bourjois representative from Paris, was in town to oversee her company's first days on East 57th Street, the only place in America that sells Bourjois (pronounced boor-JWAH) at the moment.
"These are the same shades sold in France," she added, "though a few aren't available yet because of F.D.A. restrictions."


A La Carte: Competition for the All-Night Diner
ALL-NIGHT diners are going to be facing competition from an unexpected source starting on Nov. 15.
That is when the 49 South Late Night Cafe opens at the Huntington Hilton Hotel in Melville.
The restaurant will start serving when most eating places are closing, at 10 P.M.
It will operate until dawn five nights a week, Wednesdays through Sundays.
The name 49 South comes from the Long Island Expressway exit closest to the hotel.


Behind the Many Faces of Al Hirschfeld
As anyone who has ever stalked the elusive Nina through the inky thickets of Al Hirschfeld's art knows, his drawings not only fail ultimately to conceal his daughter's name, they also reveal layer upon layer of an evolving talent.
The manifestations of that talent have now been collected in "Hirschfeld: Art and Recollections From Eight Decades," being published this month by Charles Scribner's Sons.
The book spans the Hirschfeld career from his first theater drawing in 1926 to the recent series of postage stamps honoring great comedians.
It contains more than 330 drawings, most previously unpublished or not seen since their initial publication.


Pumpkins and Prizes
WEDNESDAY -- There were a dozen ornately carved pumpkins at the entrance of the Whitney Museum of American Art, and dancing on three floors, as the museum celebrated its 60th anniversary.
The evening honored Brendan Gill and Flora Miller Biddle, a granddaughter of Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney, who founded the museum.
More than 20 of Mrs.
Whitney's descendants were on hand for the fund-raising festivities.
TUESDAY -- Friends of the Bezalel Academy of Arts and Design gave a dinner at the Pierre to honor A. M. Rosenthal, the New York Times columnist, who received the 1991 Jerusalem Prize for Arts and Letters.
Mayor Teddy Kollek of Jerusalem got a special award.


A Conflict Of Cultures At Steinway
Last month, at the Kawai piano factory in Japan, production began on a new piano.
It is being made using Japanese materials and manufacturing techniques, but inside the instrument, on the metal plate, will appear words testifying to its American lineage: "Designed by Steinway &amp; Sons." The piano, to be introduced in January, is dubbed the Boston.
The debut of a new piano is remarkable in itself, but all the more so because of Steinway's involvement.
The hybrid Boston instrument, in seven upright and grand styles, to be priced in the $10,000 range, took three engineers at Steinway's Queens factory less than two years to design.
It will compete not with the company's premiere instruments -- which range in price from $10,300 to $59,900 -- but with the assembly-line pianos from the Far East that dominate the market: pianos like Kawai, Yamaha and Young Chang.


Businesses Go Back to School
OWNERS and managers of small- and medium-size manufacturing businesses are going back to school today as they try to improve the efficiency of their operations by harnessing the power of the computer.
That is what Dominick Martorana did when he decided to add computerized controls to the automatic machine tools that cut and shape parts for electronic devices at his Highland Manufacturing Company, in Highland, N.Y.
But Mr.
Martorana did not head for an ivy-swathed university.
Instead, he went to Hudson Valley Community College in nearby Troy, for instruction in computer-aided manufacturing and the details of the software packages that control the machines.


Review/Music; A Masur Protege Leads the Philharmonic
If ever a program of the New York Philharmonic reflected the predilections of the orchestra's music director, it is that of the current subscription series, with works by Mozart, Mendelssohn and Siegfried Matthus.
Kurt Masur, who is solidly grounded in the Viennese Classics and a successor of Mendelssohn at the Leipzig Gewandhaus, has long championed Mr.
Matthus's work.
Oddly, though, the present conductor is not Mr.
Masur himself, but a younger German, Claus Peter Flor, and the program was planned before the music director arrived on the scene.
The anomaly comes as no great shock, since Mr.
Masur was one of Mr.
Flor's mentors and undoubtedly helped shape his musical affinities.


Amid Histrionics, Arabs and Israelis Team Up to Lose An Opportunity
After three days of talks, the first ever between the leaders of Israel, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and the Palestinians, a question mark still hangs over the Madrid peace conference: Was it history in the making, or just histrionics?
The early assessment is that it may have been a little bit of both.
First, the bad news.
The conference itself -- the speeches delivered by the parties -- became an incredible lost opportunity.
This was the first peace conference broadcast live, around the world, and most importantly, to the countries involved.
It was an ideal chance for Arab and Israeli leaders to reach out to their opponents' publics and try to reshape attitudes.
Instead, they mostly reached out and poked one another in the eye, proving that they were not ready for prime time.


A Shared Sense of Loss
To the Editor:
A day or two after Paul Henry Lang died, I wrote to his friend and former student Alfred Mann:


CAMPUS LIFE: Chicago; Student Leader Quits Under Fire In Vote Fraud
The student government president at the University of Chicago has resigned after allegations of ballot-box stuffing in last month's elections for Student Court and Student Assembly.
The elections were declared invalid on Oct. 24, and a rerun was held last week with no apparent irregularities.
"Some will interpret my action as an admission of guilt with regard to the 'vote fraud' charges recently leveled against me," said George Donnelly in a letter of resignation to the editor of the student newspaper.
"It is not."


Voters in Maine to Decide Fate of Highway Policy
When the Federal Government brought its progressive highway program to this rural state 44 years ago, the superhighway that would eventually link Maine and Florida was considered a path to prosperity, enabling cities and towns to flourish along its route.
Now, what was once heralded as progress is causing residents to question whether the priorities of yesterday are valid for tomorrow.


Hofstra Defeats Towson State, Making It 6 Straight
Sophomore George Beisel came off the bench to replace Tim Lynch, Hofstra's starting quarterback, and threw a 15-yard touchdown pass to Wayne Morris with 1 minute 15 seconds to play to give the Flying Dutchmen a 30-26 victory over Towson State yesterday in Towson, Md.
The victory was the sixth in a row for Hofstra (7-1).


New York Ranks High in Housing Bias
IN the largest study of housing discrimination ever completed for the Federal Government, researchers have concluded that the problem is more prevalent in New York City and its suburbs than in any of 24 other major metropolitan areas across the United States, particularly for the Spanish-speaking minority.
The study coincides with a rapid increase in fair-housing complaints to regulatory agencies in the New York area.
Taken together, the new findings from both Federal and city agencies suggest that housing discrimination has persisted, and perhaps become more common, despite a succession of laws enacted in the 1980's to prevent it.


A Smooth Young Rider Taking a Shot at History
McLain Ward, already suave at the usually awkward age of 16, is a 10th grader in the "other" world, the one that does not revolve around horses and high fences.
But in his real world, the one where education, sport, family, business, and society all converge in the shapely form of a grand-prix showhorse, Ward is a pleasant prodigy for whom making history seems to come naturally.


Review/Music; Norrington's Schumann: Toward Authenticity
A few years ago, Roger Norrington set an ambitious project for himself: to bring the "authenticity" movement into the 19th century.
In recordings and interviews, he argued that while errors in Renaissance and Baroque performance practice have been corrected, the Classical and Romantic repertory is also in need of repair.
In the view of the conductor (and others of like mind), the music at the very heart of concert life needed to be cleansed of accumulated debris, lethargic tempi and bombastic manners.
The polemics, though, were noticeably absent when Mr.
Norrington conducted the Orchestra of St.
Luke's at Avery Fisher Hall on Friday night.
The only sign of principle was in a parenthetical remark in the program notes that the all-Schumann program would be played with a Schumann-sized orchestra , and that strings would use very little vibrato -- an approach now shared by many orchestras.
There were no radical revisions of tempo or interpretation, no arguments that Schumann's Cello Concerto and his Third Symphony have, until Friday, been distorted.


9-Year-Old Critically Injured In Hit and Run in Manhattan
A 9-year-old boy was struck and critically injured in Manhattan yesterday by a car that ran through a red light and then sped off, the police said.
The car, described by witnesses as a blue 1982 Chevrolet, hit the boy about 2:40 P.M. as he crossed Fort Washington Avenue at West 163d Street in Washington Heights, where he lives, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.


Jets, After Regrouping, Look to Run
Fresh from a week off, the Jets must now see whether they can shake themselves free of a vacation state of mind and get back to the business of making a run at the playoffs.
The first order of business is a game this afternoon at Giants Stadium against the Green Bay Packers, a 2-6 team that may or may not be as bad as its record.


A Country Setting for Savvy Dining
SUMMER and the Hamptons are certainly a serendipitous combination, but Labor Day does not signal the East End's swan song.
Indeed, savvy, sophisticated diners know that less frenetic times are the most inviting.
From Westhampton to Montauk, more and more restaurants are remaining open year-round.
Violet's Country Dining, a newcomer to East Hampton in the former Spring Close House, has joined their ranks and is giving the cold months a try.


BEST SELLERS: November 3, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
2
3
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
3
3
11
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
4
4
5
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
5
1
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) A diplomat, returning to his native Gloucestershire, finds that his past life in horse racing may help save others.
6
6
2
ALL THE WEYRS OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $20.) The final volume in the fantasy series "The Dragonriders of Pern."
7
5
8
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate a balloon accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force.
8
1
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $22.50.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide and herself.
9
8
34
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
10
9
6
THE DECEIVER, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $22.50.) Sam McCready recalls his years in the British secret service. (LP)
11
7
84
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
12
14
3
HARLOT'S GHOST, by Norman Mailer. (Random House, $30.) World events of the past few decades as seen by three Yankee aristocrats who work for the C.I.A.
13
12
2
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $22.) A lawyer returns to her estranged family to attend a funeral and finds new understanding and love.
14
3
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Macmillan, $21.95.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.
15
10
9
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $22.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his older brother.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
3
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
2
1
7
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
3
3
10
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies. (LP)
4
12
3
CRUEL DOUBT, by Joe McGinniss. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The ordeal of a North Carolina woman whose son was accused of planning the murder of herself and her husband.
5
4
7
LA TOYA, by La Toya Jackson with Patricia Romanowski. (Dutton, $19.95.) Growing up in a leading show business family, as experienced by Michael Jackson's sister.
6
5
50
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
7
1
THE NEW WORLD ORDER, by Pat Robertson. (Word Publishing, $17.99.) A clergyman discusses the significance of the changes now taking place around the globe.
8
1
SAVAGE INEQUALITIES, by Jonathan Kozol. (Crown, $20.) The current crisis in the nation's inner-city public schools, with suggestions for coping with it.
9
6
25
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
10
7
20
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
11
8
6
J.
EDGAR HOOVER, by Curt Gentry. (Norton, $29.95.) The career of the longtime Director of the F.B.I.
12
10
2
MADONNA UNAUTHORIZED, by Christopher Andersen. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) A biography of the pop star.
13
1
PRAIRYERTH, by William Least Heat-Moon. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A close look at the people and mores, past and present, of Chase County, Kansas.
14
11
20
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America.
15
7
HARD COURTS, by John Feinstein. (Villard, $22.50.) A journalist's behind-the-scenes look at a year of professional tennis.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
12
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
3
92
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a fellow named Waldo.
3
4
34
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
4
5
51
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
5
1
MAKING THE MOST OF YOUR MONEY, by Jane Bryant Quinn. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Advice from the syndicated columnist.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
BACKLASH: The Undeclared War Against American Women, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A bracing look, by a reporter for The Wall Street Journal, at the reaction against women's progress -- led, she argues, by a shrewd coalition of conservative forces, abetted by movie makers, writers and journalists.
DAUGHTERS, by Paule Marshall. (Atheneum, $19.95.) This brave, intelligent, ambitious novel examines the state of black people's lives in the United States and on a Caribbean island, and calls urgently for revising the relations between men and women.
THE THRILL OF FEAR: 250 Years of Scary Entertainment, by Walter Kendrick. (Grove Weidenfeld, $21.95.) A lively, informative treatment of the pleasures of goose bumps.
HENRY CLAY: Statesman for the Union, by Robert V. Remini. (Norton, $35.) A historian's biography of the Kentuckian whose compromises could not avert the Civil War but whose program of commercial development assured the North would win it.
TWILIGHT OF EMPIRE: Inside the Crumbling Soviet Bloc, by Robert Cullen. (Atlantic Monthly, $21.95.) Collected essays, mostly from the last two years, by a Moscow correspondent whose sense of what was happening has proved remarkably reliable.
ALL-BRIGHT COURT, by Connie Porter. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A beautiful and profound first novel about a community of black steelworkers and their families whose hopes have been betrayed by the violence of the 1960's and the layoffs of the 70's.
THE TRENCH: Volume Two of the "Cities of Salt" Trilogy, by Abdelrahman Munif. (Pantheon, $25.) Mr.
Munif's powerful novel of the making of a rich, corrupt oil state goes far to deepen, correct and humanize our views of Arabs and Arab culture.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 20 about Paul Taylor gave an incorrect broadcast date for "Speaking in Tongues," a Dance in America presentation.
It will be broadcast on Wednesday at 10 P.M. on most PBS stations, including Channel 13 in New York.


Seoul's Traffic Prompts Emergency Measures
Motorists trapped in traffic during a thanksgiving holiday last month were startled by the noisy buzz of military helicopters and then a Fellini-like miracle.
The helicopters swooped down and pulled out cars that had stalled and blocked the highways for miles.
The use of military helicopters to unsnarl the traffic jams in South Korea was only the most recent experiment by a Government that has had to resort to extreme measures to deal with one of the nation's growing headaches, its explosion of cars crowding the roads.


Fathoming the Gaps
New York City and New York State both announced last week that big gaps had opened in the budgets they had balanced just a few months ago.
But while the gaps may be equally difficult to fill, they have very different causes.
State officials put much of the blame on a poor economy.
But a close look at the numbers indicates that the recession's role in the budget gap lies not so much in how poorly the economy has performed but in how much better budget-makers had expected it to be.


Review/Recital; When Freni Sings, Passion Flows 2 Ways
When a major voice sings in recital, it is as if five full moons had risen in the night sky.
Listeners go a little mad.
Normal expressions of admiration swell to mass hysteria; perceived dissent -- whether real or imaginary -- inspires resentments very close to violence.
Witness Mirella Freni's recital at Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday evening, a program of operatic music with the Orchestra of St.
Luke's and the young Italian conductor Roberto Abbado.
First, think of the last ovation you heard for a Kurt Masur or an Itzhak Perlman, multiply the duration by five and the loudness by three, and you will have an idea of the responses that greeted Miss Freni's every move.
For music well played, there is usually respect and love; for the exceptional voice, there is frantic passion.


New Paris Flights From Miami
A.O.M.
French Airlines, which is starting nonstop service between Miami and Paris, is offering first-class and business-class travelers a free ticket for each one they purchase before Dec. 15.
The free tickets are good for one year.
The airline was formed in 1987 as Air Outre Mer to serve the route between Paris and Reunion, the French island in the Indian Ocean east of Madagascar.
It also flies from Paris to Guadeloupe and Martinique in the French Antilles.
The carrier planned to begin the Miami-Paris service on Oct. 26 on its 285-seat DC-10-30's, with one flight weekly, on Saturdays, departing Miami at 4:25 P.M.
Arrival in Orly Airport in Paris is at 6:55 A.M.
On Dec. 18, A.O.M. will add a Wednesday flight with the same departure time.
By next spring, the airline plans to move to four weekly flights.


From Japan, New Ways To Sell Yet More Cars
Not long ago some of America's top trade negotiators tracked down the head of General Motors Corporation's Saturn project -- the high-tech car that was supposed to undo Detroit's bad habits and take the Japanese down a notch -- and asked a loaded question: Why wasn't G.M. selling its sporty, low-cost car in Tokyo?
After all, they pointed out, the United States, under pressure from the Big Three car makers, has turned autos into the season's No. 1 trade issue with Japan.
Cars and car parts, more than two-thirds of the swelling trade deficit, will be high on the agenda when President Bush arrives here later this month.
The Saturn would be a great way to reverse the image of American car makers in Japan, they said.


Beaches Struggle to Survive a Storm
Kenneth H. Jones swung his burly frame into the battered green four-wheel drive, nudged it into gear and set out along what used to be Dune Road to watch an island struggle to survive.
There were a few hopeful signs.
Water pipes exposed Thursday now appeared to be covered by about eight inches of sand.
The inlet that had cut across the island at the height of last week's storm now ran freely only at high tide.


Cordial Partnership


Data Bank/November 3, 1991
Index of Leading Indicators
Sept.
Aug.
July
Monthly percent change
--0.1
0.0
1.2
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
--1.7
--2.0
6.1
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
0.5
--0.2
0.4
Construction Spending
Monthly percent change
1.1
0.4
0.6
Employment
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
In thousands
116,967
117,165
116,416
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
8,582 (6.8)
8,442 (6.7)
8,488 (6.8)
Weekly Jobless in Thousands
Oct. 18
Oct. 11
Oct. 4
In thousands
405
452
423
Real G.N.P. Growth
III Q'91
II Q'91
I Q'91
1982 dollars in percent
2.4
--0.5
--2.8


Corrections
An article on page 31 of the Arts and Leisure section today about public television misstates the broadcast history of the "P.O.V." documentary "Tongues Untied." The Public Broadcasting Service provided "Tongues Untied" to its member stations, many of which decided against broadcasting it.


Harry Connick Jr.: The New Sinatra or Boy in a Bubble?
In the liner notes to his new album, "Blue Light, Red Light," Harry Connick Jr. announces that he intends to lead a full-scale swing revival that will put the "big band sound in everyone's ears."
It is a typically brash pronouncement from a 24-year-old Wunderkind whose opinions on everything from contemporary pop (kiddie music, he calls it) to MTV ("pornography") have gotten him into so much trouble that he has almost completely stopped talking to the press.
But in a recent interview, Mr.
Connick discussed the frustrations of being a matinee idol in a society that wants to tear down and devour its stars the moment they are established.
It takes strength to withstand the attack, or so he says.
"Feel my muscle," said Mr.
Connick, flexing a bicep under his brown leather jacket.
"It's demanding to play the New Orleans stuff, and I like feeling powerful on stage," he added, alluding to his recent enthusiasm for lifting weights.


Himalayan Quake Reignites Dispute on Dams
The earthquake that recently killed hundreds of people in the Himalayas has rekindled a sharp debate within the Indian Government on whether to build big dams throughout the quake-prone mountain range.
While advocates of the dams say they are needed to satisfy India's energy needs, critics say that earthquakes will make them crumble, destroying towns and villages downstream.


Mourning a Friend, Teen-Agers Get in Trouble With the Law
Peter Butanowicz would have been 16 last Saturday, so friends decided to take something special to his grave.
Some took pumpkins, flowers, baseball cards, a baseball, a stuffed bear, a book by Bo Jackson.
Eleven of his friends decided to do more -- and so they stole home plate from a city baseball field, which they were all going to sign.
But on the way to the cemetery last Saturday night, they ended up in the hands of the police, charged with theft.


Retailing's Wistful Christmas Dream
The 20-odd days between Thanksgiving and Christmas were once a magic time for America's retailers.
Merchants could count on selling most of their goods at the full retail price and producing as much as half of their profits for the entire year.
The pre-Christmas sale was anathema.
Shoppers so improvident as to have waited until the last minute were punished with empty shelves.
Absolutely no markdowns until December 26.
And measured year to year -- with an occasional blip from a recession -- revenues marched ever upward, often posting double-digit growth.
It's been at least four years since retailers enjoyed such a traditional Christmas.
Some in the industry contend the glory days ended back as far as '84.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I recently moved into a nine-year-old house that has windows with double-pane glass.
There are metal or plastic strips between the two panes of glass that divide the large panes into smaller ones, but the strips seem to be falling apart and look terrible.
Is there anything that can be done to fix or replace these strips without having to replace the windows?
A.
Chances are that the two glass panes can be taken apart and the strips replaced, but that depends on how the glass was installed by the manufacturer when the windows were constructed.
Unfortunately, even if it can be done, it is not usually a job for a do-it-yourselfer.
It calls for a professional.


Joan Manning Has Wedding
Joan Hall Manning, a daughter of Richard deYarman Manning of New York and Mountaintop, Pa., and Elinor S. Manning of San Juan, P.R., was married yesterday to Paul Condzal, the son of George Condzal of New York and the late Ann Condzal.
The Rev.
Robert G. Stephanopoulos, a Greek Orthodox priest, officiated at the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in New York.
Mrs.
Manning-Condzal, 28 years old, is an assistant buyer at Lord &amp; Taylor in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a lawyer in New York and Mountaintop.
Her mother is the president of the Executive Real Estate Company, a San Juan brokerage.


Review/Music; Musica Sacra Pairs Masses
Over two decades, Richard Westenburg's Musica Sacra has given many distinguished performances, generally avoiding a sense of uninvolved routine even in its most familiar repertory.
But the Carnegie Hall concert on Wednesday evening that opened the group's 21st season, comprising Haydn's "Nelson" and Mozart's "Coronation" Masses, seemed a tired affair in both planning and execution.
What easier, more mindless way to build a blockbuster program than to couple two grand Masses similar in style?
The presentation of even one Mass in concert is problematic, since the individual movements are conceived as parts of a larger liturgical service, not as an unmodulated sequence.
Some early-music groups have devised imaginative solutions, filling out the intervals with related or tellingly contrasted repertory.
Here, Mr.
Westenburg simply offered the two scores neat, unapologetically repeating the same texts, as if they carried no meaning beyond the musical.


Children's Books
FIVE LITTLE MONKEYS SITTING IN A TREE
Written and illustrated by Eileen Christelow. 32 pp.
New York: Clarion Books. $13.95. (Ages 2 and up)


Chess
Back in the 1920's, gambit play bore the taint of the not-quite-respectable.
The world champion from 1921 to 1927, Jose Raoul Capablanca of Cuba, accomplished such legerdemain with purely positional methods that he had no need to take gambles.
And his influence was heavy and long-lasting.
But now gambits have returned to widespread use.
For one thing, the present world champion, Gary Kasparov of the Soviet Union, is a wizard of speculation and inspires others to follow his paths.
There is also another reason: Many players despair of succeeding with dry, positional chess and look for gambits to provide their winning punch.


THE WORDS THEY CAN'T SAY
We are parents of a child who was diagnosed, at one time or another, as being autistic, retarded, emotionally disturbed, brain damaged or developmentally disabled (depending on which physician we were talking to).
We, too, discovered, through trial and error, that various audio-visual aids like tape recorders, typewriters, cameras, etc. assisted our son in organizing and expressing his thoughts.


Business Diary/October 27 - November 1
COMPANIES Getting Salomon Managers to Think of the Shareholders


Mimi Buchness Weds M. G. Arvystas
Dr.
Mary Ruth Buchness, a dermatologist, and Dr.
Michael Geciauskas Arvystas, a dentist, were married yesterday by the Rev.
David S. Lothrop, a chaplain for the Federal Law Enforcement Officers' Association, at the Church Center for the United Nations in New York.
Dr.
Buchness, 34 years old, is known as Mimi and is keeping her surname.
She graduated from Harvard University and received her M.D. degree from Columbia University.
She is an assistant professor of dermatology at New York University Medical Center and the assistant chief of dermatology at the Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center in New York.


Recounting Marital Angst in 3 Acts
IN Act I of "Remember the Ali mony" the play is even worse than the title -- Marty Gladstone, a 30-year-old dentist, implores his wife, Phyllis, to unpack her suitcase and stay.
"It's the sex," Marty explains, referring to an indiscretion with one of his patients.
Besides, "she had such nice teeth," he says, adding, "Men have certain needs." To that, Phyllis retorts, "And I suppose women don't?"
When his pleas fail, Marty tries to belittle Phyllis, saying things like: "No man respects a divorced woman" and, "Who do you think is going to want you?" As Phyllis reconsiders, Marty offers to cook dinner.
"How can you pass up steaks?" he asks.
Phyllis decides to stay, saying, "I'll always love you, Marty," The year is 1959.


AIDS Tests for Eagles
The Philadelphia Eagles tested their players for AIDS during training camp, and according to a civil liberties lawyer, the team violated Pennsylvania law by not first getting the players' informed consent and by not providing counseling before and after the tests.
The Eagles, who said none of the players had tested positive for HIV, as the AIDS virus is known, said the players gave their consents when they signed standard forms authorizing other tests.


Ms. Edmonds Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Jack N. Edmonds of New Brunswick, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katherine Mary Edmonds, to Thomas Jared Bachner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Bachner of Del Mar, Calif.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Edmonds, 23 years old, is an analyst for the Pragma Corporation, an international development consulting company in Falls Church, Va.
She graduated cum laude from American University.
Her father is a vice president of Johnson &amp; Johnson.
Her mother, Susan Edmonds, is a manager for Bell Communications Research in Piscataway, N.J.


The Quiz
Like a quirky law of cartography, Americans' knowledge of a country's geography seems to be inversely proportional to that country's distance from the United States.
The closer a nation is, the less we know.
Canada and Mexico, for example, are the United States' old neighbors, new free-trade partners and longtime strangers on the geographic landscape.
Time to fill in the mental map.
(Answers on page 12)


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
The Hard-Won Sense of Self
Susan Krieger, a scholar and social critic, suggests that the social sciences have paid insufficient attention to the central role of the individual in shaping society.
This is from "Social Science and the Self: Personal Essays on an Art Form" (Rutgers University).


Bedraggled Auburn Marks Its 3d Straight Loss
With its off-field woes seemingly deepening every day, Auburn's football fortunes plummeted to a new low today as Florida, the Southeastern Conference's only undefeated team, rolled over the Tigers, 31-10, at Jordan Hare Stadium.
The defeat was the third straight at home for Auburn, something that hasn't happened since 1977.


How Most of the Public Forests Are Sold to Loggers at a Loss
In 1905 Gifford Pinchot, America's first national forester, assured Congress that if it would place the national forest reserves under his direction in the Department of Agriculture he would have them running at a profit within five years.
He went so far as to say that he would not even need the $1 million a year he was given for research and promotion.
The National Forest Service has never made good on Mr.
Pinchot's promise.
Last year, Congress gave it $550 million to pay for growing and selling timber.
F.
Dale Robertson, the present chief, reported that its "net revenues" from timber sales for 1990 were $629 million.


Bush Toll: Memories Lost to Sea
A shaken President Bush and his wife, Barbara, led reporters through their devastated vacation house today, clambering over broken timbers and shattered glass to show where antiques and political mementos had been washed away this week by a powerful ocean storm.
Afterward, he pledged to repair the Walker's Point compound, an 11-acre estate on a seaside promontory named for the President's grandfather, where his family has summered for 89 years.


Harold Holappa 2d to Wed Janice Branom in '92
Dr. and Mrs.
Wayne T. Branom Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Janice Lynne Branom to Harold Samuel Holappa 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
S.
Holappa of Lynnfield, Mass.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Branom, 25 years old, is a product manager at Ralph Lauren in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Vanderbilt University.
Her father, a dermatologist, is an attending physician at Greenwich Hospital.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LECTURE SERIES ON ISLAM
A series of lectures on Islam begins this week at the Westchester Reform Temple, at 255 Mamaroneck Avenue in Scarsdale.
Peter Awn, professor of Islamic religion and comparative religion and chairman of the department of religion at Columbia University, will open the series at 8:30 P.M.
Wednesday with a talk on "Religion of Islam: Origins and Evolution."


TAX TIPS
BRINGING BUSINESS GUESTS home for dinner does not have to mean forgoing the tax deduction that is often allowed when the venue is a boardroom or a supper club.
But before you order exotic flowers or expensive Champagne, keep the following points in mind.
Unlike job-hunting costs, safe-deposit box fees, investment advisory fees and subscriptions to business periodicals, only 80 percent of business entertaining is deductible.
Furthermore, most employees must count entertaining costs as miscellaneous unreimbursed business expenses, not a dime of which can be written off until they exceed 2 percent of adjusted gross income -- a big hurdle for the very taxpayers who do the most entertaining.


Mattatuck Offering 'The Poetry Of Light'
IN 1983 the New Britain Museum of American Art celebrated its 80th anniversary with, among other things, a show of landscapes by Allen Butler Talcott (1867-1908).
The artist did not make it into either the statewide "Connecticut and American Impressionism" of 1980 or the 1982 traveling show of Tonalism.
He was, nonetheless, the right choice for New Britain, since the museum started out with a generous endowment from his uncle, John Butler Talbott, founder of the American Hosiery Company.
Now the Mattatuck Museum in Waterbury is featuring Talcott but without mentioning the New Britain show or any other that may have taken place in the interim.
These 27 canvases, which were recently discovered in storage, appeared earlier in the year at the Cooley Gallery in Old Lyme, where 17 of them were sold.
The Mattatuck presentation could, therefore, be called a celebration of ownership.


Chicago-N.Y. Luxury Train Ceases Operation
American-European Express, which operated a luxury train service between Chicago, Washington and New York and planned to switch the service to New York-Miami this winter, has ceased operations and says it cannot make immediate refunds.
The two-year-old company cited the cost of repairs to rail cars damaged in a derailment in Indiana in June when it announced cessation of operations on Oct. 15.
The president, William Spann, in "a notice to passengers and travel professionals" issued on Oct. 18 said, "Because of the company's current financial condition, we are unable to to make immediate refunds for travel and other services booked with our reservation office."


Lead From Bronx Police Range Prompts a Suit
Lead from more than 100 million bullets discharged at the New York City police firing range in a Bronx park has seriously polluted the land and nearby waterways, an environmental group has charged in a Federal lawsuit.
The suit calls for the range to be closed and cleansed.
The group, Soundwatch, said two to three tons of bullets have been fired into earthen mounds at the firing range, on Rodman's Neck in Pelham Bay Park, in each of the last 32 years.


Yugoslavia's Albanians Seek Foreign Affirmation
The two million ethnic Albanians of Yugoslavia's Kosovo region are seeking international recognition of their declared sovereignty in the face of continuing repression by the Serbian military and the civilian authorities.
Acting on the results of a referendum held in September, the Kosovo Republican Assembly met clandestinely on Oct. 19 and approved a measure declaring that "the Republic of Kosovo is a sovereign and independent state."


A Magazine To Please Children's Ears
A children's magazine called Boomerang opens each month with noises like the rumble of thunder or the whine of a dentist's drill -- all in crisp stereo sound.
That's only the beginning; a recent edition of this 70-minute cassette-tape magazine features bats squealing, guns firing and, appropriately, the whizzing sound of a boomerang.
Its creator, David Strohm, of La Honda, Calif., says that sound can stimulate youngsters' imaginations.


A Question Of Sensitivity
To the Sports Editor:
One can understand the Indians' sensitivity to having teams named Braves, Indians and Redskins ("How Can Jane Fonda Do the Chop?," by Robert Lipsyte, The Times, Oct. 18).
Yet this goes to show how sensitivity for past mistreatment (and that is an understatement for what the white people did to them) makes people see things in a different way.
It is a matter of perspective.


Special Glues Can Help Solve Tricky Problems
CHOOSING the correct glue can be confusing.
Multipurpose glues have been replaced by specialized types that often work better, but only if knowlegeably selected and used.
To be well stocked, one should keep these glues on hand: aliphatic resin, cyanoacrylate, epoxy and polyvinyl acetate.
Aliphatic resin glue is also called yellow woodworking glue.
It is preferred by carpenters and cabinetmakers for gluing wood, and also can be used to join other porous surfaces like leather, felt and cork.
An advantage for some projects is that pieces being glued can be repositioned for up to 15 minutes before the glue begins to harden.


Don't Strike Out At Fantasy Games
To the Sports Editor:
It is incredible to me that erudite, literate sports writers like Murray Chass, who write so much about keeping sports in perspective, become so irate about the fantasy baseball phenomenon ("Rotisserie Leagues: Fans in the Land of Oz," The Times, Sept. 22).


Madelin Einbinder To Wed in February
Mr. and Mrs.
Jason R. Einbinder of Lincroft, N.J., have announced February wedding plans for their daughter Madelin Einbinder and John Foti Jr., whose parents live in Fair Lawn, N.J.
Ms.
Einbinder, 29 years old, and Mr.
Foti, 42, are assistant prosecutors for Ocean County, N.J.
She graduated from Smith College; he from Boston College.
She has a law degree from Seton Hall; he from Fordham University.


Spices and Seasonings Enter the Mainstream
STATISTICS show that Americans have acquired a taste for spices.
Consumption of spices, especially red and black pepper, has increased dramatically in the last decade.
Several factors have contributed to the trend toward more highly seasoned food.
Spices and seasonings are essential in processed foods, they compensate for decreased use of salt and there is a greater interest in ethnic foods, especially Mexican.
Freshly ground black pepper has become the rule, not the exception, in homes and restaurants.


POSTINGS: In the Village; Americana Redux For a Locksmith
Rocco Leonardis stopped by to get a key made at Greenwich Locksmiths, 56 Seventh Avenue South, near Commerce Street.
But the proprietor, Philip Mortillaro, had something more challenging in mind.
"You're an architect," the locksmith said.
"What can I do with this place? It looks like any building on Queens Boulevard. I'm proud to be an American. I'd like you to make this a real American building."


Conner Will Be Forced to Race Just One Boat
Prospects for a successful defense of the America's Cup, an uphill battle at best, took a turn for the worse last week with the announcement that Team Dennis Conner cannot afford to build a second boat for its 1992 campaign.
In cup campaigns of the last decade, it was always Conner who led the way, often with costly innovations.
Although his efforts tended to leave a trail of indebtedness, Conner had the money to do what was necessary to win.
In the 1986-87 cup races in Australia, it meant having a stable of five new boats from which to choose.


CHINA CHIEFS SEEM EDGY AND DIVIDED
Two months after the collapse of Soviet Communism, China's leaders seem increasingly edgy and divided, and there are signs that they have responded to the events in the Soviet Union by deciding to tighten their grip on the nation further.
Chinese newspapers have carried more statements about "class struggle," there are calls for intensifying Marxist education, leaders of many work units have recently warned employees not to meet foreigners without permission, and officials at one Beijing university even called on staff members to report on colleagues who have contacts with foreigners.
The officials insisted that even private correspondence with Westerners should be reported to the authorities, a Chinese who was present said.


Italy Car Rental
To the Editor: I read with interest the Practical Traveler article on car rentals in Italy (Oct. 20) and want to correct any impression that rental companies there are running a scam.
The police everywhere try to enforce traffic laws, but car renters tend to ignore tickets issued far from home.
So rental companies provide information about renters to the police.
So far, so good.
What was not mentioned in the article is that fines in Italy double if they are not paid within 15 days of issue, e.g., a $40 fine would rise to $80.
This is why companies, Eurodollar included, take a separate credit card imprint "for fines only": in case of a ticket, this saves the renter money.


Earning One's Keep
To the Editor:
In response to my letter ("Keeping the Government Out of Housing," Oct. 6) Muriel C. Hayman correctly points out that I am "not old enough to remember the G.I. Bill" ("Low-Interest Loans to Lower-Income People," Letters, Oct. 20).
I am a senior economics major at the University of Maryland at College Park and came to the United States from Somalia barely seven years ago.


Revisionist Thinking On the Carpenters
How easy it was to revile the Carpenters.
In the 70's, this brother-and-sister duo went against the grain of any self-respecting rock-and-roller: they always dressed as if they were going to church, and they sang sticky songs about love (but never sex).
Worst of all, parents loved their music.
If, outside, the nation was raging (Vietnam, Watergate), the Carpenters suggested that, inside, cookies were baking.
Twenty years later, with their music collected on a four-CD set, "From the Top" (A&amp;M 6875), the Carpenters acquire something resembling depth -- or at least conviction.
Richard Carpenter, the duo's keyboardist and arranger, pitted his gentle sounds against loudmouths like Led Zeppelin and the psychedelic soul of Sly and the Family Stone.
In comparison, the Carpenters sounded just plain weird, sort of like the Mamas and the Papas crossed with Lawrence Welk, with Mr.
Carpenter emphasizing frothy melodies and overdubbing his and his sister's voices into a choralelike swell.
Remember the wahs on "(They Long to Be) Close to You," the duo's first million seller?


Paul Russell Carro, AIDS Group Official, 34
Paul Russell Carro, a former official of the Gay Men's Health Crisis, died on Friday.
He was 34 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Carro died of complications from AIDS, said Greg Lugliani, the assistant director of the AIDS service and health advocacy organization.


Spices and Seasonings Enter the Mainstream
STATISTICS show that Americans have acquired a taste for spices.
Consumption of spices, especially red and black pepper, has increased dramatically in the last decade.
Several factors have contributed to the trend toward more highly seasoned food.
Spices and seasonings are essential in processed foods, they compensate for decreased use of salt and there is a greater interest in ethnic foods, especially Mexican.
Freshly ground black pepper has become the rule, not the exception, in homes and restaurants.


After Nailing 60-Yarder, Andersen Sets Sights on Dempsey
Tom Dempsey didn't think that his 63-yard field goal, which he hit for the New Orleans Saints on Nov. 8, 1970, against Detroit, would stand up for more than two decades as the longest in National Football League history, considering the advent of indoor stadiums and the prevalence of more athletic kickers.
But the record has become one of the most enduring on the N.F.L. books.
Dempsey watched last week as New Orleans kicker Morten Andersen hit a 60-yard field goal against Chicago at the Louisiana Superdome.
Andersen's kick, a line drive that would have probably been good from 65 yards out, showed that the only thing standing in the way of Dempsey's record falling is opportunity.
The 60-yarder tied Steve Cox for second place in N.F.L. history.


POSTINGS: Rental Scam Nipped; Greenthal Helps Unravel a Case
The police say they have halted a scam in Manhattan with the arrest of a man charged with posing as a rental agent to collect bogus application fees from prospective tenants.
Using newspaper classified advertisments, the police say, Christopher O'Brien of 275 West 238th Street in the Bronx, lured potential tenants to empty apartments in buildings on the Upper East Side where keys had been left with doormen.
After showing apartments, Mr.
O'Brien, a former licensed real estate salesperson, would take an $80 or $90 fee -- in cash or personal check -- for a credit check he said was required as part of the application process.
The police believe the suspect used listings in industry newsletters to find sponsor-owned rentals in co-op buildings.


Academia Fails The Ethics Test
OTHER schools looking at Stanford University must be heaving a there-but-for-the-grace-of-God-go-I sigh of relief.
The university's president, Donald Kennedy, resigned after two years of fighting accusations that Stanford had fraudulently used Federal grant money to maintain a yacht, throw lavish parties and keep his house resplendent with antiques, fresh flowers and a brand new cedar closet.


Elif Rosenfeld Weds
Elif Tolga Rosenfeld, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Rosenfeld of New York, was married yesterday to Christopher Andre DeConti, the son of Mrs.
John Wilson of Haddam, Conn., and Vincent DeConti of Naperville, Ill.
Judge Anthony Scarpino of Westchester County Court officiated at Le Chateau in South Salem, N.Y.
Ms.
Rosenfeld, 23 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Georgetown University, as did the bridegroom, and is studying there for a doctorate in sociolinguistics.
Mr.
DeConti, 23, received a master's degree in international trade and finance from Georgetown.
He is a financial analyst at Oppenheimer &amp; Company in New York.


Dupree's First of '91 Pleases 3-5 Rams
What did it matter that Marcus Dupree had to wait eight weeks to play for the Los Angeles Rams this season?
Compared with the five years he spent out of the game, it was like the blink of an eye.
There was a measure of frustration to it, but Dupree has learned patience in his life.
He has had to wait for a lot of things.


Jackson Says He Won't Run But Seeks to Keep Coalition
Declaring to his supporters that "we are free agents in a political market," Jesse Jackson announced as expected today that he would not mount a third try for the Democratic Presidential nomination, and he asked his backers to withhold their support for other candidates.
In calling for the mobilization of a "new democratic majority" in a speech to about 100 people at a housing project near the Capitol, Mr.
Jackson, 50 years old, sought to signal that he was not ready to have others write his political obituary.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Entertaining/Magazine Part 2 Special Today: Education Life//Section 4A


Luggage Theft
To the Editor: I read with interest the letter from Estelle Levy about a theft she suffered in France (Travel, Aug. 25).
My husband and I recently returned from an auto trip in France, Germany and Belgium.
We had purchased a six-foot long steel bicycle cable and used it to secure our four pieces of luggage in the car trunk.
We looped the cable through the handles of the luggage and the trunk hinge.
It took an extra few minutes each morning and night, but we felt more secure.
After hearing too many stories about stolen luggage, we never opened the car trunk when we stopped for any reason during the day and we never left anything in the trunk overnight.
I hope this will be of help.
BETTY FRANKEL Oakdale, L.I.


Mutual Funds; Nobody Loves an Equity
IndividuaL investors' equity holdings, including both common stocks and mutual funds, have dropped as a percentage of total assets in the last 20-plus years.
Experts say the trend is fueled by several forces: the stock market collapses of 1969-70, 1973-1974 and 1987; high yields on money market funds and bonds in the late 1970's to early 1980's; soaring real estate values that competed for dollars, and the growing domination of institutional investors.


Wind and Fires Fought in 9 States
Shifting winds today produced mixed results in containing wildfires that have blackened at least 231,000 acres in nine states.
Fires since Oct. 26 have done damage in West Virginia, Georgia, Kentucky, Ohio, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia and Maryland.
Nearly 200,000 of the acres were burned by more than 500 fires in West Virginia.
Authorities suspect arson in most of the blazes, and a Virginia man was arrested on an arson charge there.


Miss Hochstim Wed
Nancy Harriet Hochstim and Michael Moses Goldberg were married last evening at Temple Emanu-El in Dallas by Rabbi Gerald Klein.
Mrs.
Goldberg, 26 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is a corporate manager in Dallas for Something's Afoot, a chain of socks and hosiery stores owned by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore S. Hochstim of New York.
Mr.
Goldberg, 26, graduated from the University of Georgia and is a manager at the Hotel Crescent Court in Dallas.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles S. Goldberg of Charleston, S.C.
His mother, Harriet Goldberg, is a certified public accountant.
His father is a lawyer.


Naked Young Men and Little Green Trees in Tubs
On the northwest corner of Madison Avenue at 84th Street, there is a tall, square, red brick town house that speaks for the New York of an earlier day.
It is a civilized fortress, an ark that will outlast us all, a residence of an ageless, timeless, unhurrying sort.
Right now, and since exactly 25 years ago, 21 East 84th Street is the home of the heartland of esthetic surprises, the Shepherd Gallery.
The Shepherd Gallery has consistently given a new and curious dimension to the art that was currently in the New York galleries.
Repeatedly it has given house room to art that would otherwise have been homeless.
Quite apart from that, it is in itself a remarkable place.


Mississippi Race Heats Up as Governor's Margin in Polls Narrows
Gov.
Ray Mabus, the Democrat who is seeking a second term in Tuesday's voting, came to this small central Mississippi town today to participate in what seemed a routine announcement of an expansion by a hosiery manufacturer.
But it was anything but routine as the 43-year-old Harvard-educated politician sought to associate himself with any kind of concrete economic development efforts in the state and tout his trips to the company's headquarters to encourage the expansion.


For the Bond Market, Heaven Can Wait
As Dante saw it, purgatory was no vacation spot.
There, the greedy were consigned to a mountain ledge, with "weeping people everywhere, lying outstretched and face-down on the ground."
Many lost souls are paying a price for the avarice of the 1980's.
No one -- not the banks, the Government or the Federal Reserve -- is able to recharge the economy.
A fading recovery and Fed easing have failed to make long-term capital much cheaper, an essential for strong growth.
But many bond investors and analysts are optimistic that this will happen, ignoring the sizeable risks.


New York
Get ready for a potpourri.
Seventh Avenue designers, like those elsewhere, have found inspiration from a mix of decades, cultures and fads, not to mention the collections of their European colleagues.
As they show their spring '92 styles this week, look for readily identifiable traces of the 40's and 50's, the antebellum South, the Wild West and South Sea paradises.
These are among the romantic themes that, in typical American fashion, will be toned down and made wearable.
Silhouettes are not shifting much, but hemlines will be up, down and in-between, signifying nothing.
It is the accessories that will establish the extremes.


Fearing Gang Violence, School Forfeits a Game
The two top-rated high school football teams in Los Angeles spent Friday afternoon at practice instead of playing their showdown game against each other, and therein lies a painful statement about urban America.
It is not a standard story of racial animosities.
Rather, it is a story of fear and apprehension among hard-working families trying to bring up their children in an urban setting in which teen-age thugs tote automatic weapons, and where it seems that even so traditional an American pastime as Friday night football cannot be played without an army of police officers.


The Executive Life; Achievements, A to Z, To Adorn the Office
When visitors enter the Manhattan office of Sam Butler, managing partner of Cravath, Swain &amp; Moore, there are Hudson River views to contemplate, handsome legal volumes and a wall filled with family photos.
But their attention tends to be riveted to a large painting opposite Mr.
Butler's desk.
The picture is divided into a grid of 26 squares, each depicting a different scene: the front door of a house, a herd of zebras gazing in a pond, a Broadway marquee.
Baffled guests stare at the disparate images and soon the prominent attorney reveals its title: "Sam Butler, A-Z."


Klan Seizes On Germany's Wave of Racist Violence
In a forest clearing outside Berlin a few weeks ago, a giant cross was set aflame as several dozen spectators in white robes and hoods cheered and shouted racist slogans.
The demonstrators were German, but the organizer was Dennis Mahon, a prominent Ku Klux Klan leader from Oklahoma who was visiting Germany to build links between the Klan and neo-Nazi groups here.


Lucy E. Prager Has Wedding
Lucy E. Prager, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Prager of New York, and Benjamin Weintraub, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Weintraub of New York, were married last evening by Rabbi Marjorie Slome at the Cosmopolitan Club in New York.
The bride, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, is a marketing associate at Lederle Laboratories in Wayne, N.J.
A graduate of Princeton University, she has an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
Her father, a lawyer, is a former president of the Municipal Art Society.
Her mother, Annabelle Prager, is a writer, a children's book illustrator and the founder of Interschool Orchestras of New York, a nonprofit organization that helps children learn to play musical instruments.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I recently moved into a nine-year-old house that has windows with double-pane glass.
There are metal or plastic strips between the two panes of glass that divide the large panes into smaller ones, but the strips seem to be falling apart and look terrible.
Is there anything that can be done to fix or replace these strips without having to replace the windows?
A.
Chances are that the two glass panes can be taken apart and the strips replaced, but that depends on how the glass was installed by the manufacturer when the windows were constructed.
Unfortunately, even if it can be done, it is not usually a job for a do-it-yourselfer.
It calls for a professional.


Miami marks the 500th
Though Columbus neither saw nor set foot on the North American mainland, Miami will be host to a number of quincentennial celebrations throughout 1992.
For example, Columbus and the quincentennial will be the themes of both the King Orange Jamboree Parade (better known as the Orange Bowl Parade) on Dec. 31, and the Three Kings Day Parade on Jan. 5, while a beauty pageant has already found its Miss Quincentennial in 17-year-old Yulaykis Piloto, a native of Cuba.


Part-Time Instructors At Colleges
As a chronically underemployed part-time college instructor, I found the recent article on the impending exodus from the professoriate ("Aging College Faculties Causing Worry") particularly galling.
The heart of the matter -- in New Jersey, as elsewhere -- is that at increasing numbers of colleges and universities, the overwhelming majority of lower-level courses are now taught by either graduate students or adjunct faculty.
This kind of work is characterized primarily by an absence of job security and benefits, by the kind of professional standing you would generally accord a day laborer and by financial remuneration usually in the neighborhood of $8 an hour.


THE CLASSICS REVISITED
In Cooking, as in art and music, new is a dubious term.
From the time humans learned to harness fire and held the first barbecue, virtually everything in cooking has been derivative.
The best of today's brash young chefs, who dazzle the public with creations of astounding colors, textures and flavors, are invariably nourished by the roots of classical cuisine.
"We all read the classic books and start that way," says Alfred Portale, the highly acclaimed American-born chef of Gotham Bar and Grill in Manhattan.
"Personally, I am much more confident working from a traditional base."


Week's Trio of Benefits: Organ Recitals and Gala
THREE concert benefits bracket the week, a pair of organ recitals today followed by a gala on Saturday.
When Richard Donohue plays Bach, Widor and Ravel this afternoon at 4 in South Church in Hartford, donations will go to the church's Aeolian-Skinner organ restoration fund.
For details, call 249-8627.
David Liddle began his musical studies at the Worcester College for the Blind, and at 8 P.M. tonight, the young English organist comes to Woolsey Hall at Yale University to give a benefit recital for the Connecticut chapter of Recording for the Blind.
In addition to works of Mozart, Bach and Vierne, Mr.
Liddle has chosen pieces by his countrymen Charles Villiers Stanford and Alfred Hollings, as well as one of his own compositions, the "English Organ Mass" (624-4334).
A very different sort of fund-raising event is coming up at 8 P.M. on Saturday at the United Church of Rowayton: it's a "raise and replace the roof" gala with proceeds earmarked for the new roof needed by the landmark church, which is home to the Five Mile River Recitals.
Among the Connecticut artists contributing their services are the pianist David Sweeney, the violinists of the Markov family, plus Ed Wright, Marsha Hall, Judi and John Livingston and Joe Utterbach (866-1415 or 866-9318).


Views Aimed at Civic Pride, and Photography by a Romantic
THERE were to have been three exhibitions opening the Jersey City Museum's fall season.
But the largest of them, a group of four contemporaries, has been delayed by construction in one of the galleries.
On hand, accordingly, are an excerpt from the museum's collection of paintings, drawings and prints by August Will and a small display of pictorial photography by William Armbruster.
For Will (1834-1910), it is a return engagement, the fourth since his art was acquired by the Jersey City Public Library in 1923.
Born in Germany at Weimar, the artist came to the United States in the early 1850's, settling in Jersey City about 1855.
He worked as an illustrator for magazines like Scribners and Century; his speciality was portraits done from photographs or life, as in the study of his daughter, Emily.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Automobile sales, millions, annual rate
6.2
6.1
Thursday
Unemployment claims, in thousands
405
429
Wholesale trade, percent change
-0.6
0.2
Change in consumer credit, in billions
-$1.3
-$0.5
Monday: Sales of existing homes *
Industrial productivity and costs *
Strike deadline at Caterpillar Inc.
Tuesday: Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee meets to discuss interest rates *
Three-year Treasury auction  Wednesday: Ten-year Treasury auction  Thursday: Bundesbank council meeting *
Thirty-year Treasury auction  (Sosurce: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


April Wedding For Ms. Raucher
Mr. and Mrs.
Herman Raucher of Cos Cob, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jacqueline Leigh Raucher, to William Alan Salkin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Salkin of Gwynedd Valley, Pa.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Raucher, 27 years old, is an assistant paralegal supervisor in the law firm of Anderson, Kill, Olick &amp; Oshinsky in New York.
She graduated from Hartwick College, as did her fiance.
Her father is a novelist and screenwriter, whose works include "Summer of '42." Her mother, Mary Raucher, is a former dancer, who appeared in several Broadway shows under her maiden name, Mary Martinet.


Laurie Blaufox Is Engaged
Dr. and Mrs.
M.
Donald Blaufox of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Laurie Blaufox to Gary Solomon Lee, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Lee of Maidenhead, Berkshire, England.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Blaufox, 29 years old, is a lawyer at the C. T. Corporation, a legal services and publications company in New York.
She graduated from Lafayette College and received a J.D. from Yeshiva University.
Her father is the chairman of the department of nuclear medicine at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center.


Topics of The Times; Police at the Polls
New York City police officers -- 4,578 in all -- have good reason to welcome Election Day: They're assigned to patrol the polls, which usually means light duty, lounging around school gyms and chatting up voters.
Police Commissioner Lee Brown wants to change the state law that mandates the practice.
The law says at least one officer must be assigned to each polling place, and also requires that police transport ballots to the Board of Elections after polls close.
It's a vestige of the 19th century, when police, rather than an independent Board of Elections, managed voting.
The Legislature mandated police presence in the 1930's after rival political groups brawled at the polls.


Walking the Streets Columbus Built
DEBATES will rage on about which island Columbus first discovered, or whether discovery is even the appropriate term for his achievement.
Where the explorer's body lies also remains something of a mystery, and treasure hunters and archeologists still compete to determine which crystalline West Indian bays hide the wrecks of his lost ships.
What cannot be disputed is that Santo Domingo has few rivals anywhere in the Caribbean for its architecture and artifacts dating from the period of the explorer and his descendants.
And to that proud distinction, the Dominican Republic clings dearly as it aims to become the regional focal point for the coming year's Columbus observances.


The Executive Computer; For Small Businesses, a Simpler Approach to Networking
Novell Inc., which makes the Netware operating system software that allows two or more personal computers to exchange data and share peripherals, has developed a simplified version called Netware Lite for small businesses and offices.
Netware Lite is not only simple but delightfully cheap.
Many advantages come from hooking all the personal computers in the office together, including the ability to share files, programs and expensive peripherals like laser printers.
The cost of networking is theoretically offset by the savings on hardware (one printer can serve many computers, and those computers do not necessarily have to have hard disks).
Productivity is theoretically enhanced because people do not have to run from computer to computer to find the data they need.


Maria Tipo Is Back. Why Did She Dally?
On Jan. 28, 1955, a blond, sultry-looking 24-year-old Italian pianist took the stage at Town Hall and proceeded to startle an audience in a program of Scarlatti, Bach, Beethoven, Chopin and Debussy.
"Confidence and competence," reported The Times the next day.
"Rhythm and clarity." "Verve." "Natural affinity to the keyboard." "Real temperament." "Virtuoso playing."
There were some reservations -- all young critics have to major in reservations in critics' school -- but the reviewer called Maria Tipo a pianist of "extraordinary potential." That reviewer, it so happens, was this writer.


Giving Downtowns a New, Alluring Look
AFTER years of being passed over in favor of regional malls and shopping centers, downtown districts throughout the metropolitan area are reworking their images to try to bring back shoppers and revive their commercial centers.
They are doing this through mixed-use developments involving residential as well as commercial projects to put more middle-class and affluent residents right in the center of town.


Jersey Plan For Schools Gets Lost in The Politics
Some time within the next several weeks, Marilyn J. Morheuser expects to return to the same courthouse where a decade ago she began a legal fight that led to a landmark ruling on how education funds should be dispersed between the rich and the poor.
"What we won was a wonderful victory on paper," said Ms.
Morheuser, a member of the Education Law Center in Newark, a group of lawyers who specialize in education advocacy, "and to date, that is all it is."


Intimidated By Flyers? Not Rangers
The Rangers survived the intimidating tactics of the Philadelphia Flyers this afternoon and defeated their Patrick Division rivals, 4-2.
The victory, which came before a capacity crowd of 17,380 at the Spectrum, was the fifth straight for the Rangers and seventh in their last eight games.
Having been outskated and outmuscled early in the first period, the Rangers overcame a 1-0 deficit and did something they failed to do in four contests here last season: win a hockey game.


Watch Out for Those 12-Year-Old Hunters
To the Editor:
As thousands of New York homeowners, farmers and nature lovers annually attest, it's not safe out of doors when hunting season arrives and the guns of autumn begin to blaze.
Thus, it defies sane explanation that the New York State Legislature would add 12- and 13-year-olds to the ranks of licensed hunters (news article, Oct. 28).


Ms. Greenberg Has Wedding
Deanne Fern Greenberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Greenberg of New York, was married last evening to Charles Peter Winnick, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Winnick of Hartsdale, N.J.
Rabbi Judah Nadich officiated at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Mrs.
Winnick, 25 years old, graduated from Syracuse University.
Until recently, she was an account representative at Bliss, Barefoot &amp; Associates, a New York public relations firm.
Her father is a vice president of the National Equipment Corporation, a manufacturer of food processing machinery in the Bronx.


Amy L. Carter, Banker, to Wed
Mrs.
Willis M. Carter of East Greenwich, R.I., has announced the engagement of her daughter Amy Louise Carter to Quentin Frederick Dudley Clulow, the son of Margaretta M. Clulow of Greenwich, Conn., and the late David J. Clulow.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Carter, 33 years old, graduated from Wheaton College.
She is a client service administrator at People's Bank in Bridgeport, Conn.
Her father, the late Willis M. Carter, was a production manager at Charles Scribner's Sons, the New York publishing house.


Emelin Brings Back Early Shanley Comedy
IT is a sign of grace and acumen that the Emelin Theater is producing "Italian American Reconciliation," a wild and crazy lyric and life-enhancing play that was first seen in 1988 at the Off Broadway Manhattan Theater Club, where the playwright John Patrick Shanley's newest work, "Beggars in the House of Plenty," is now playing.
Then only perfunctorily acknowledged, Mr.
Shanley's comedy has since settled in the shadow of his award-winning screenplay "Moonstruck," to which it bears only a surface resemblance.


CAMPUS LIFE: Rutgers; Asian Americans Organize Against 'Silent' Stereotype
Though the 5,100 Asian and Pacific Islander students at Rutgers University constitute, at 11 percent, the largest minority group, they are often referred to on campus as the silent minority.
"It's the Confucian ethic of restraint," said Bertrand Wang, a senior in Asian Studies from East Brunswick, N.J.
"Mind your own shop, and never speak out against your elders."


Father of Invention
LONG BEFORE gurus became commonplace, John W. Gardner was the guru for innovators in American education.
As a leader of public and private task forces and conferences on education, as a Federal official and especially as president of the Carnegie Corporation of New York, Mr.
Gardner spurred reforms such as that of math teaching and development of Children's Television Workshop.
"We got quite excited about educational innovation after the Russians sent up Sputnik in 1957," Mr.
Gardner said in a telephone interview, "but the American people displayed a short attention span, and the excitement lasted only about eight years. With the swing of opinion, the Republicans came in on a platform of cutting the size of government."


When Chiefs Dined, Opulence Reigned
Bird-shaped masks open to reveal legendary creatures or human faces.
A feasting bowl depicts a woman with bear-shaped breasts or a man crawling with a whale on his back.
The image of a tribal chief sitting on the head of a grizzly bear and holding a wolf to his chest is carved on a 10-foot pole.
Dramatic interplay between people and animals, birds and beasts is captured in the artworks exhibited in "Chiefly Feasts: the Enduring Kwakiutl Potlatch" at the American Museum of Natural History, through Feb. 23.
These works bring to life centuries-old legends of the Indians of the Pacific Northwest.


Battle of the Sexes Gets All Fuzzy as New Age Authors Meet
The interplay of the sexes, at least as a New York performance art, has gone all fuzzy.
When Robert Bly, the leader of the nascent men's movement, shared the stage Friday night at Cooper Union's Great Hall with Deborah Tannen, the author of two best-selling books on the failure of men and women to communicate, gender anxiety came to a standstill.
It was a New Age sort of evening, an event of such unrelenting agreement that the two authors began by reading their favorite passages from each other's books and ended with a kiss.
Ms.
Tannen congratulated Mr.
Bly for saying that not all of men's problems were the fault of their mothers.
Mr.
Bly called passages from Ms.
Tannen's book "sweet."


Stadler Keeps His Cool And Share of the Lead
Craig Stadler, seeking his first tournament victory since 1984, and left-hander Russ Cochran put themselves three shots clear of the field today going into the final round of the season-ending Tour Championship.
The 38-year-old Stadler, who shot an one-over-par 72, and the wiry Cochran, who had a 71, each have 54-hole totals of five-under-par 208 over Pinehurst No. 2 to lead 28 other golfers representing the leading money winners on this years' PGA Tour in the race for the 360,000 first place prize.


Corrections
A report on the Evening Hours page last Sunday about a party for the Community Council of the 19th Police Precinct in Manhattan misstated the purpose.
The benefit was for the council's crime prevention and liaison programs and its athletic programs for children in the precinct.


The Environment Should Be Considered
Long Island voters should consider environmental issues when choosing local leaders.
Oyster Bay's concerned citizens know that our Town Board could take much better care of our harbor.
The Oyster Bay Town Board ignores environmental science.
They have turned their backs on pressing water quality issues.
They refuse to take responsibility for the future of our harbor.
They have neglected their duty in protecting the public trust.


R. N. Holtzman Wed to Ms. Slosberg
Elise Robin Slosberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee R. Slosberg of Owings Mills, Md., was married last evening to Robert Neil Holtzman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin S. Holtzman of Parsippany, N.J.
Rabbi Jeffrey Sirkman performed the ceremony at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Holtzman, 26 years old, is an associate in New York at the law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a senior vice president of Crown American Life Insurance in Alexandria, Va.
Her mother, Marion Slosberg, is a speech pathologist for the Baltimore public schools.


Motown Maestro


Technology; Mining Deep Underground for Energy
Across vast areas of the world, Government scientists say, it should soon be possible to drill a hole in the ground and harvest energy that is abundant and environmentally benign.
This is not oil or gas, but heat.
Researchers at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico are seeking to tap the heat within the earth, which comes from earth's molten core or from radioactive decay and which geologists say dwarfs the energy content of oil, coal or natural gas.


Switch Doesn't Pay for In Excess As Owner's Plan Comes Up Lame
The tail of his tan sports jacket caught in the breeze, Bruce Jackson hurried down from his box in the stands at Churchill Downs and made his way onto the track after the horse he trains, In Excess, the 2-1 favorite in the Breeders' Cup Mile, faltered and finished ninth.
Last Wednesday, Jackson made a decision not to run In Excess in the Breeders' Cup Classic and perhaps battle Festin or Black Tie Affair head-to-head for Horse of the Year honors in that race.
Some people said then that Jackson was taking the easy way.
He offered the rebuttal that he was taking the best way for his horse.


Eating the Steak With a Grain of Salt
By all the old standards and stereotypes, the two high school seniors from New York City should have been perfect -- vulnerable targets for a college recruiting blitz.
Maurice Brown and Robert Blackwell do not live with their parents, who have died or left home or had problems with drugs.
Both teen-agers have notions about removing themselves, and their energized basketball games, from the gunshots that keep one of them awake at night.
They are ambitious and cocky, perhaps a bit too certain their skills will overwhelm all obstacles.


Mavericks Sign Smith
The Dallas Mavericks' first-round draft pick, DOUG SMITH, yesterday signed a four-year, partly guaranteed contract worth $7.75 million.
Smith, the sixth player taken over all, is expected to provide Dallas with some much-needed muscle up front.
He was expected to make his debut against Cleveland on Tuesday night.
To make room for the 6-foot-8-inch forward from Missouri, the Mavericks put forward Herb Williams on the injured list.
Williams has a sprained left ankle. (AP)


A Taste for the Old West in Ridgefield
FANS of Hay Day, the produce and food market in Greenwich and Westport, will welcome a new branch in Ridgefield that has the added attraction of a restaurant called the Hay Day Cafe.
As one-third of a complex that includes the Hay Day Country Farm Market and wine shop, the cafe resembles a turn-of-the-century Western hotel or train-station restaurant.
High ceilings, potted palms and ficus, mottled wallpaper, lace curtains, wood floors and wainscoting plus bentwood chairs all recreate another time.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL AROUND THE NATION
Worth Noting INDIANA (5-2-1, 4-1) defeated MINNESOTA (2-6, 1-4), 34-8, at Bloomington, Ind.: The Hoosiers, surprisingly still in the Big Ten's Rose Bowl sweepstakes, won again with Vaughn Dunbar rushing for 149 yards and 3 touchdowns.
Some say Dunbar is the top running back, or near the top, for the next National Football League draft pick at his position.
He's the No. 2 rusher in the country.
His scoring run of 37 yards pretty much put the game away, 24-0, early in the third quarter.


Home and Hut
SELECTED POEMS
By Robert Creeley. 366 pp. Berkeley: University of California Press.
JAGUAR OF SWEET LAUGHTER
New &amp; Selected Poems. By Diane Ackerman. 254 pp. New York: Random House.


CAMPUS LIFE: Connecticut; Campus Outgrows Its Need for Dairy But Not for Milk
University of Connecticut students will no longer be drinking milk from the university's own dairy herd come the middle of this month, when the creamery is due to close.
UConn announced on Tuesday that it will close the only milk processing plant at a New England university.
Karen Grava Williams, a university spokeswoman, said the plant would be closed because it no longer serves as a laboratory for agricultural students and is in financial difficulties.


Out of the Fog


Selling Software, Soviet-Style
Selling software in the Soviet Union has its own special set of challenges.
The Nantucket Corporation, a $35 million, privately held software maker in Los Angeles, is learning that in a country with no clear notion of ownership, much less intellectual property rights, building a market can be daunting.
"Copying is so pervasive that the people over there think that Maxell and Verbatim, the floppy disk makers, are actually the software publishers," said Larry Heimendinger, Nantucket's president.
Nantucket, however, is showing other major software companies how to succeed there by painstakingly convincing Soviet software developers that buying is preferable to pirating.
Nantucket's popular Clipper package, used to develop software, is unusual in that 2,000 legal copies have been sold in the Soviet Union.


Miss Sommers, Executive, Wed
Elizabeth Sommers, a senior vice president of the Greater New York Hospital Association, was married yesterday in Glen Cove, L.I., to Dr.
Tracy E. Strevey Jr., the chief executive and executive director of the Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow, L.I.
Alfred F. Semanga, a retired justice of State Supreme Court in Mineola, L.I., officiated at the Harrison House conference center.
Mrs.
Strevey, 40 years old, graduated from Smith College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert T. Sommers of Manhasset, L.I.
Her father is a senior fellow and the economic counselor at the Conference Board in New York.
Dr.
Strevey, 58, retired as a major general in the Army Medical Corps.
He is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Strevey of Laguna Hills, Calif.
He graduated from Pomona College and received an M.D. degree from the University of Southern California, where his father, now retired, was the vice president for academic affairs.


Anne F. Botta Has Wedding
Anne Ferris Botta, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Botta of Allendale, N.J., was married yesterday in New York to John Russell Trautlein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald H. Trautlein of Bethlehem, Pa.
The Rev.
Charles U. Quinn performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Our Saviour.
Mrs.
Trautlein, 32 years old, graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father is a physician and surgeon who practices in Ridgewood and Ramsey, N.J.


Review/Music; Music Factory's Beat Goes Onstage
After selling three million records in a year, C&amp;C Music Factory expected more response that it got on Thursday night at Radio City Music Hall.
Freedom Williams, the group's rapper and front man, kept urging concertgoers to dance, sing and shout back, but most them preferred to be spectators, standing or sitting quietly and watching the group go through its routines.
The problem is that C&amp;C Music Factory is stranded between two worlds: participatory clubs and passive, video-era pop, or to be precise, between clubs and "Club MTV," cable's answer to "American Bandstand," where even the dancing is done for the viewer.
Robert Clivilles and David Cole, who are C and &amp;C, made their reputations as producers and remixers of dance records, honing music for maximum effect in clubs where people join motion to music for pure physical pleasure.
They have come up with definitive New York dance rhythms, merging the thumping drums, earthshaking bass and diva exortations of house music with a little Latin percussion and the blipping synthesizers of electropop, or hi-N.R.G. music.


Stamps
Statehood and Stamps
Estonia and Armenia announced the issue of new stamps last month, the first since they declared their intent to leave the Soviet Union.
With the possibility that 15 nations may be carved out of what was once was the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, stamp collectors can look forward to building new collections.
But that might not be any time soon: the establishment of postal administrations is proving complex and disorderly.


Poland's Politicians Gather Few Votes And Less Trust
Through the 45 years the Communists held power in Poland, people survived by divorcing themselves from what happened in public life.
What they read in the censored newspapers, what they watched on the state-controlled television, or what they heard from their national leaders all belonged to the sham reality of "Oni" -- "Them.".
Everything that really mattered, from personal life to political agitation, happened outside the established political system -- in the home, the Roman Catholic Church or the clandestine Solidarity movement.
The resulting cynicism toward politicians has proven more pervasive than the cathartic enthusiasm that swept away the Communist regimes of Eastern Europe in 1989.
The idea of "Oni" lives on, and many people have come to view their elected government with the disdain once reserved for the Communists.
Consider the results of Poland's parliamentary elections last week.
Just two years ago, this country turned out to chase the Communists from power in elections overwhelmingly won by candidates from Solidarity.
This time nearly 58 percent of the electorate stayed at home, and of the more than 100 parties that competed, none won more than 12 percent of the vote.
The prospect of forming a governing coalition proved so insurmountable that President Lech Walesa offered himself as prime minister.


Not All Giants Are So-So
Halfway through a post-Super Bowl season, the Giants have a 4-4 record.
They have been fairly good, fairly disappointing, fairly banged up and almost always puzzling.
True, Erik Howard (give him a grade of A) and Matt Bahr (A), their best players this season, have been injured.
The strained adductor muscle in Bahr's right thigh has not hurt the team because Raul Allegre is filling in competently.
Howard's back surgery has weakened an already wounded defensive line.


From California,x A Cleaner Car
A new sensation just hit the East Coast from California: cleaner cars.
Adopting California's clean vehicle program over the less-strict Federal standard was an option allowed the other 49 states in the Clean Air Act of 1990.
In the East, where states are geographically small, the added expense makes sense only if everyone in the neighborhood goes along, and last week, just about everyone did.
Every state from Virginia to Maine promised to sign on, with the exception of Rhode Island and Vermont, which advocates expect will follow soon, and Connecticut, whose direction is slightly less certain.
From Less to Zero
The states are agreeing to new gasoline-powered cars that meet tighter standards, and later, cars that emit even less because they run on an alternative fuel, or that emit nothing at all because they are battery-powered.
The California rules require that 2 percent of cars sold in 1998 be "zero-emitting vehicles," rising to 10 percent in 2003.
So far, the car makers say, they have nothing in that category that performs well enough to sell.


Bridge
Half a century ago, virtually every college in the United States had a regular bridge game in its student center, and sometimes several tables.
This was still true in the 50's, but student interest in the game then began to decline and such games are now relatively rare.
The disappearance of this natural breeding ground for new players is one reason that the average age of American players has risen to almost 60, unlike the trend in the rest of the world.
In answer to a questionnaire in 1989, only 6 of 170 students at the University of California at San Diego said they played bridge.
And the students who did not play bridge had a most unfavorable image of players: old, fat, dull smokers.
Student who play have a different perspective, but it is hard to counter the misconception.


Capitalist Boosterism Comes to St. Petersburg Through Its Unofficial Jaycee
Vladimir Maleka sometimes sounds as if he is single-handedly trying to turn this cradle of Russian Communism into a bulwark of capitalism.
The blond, 39-year-old entrepreneur owns a building company and just started a farm that raises 300 minks.
He also runs a company that fixes docks and boats and makes machines for underwater exploration.
His next project is to build greenhouses to grow vegetables in a nation desperately short of lettuce and other greens.


Doubts on Reports That Burma Nobelist Is Ill
Diplomats in Myanmar, formerly Burma, said today that they had no evidence to support reports that the Burmese opposition leader Daw Aung San Suu Kyi was critically ill.
Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi, 46 years old, who won the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize, has been on a hunger strike to protest the conditions of her house arrest by the military Government, the Nobel committee in Oslo said on Friday.


Imaginations Running Wild Through the City
DON'T think too fast at the start.
You can get a brain cramp, which is how marathon ruminations are lost.
Find a thoughtful question that's interesting enough to let you forget your headache yet shallow enough to let you float on the stream of consciousness over the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge into the Scandinavian section of Brooklyn.
DID THE TOMAHAWK CHOP BEAT THE BRAVES?
This is a fine question for the morning chill when the fading glow of the Feel-Good World Series can still keep you warm and the streets are lined with people who have relatives in Minneapolis.
The answer is: Yes.
But it wasn't the Atlanta fans who spoiled their team's chances, it was all those sillies who wrote me "Lighten up, Bob" letters contending that Indian slurs are harmless, and that by injecting "political correctness" into the Happy Hours, I was spoiling their fun.
I'm so glad.
Consider this my return letter.


Rose Polidoro Weds
Rose Polidoro, the vice president of promotion and publicity for Radio City Music Hall, and Kevin Taylor, a partner and the general manager of Rusty Staub's on 5th, a restaurant in New York, were married yesterday by the Rev.
Terence Gleeson at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Savior in New York.
Mrs.
Taylor, 35 years old, is a magna cum laude graduate of the University of New Haven.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Angelo Joseph Polidoro of Norwood, N.J.
Mr.
Taylor, 37, graduated from the University of Houston.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Taylor of Cheverly, Md.


The Money Song, From 'Nick and Nora'
The idea itself came to them at the movies.
Watching the facetious banter between the husband and wife, the bottomless martini pitcher, the yipping wire-haired terrier, James Pentecost and Charles Suisman felt inspiration.
This was May 1985, and the two young men were attending a double bill of old "Thin Man" movies at the worn Theater 80 St.
Marks in the East Village.
For months, they had been searching for an idea for a Broadway musical, and nothing had seemed quite right.
But what quirky characters Dashiell Hammett had created -- Nick and Nora Charles, a whimsical retired private detective and his peppery socialite wife, who solved cases with the help of remarkable quantities of booze and their fidgety dog, Asta.
Several years earlier, Mr.
Pentecost had given fleeting thought to a play based on the "Thin Man," but not until midway through the second film that evening did the two friends know that they had found what they were looking for.
Soon afterward, to clarify their thoughts, they fashioned an MTV-like video with clips from the "Thin Man" set to Blossom Dearie's recording of "You Fascinate Me So." Looking at it, they dreamed the sweet dream of a Broadway hit.


The Money Song, From 'Nick and Nora'
The idea itself came to them at the movies.
Watching the facetious banter between the husband and wife, the bottomless martini pitcher, the yipping wire-haired terrier, James Pentecost and Charles Suisman felt inspiration.
This was May 1985, and the two young men were attending a double bill of old "Thin Man" movies at the worn Theater 80 St.
Marks in the East Village.
For months, they had been searching for an idea for a Broadway musical, and nothing had seemed quite right.
But what quirky characters Dashiell Hammett had created -- Nick and Nora Charles, a whimsical retired private detective and his peppery socialite wife, who solved cases with the help of remarkable quantities of booze and their fidgety dog, Asta.
Several years earlier, Mr.
Pentecost had given fleeting thought to a play based on the "Thin Man," but not until midway through the second film that evening did the two friends know that they had found what they were looking for.
Soon afterward, to clarify their thoughts, they fashioned an MTV-like video with clips from the "Thin Man" set to Blossom Dearie's recording of "You Fascinate Me So." Looking at it, they dreamed the sweet dream of a Broadway hit.


Sports of The Times; Is Don King's Asbestos Tuxedo Turning Toxic at Last?
HOW much longer can Congress and the Justice Department ignore Don King and boxing?
In this week's Sports Illustrated magazine, Joseph Spinelli, a former Federal Buruau of Investigation agent who is now the New York State Inspector General, writes of F.B.I. reports linking King to the organized-crime figures John Gotti and Matthew (Matty the Horse) Ianniello; of the boxing promoter's ties to the Cleveland mob, which began when he was a numbers baron there, and of his manipulation of money owed Larry Holmes, the world heavyweight champion, and his trainer, Richie Giachetti.


An Unpredictable Political Season Comes to a Close
WESTCHESTER voters will finally have their say Tuesday in local and county elections that include some of the most fiercely fought and politically unpredictable contests in recent years.
They will be electing mayors, supervisors, county legislators, city and town council members and judges, as well as deciding in two cities whether to change the very structure of government.
In Yonkers, a state assemblyman, a local councilman and a former mayor are vying for the mayor's office, newly transformed from a part-time ceremonial post to the city's full-time chief executive.
In Greenburgh, one of the county's most familiar political figures, Anthony F. Veteran, will be replaced after 18 years as Supervisor.


Miss Thumann, Lawyer, Is Wed
Seeley Ann Thumann, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry C. Thumann of Los Angeles, was married yesterday to Preston William Brooks, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Brooks of New Haven.
The Rev.
James H. Morrison officiated at the Beverly Hills Presbyterian Church in Beverly Hills, Calif.
Mrs.
Brooks, 27 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is an associate with the law firm of Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher in Los Angeles.
Her father is a partner in the Los Angeles law firm of O'Melveny &amp; Myers.


Dear Santa


Feeling The Power
To the Editor  Yet again, as Studs Terkel is well aware, the question is asked: Can a white man
really
understand the blues?
Well, I grew up comfortably in the suburbs, and I'm now a physician; together with the color of my skin, that makes me pretty damned white.
But, I also play the bass guitar, and I love to play the blues.
Like any great art form, this music can transcend the boundaries of race, geography and the specifics of personal circumstance.


No Headline
International 3-23
Syria continued to balk at new talks with Israel on Sunday, but the joint Jordanian and Palestinian delegation went ahead with plans to join Egypt and Saudi Arabia in a face-to-face meeting with the Israelis.
Page 1


Family Triptych  Brigitte Rouan, Marianne Basler and Nicole Garcia portray sisters in "Overseas." Written and directed by Miss Rouan, the drama is set in French Colonial Africa during the 1950's. It opens Friday. (Aries Film Release)


Hotel Sales Call
To the Editor: I could not escape the annoying telephone sales practice known as telemarketing, even on an island vacation.
My wife and I went to Merv Griffin's Paradise Island Resort and Casino for our 15th anniversary, and at 8:30 A.M. we were awakened by a sales representative for a nearby Marriott time-share property.
He addressed my wife by name, so initially she thought someone was calling about trouble back home.
After a late night in the hotel's restaurant and casino, the call ruined the rest of our anniversary day.


New Yorkers, etc.
Some people can actually come right out and say, "I'm going to hang up now," not as a threat but as a fact, because then they do exactly that.
But it's not easy, even for tough, no-nonsense types.
It's a statement made and action taken only as a last resort when every other hint, subtle and otherwise, has failed.
Almost everyone knows at least a few telephone callers who simply refuse to end a conversation, or at least refuse to end it when requested to do so.
It's not so much nonstop talking, which, unfortunately, is not uncommon, but nonstop talking that literally cannot be braked.


From Parenting, a Presidency
NINETEEN-SEVENTY.
I come home, and there in the mailbox is the package I've been waiting for.
I pick it up, open the door and am rushed by four little boys, ages 3 through 8.
"Look, boys," I say brightly, "Mommy's first book."


Corrections
A background note last Sunday with a map of the Golan Heights summarized the region's history incorrectly.
A large part of the Golan was included in the original League of Nations Mandate granted to Britain at the San Remo Conference of 1920, but in 1923 Britain ceded control to France, an act that detached the area from the Palestine Mandate and transferred it to the French mandate in Syria.


Howard Pollack to Wed Grace Fallon
Mr. and Mrs.
John N. Fallon of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Grace Catherine Fallon and Howard Allen Pollack, a son of Roy H. Pollack of New York and Princeton, N.J., and the late Margaret J. Pollack.
Miss Fallon, 31 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia.
She is a vice president and broadcast manager at Wunderman Worldwide, a direct-market advertising agency in New York.
Her father retired as a vice president for external affairs at New York Telephone and is a consultant to Nynex.


Doesn't Feel It Or Look It, But Yes, It's Knit
There is more to knitwear than sweaters.
Designers today are making classic and not-so-classic dresses and suits from knits that the eye can easily mistake for woven fabrics.
There are crunchy boucles and ribbed textures like ottoman as well as that favorite of the 1960's and 70's, flat double-knits.
Knits have always had their fans among frequent travelers and on-the-go women who appreciate their softness and wrinkle-resistance.
There are times, though, when a sweater looks too casual and a cut-and-sewn knit jacket or a dress looks more businesslike or more dressed-up.


Junius Jay Bleiman, Ex-Mayor, 68
Junius Jay Bleiman, a former Mayor of Princeton Township, N.J., and an administrator at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University, died on Thursday.
He was 68 years old and lived in Princeton Township.
Mr.
Bleiman (pronounced BLY-man) died of cancer, said a university spokesman, Justin Harmon.


Audrey Levine Plans to Marry
Arnold and Barbara Levine of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Audrey Hope Levine to Andrew John Rossman, a son of Louis and Terry Rossman of Lynbrook, L.I.
An August wedding is planned.
The couple, both 24 years old, are third-year law students at Harvard University.
Miss Levine graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn in New York.
Her mother is a partner in the New York law firm of Warshaw Burstein Cohen Schlesinger &amp; Kuh.


LAW ON THE FEMINIST FRONTIER
Fred Strebeigh's article "Defining Law on the Feminist Frontier" (Oct. 6) mentions that Prof.
Catharine A. MacKinnon is a controversial figure, but it only hints at the storm the Mac Kinnon-Dworkin pornography ordinance has precipitated among feminists.
Many of us felt that the ordinance confused a legitimate need to attack coercion with a general assumption that sex itself is subordinating to women.
Many believed that the language of the ordinance proposed a stifling morality while pretending to protect women from sexual abuse by men.
A similar confusion can occur in the current discussions of sexual harassment.
The issue is not that "dirty" words besmirch women, but that men sometimes use these words to keep control of public space, trying to make less powerful women feel like strangers there.
Unfortunately, MacKinnon's work has muddied the distinction between the old ideal of female sexual purity and the newer one of women's autonomy and sexual self-determination.


Streetscapes: The Old Jamaica Savings Bank; Beaux-Arts Building in Limbo
WHILE the city's Landmarks Preservation Commission is attempting to redesignate a Queens bank building -- over the owner's vociferous objections -- other agencies have been moving to demolish it with no protest from the owner.
It is unlikely that the 1898 Jamaica Savings Bank building at 161-02 Jamaica Avenue in Jamaica will be razed, at least without the landmarks agency's consent.
But whether what the commission describes as "the finest Beaux-Arts building in Queens" will ever be anything more than an empty shell seems beyond the power of any agency.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I recently moved into a nine-year-old house that has windows with double-pane glass.
There are metal or plastic strips between the two panes of glass that divide the large panes into smaller ones, but the strips seem to be falling apart and look terrible.
Is there anything that can be done to fix or replace these strips without having to replace the windows?
A.
Chances are that the two glass panes can be taken apart and the strips replaced, but that depends on how the glass was installed by the manufacturer when the windows were constructed.
Unfortunately, even if it can be done, it is not usually a job for a do-it-yourselfer.
It calls for a professional.


West Virginia Rolls Past a Flat Rutgers
Darren Studstill threw for 2 touchdowns, one on a 53-yard pass play to all-American sprinter James Jett, as West Virginia (6-3) beat Rutgers, 28-3, today to keep its bowl hopes alive.
"I felt that we didn't play with a lot of intensity," said Doug Graber, coach of Rutgers (5-4).
"You could kind of see it coming during the week in practice." Boston College 38, Pitt 12
NEWTON, Mass. (AP) -- Sophomore Glenn Foley threw 4 touchdown passes and junior Darnell Campbell rushed for 227 yards, both career highs for the Boston College players.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Oct. 19 MANHATTAN Clinton 835,000
320 Eleventh Avenue (32d St.)  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 2,700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, fireplace, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,695, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Sotheby's International Realty)  Fort Washington 137,500
360 Cabrini Boulevard  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; part-time doorman, entry foyer, dinette, sunken living room, Hudson River view; maintenance $750, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Simone Song Properties)  Stuyvesant Square Area 251,000
145 East 15th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, entry gallery, dining el, eat-in kitchen; maintenance $805, 52% tax-deductible (Broker: Silverman Group) Upper East Side 655,000
165 East 79th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 2 maid's rooms, dining room; maintenance $1,532, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 530,000
262 Central Park West (86th St.)  (The White House)  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, north and west exposure; maintenance $1,335, 47% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group-Carnegie Hill Properties)  BRONX  Allerton Avenue 235,000
2531 Cruger Avenue  2-family semi-attached brick house; dining room, 1 1/2 baths, eat-in kitchen in lower duplex unit; dining area, 1 bath in third floor unit; 3 bedrooms in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Tryax Realty)  Riverdale 89,000
3530 Henry Hudson Parkway  (Parkway House)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, terrace; maintenance $503, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Stephen Eldridge Realty)  BROOKLYN  Midwood 160,500
3321 Avenue K  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 20- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $1,080 (Broker: Dwork &amp; Korn)  Park Slope 140,000
759 President Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a former hospital building; elevator, renovated kitchen and bath, terrace, common roof deck; maintenance $525, 57% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  QUEENS  Bayside 174,000
209-45 26th Avenue  (Bayside Mews)  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. postwar condo; dining room, study, terrace, 1-car garage; common charge $264, taxes $1,326 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Corona 220,000
37-22 97th Street  2-family semi-attached brick and frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $963 (Broker: Century 21/Delta Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Annadale 103,000
103 Detroit Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family detached ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 55- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $815 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)  Sunset Hill 197,000
16 Starr Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 3/4-bath, single-family detached hi-ranch; dining area, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage, 44- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $2.150 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)  Ward Hill 185,000
52 Nixon Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family detached Colonial; dining room, breakfast nook, finished basement, 40- by 88-ft. lot; taxes $1,250 (Broker: Rand Properties)


CAMPUS LIFE: Alabama-Huntsville; 140 Years Overdue, Jefferson's Book Is Checked Back In
It was roughly 140 years overdue, but a book once owned by Thomas Jefferson was nevertheless happily received by the Library of Congress last week.
The University of Alabama in Huntsville, which returned the book after finding it in a donated personal collection, was charged no fine, and the library promised that if any of Alabama's books ever turn up in the Library of Congress's book deposit, they will be returned promptly.
The Jefferson book, which was turned over to the Library of Congress on Tuesday, is "Pamphlets, American," a compilation of 14 political pamphlets from 1793 and 1794 that Jefferson did not write but had bound together, as was his practice with political documents.
It was discovered last year by the university's head of special collections, Jean Perreault, in a collection donated by a Huntsville resident, Ruth Weber.


Making a Difference; DiMaggio's New Team
Paul Goldin may be an old New York Giants fan -- "It killed me when they moved," he said recently -- but he didn't let sentiment stand in his way 10 days ago when he signed Joe DiMaggio to an exclusive autograph agreement with Score Board Inc., Mr.
Goldin's sports and entertainment paraphernalia company.
The 77-year-old former Yankee joins a roster at Score Board that already includes such legends as Willie Mays, Mickey Mantle, Reggie Jackson, Joe Montana and Wayne Gretzky.
For $5 to $25 an item, the athletes sign their names to photographs, baseballs, bats or footballs, which Score Board then sells through catalogues, hobby stores, magazine ads, department stores and television shopping networks.


Special Glues Can Help Solve Tricky Problems
CHOOSING the correct glue can be confusing.
Multipurpose glues have been replaced by specialized types that often work better, but only if knowlegeably selected and used.
To be well stocked, one should keep these glues on hand: aliphatic resin, cyanoacrylate, epoxy and polyvinyl acetate.
Aliphatic resin glue is also called yellow woodworking glue.
It is preferred by carpenters and cabinetmakers for gluing wood, and also can be used to join other porous surfaces like leather, felt and cork.
An advantage for some projects is that pieces being glued can be repositioned for up to 15 minutes before the glue begins to harden.


Since He Went Away
DEAD ELVIS
A Chronicle of a Cultural Obsession.
By Greil Marcus.
Illustrated. 233 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $25.


World Markets; A British Play Called ECC Group
Andrew H. Teare, the group chief executive of Britain's ECC Group, is a solid kind of gentleman, a burly veteran of the building materials industry.
Since taking over in 1990 at the flabby ECC, formerly English China Clays, he has put the company through a rigorous slimming that caught the eye of the investing community.
The stock of ECC, the world's largest producer of kaolin, the white clay used to coat and brighten paper, has risen 38 percent since the beginning of the year.
Mr.
Teare won many hearts after he arrived from the Rugby Group with his move to keep ECC's dividend steady, using both savings from the restructuring and a reduction in capital spending.
He also promised, despite a fall in demand, not to cut prices.
In paper coatings and fillers, ECC seems to have the product quality and market dominance to hold or push up prices.


ROBERT B. MITCHELL; Business, Law and Disabled Workers
IN 1992 the Americans With Disabilities Act will mandate a new set of hiring rules for most employers.
For the first time, the law says employers can be forced to prove they did not discriminate against handicapped people in hiring.
Robert B. Mitchell, who came to the Bridgeport law firm of Durant, Sabanosh, Nichols &amp; Houston four years ago, said the coming year would be an excellent growth period for the firm, which advises clients how to cope with aspects of the act.


Other Aspects Of Bank Charges
I read with interest the Oct. 6 article "Service Charges by Banks Scrutinized," and I am writing about two other areas of bank charges and about legislation being considered in Trenton.
First, when a bank lends money, the borrower pays interest.
When, however, a borrower has the bank pay his real-estate taxes, the borrower receives no interest on the funds held in escrow, allowing the bank the free use of this money.


Finland to Get 10 Sleep Inns
Choice Hotels International has signed an agreement with a Finnish hotel construction company to build 10 Sleep Inn economy hotels in Finland during the next six years.
The company says the hotels will make up for the lack of an established chain of budget lodgings in Finland.
Construction of the first hotel, at Oulu, begins next spring.
Two are planned for Helsinki, and among the other sites are Lanti, Tampere and Vaasa.
Choice, which started Sleep Inns in 1988, says its Finnish hotels will conform to its properties in the United States, Canada and Nottingham, England (the only one outside North America).
Each guest room is designed to accommodate a 73-inch desk, king-size bed, shower, telephones equipped to connect personal computers via modem and a security system allowing personal credit cards to be used for room entry.


Diverting Attention From the Real Problem
To the Editor:
I enjoyed "The Harsh Lessons of Professor Hill" (Forum, Oct. 13).
But until the position of human resources manager is recognized and supported by the corporation's executive staff, all of Prof.
Anita F. Hill's efforts will have been in vain.


Stirring up the Past
LOGICALLY, THERE shouldn't be any such thing as a classic cocktail.
Mixed drinks tend to be invented on a whim, named as an afterthought, consumed on the spot and forgotten in an instant.
Like other products of American popular culture -- from movies and cartoons to television commercials and funny T-shirts -- most cocktails earn their oblivion.
Who will mourn the Fluffy Ruffles, a Prohibition favorite?
Or the Locomotive, a rebarbative mixture of claret, curacao, honey and egg yolk that oozed its way into cocktail glasses just before the turn of the century?
But the democratic process has dealt some injustices along the way.
Genuinely distinguished drinks have suffered the same fate as their emetic colleagues, tossed down the drain of history along with the Ants in the Pants, the Maiden's Blush and the Pacemaker.
These forgotten classics deserve to be rescued, not for antiquarian reasons but because they are fine drinks.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 20 about a proposed Planned Parenthood clinic in Fairfield misstated the involvement of a physician, Dr.
Joel Allen.
His proposal to the town to operate the clinic with Planned Parenthood has not been withdrawn.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Philadelphia; Headquarters From a Trade
IN a transaction aimed at avoiding real-estate transfer or capital gains taxes, the Covenant Life Insurance Company has exchanged five of its Rittenhouse Square buildings for an 85,000-square-foot headquarters building now being built in a suburban office park.
The trade gives the park's owner, Quarry Office Park Associates, a new tenant for its Westlakes Office Park in Berwyn, Chester County, about 40 minutes west of downtown.
It also gives Quarry, an affiliate of Trammell Crow Company, one-third of a prime commercial block at the corner of 18th and Walnut Streets in Philadelphia's business district.
John K. Binswanger of Philadelphia, who brokered the transaction for Covenant, estimated the total value at $27 million.


Ugandan Says Muslim Group Plotted to Assassinate Him
Uganda's President, Yoweri Museveni, says he has uncovered a plot by a radical Muslim group to assassinate him, a Government-owned newspaper reported today.
The paper, New Vision, said Mr.
Museveni made the allegation in an address to a Muslim gathering in Kampala on Friday.
He did not name the group but said it had objected to his being invited into a local mosque because he is non-Muslim.
Muslims who spoke on condition of anonymity said the reported threat was linked to internal conflicts in the Ugandan Muslim community.


Prime Mating
Not all 500-pound gorillas get to sleep wherever they choose.
Take Timmy, a quarter-ton lowland silverback and 25-year resident of the Cleveland Metropark Zoo.
Experts noted that Timmy's potential as a fertile male was going to waste while he was paired with his longtime companion, an infertile female named Kate, and said it would be better to move him to the Bronx Zoo, with its four fertile females, superior gorilla quarters and a history of successful gorilla breeding.
The two zoos agreed and arrangements were made for Kate to get a new companion, an infertile male from Topeka, Kan.
But last week, as Timmy was about to head for his promising new domestic situation, animal rights groups went to court in an attempt to block the move.
They argued that the transfer might physically or mentally traumatize Timmy and that neither Timmy's nor Kate's feelings in the matter had been considered.
A Federal court dismissed the complaints and Timmy was trucked off safely to New York.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 13 about second-run film houses misstated the location of three.
The Village, the Four Hundred and the Logan are all in Chicago, not in its suburbs.


Art May Be Full of Mystery, But It Better Not Be a Crime
When burglars broke into a mansion in Newport, R.I., last May and stole more than $100,000 worth of art and jewelry, Inspector Kevin Sullivan of the local police department made a quick call to (212) 374-3955 and asked for Joe Keenan.
And a few weeks earlier in Chicago, when a 16th-century painting valued at $250,000 was offered for sale under suspicious circumstances, Sgt.
Ronald Smith of the Illinois State Police picked up the phone, dialed the same number and asked for Mr.
Keenan.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
HEMPSTEAD 21, BALDWIN 0 -- All-county runner Ron Brockington scored all of the Tigers' touchdowns and rushed for 124 yards to help propel Hempstead (6-0) past Baldwin (5-1).
Baldwin's offense never did get on track as it turned the ball over six times -- four fumbles and two interceptions.
Hempstead set the tone on its opening series when it marched 71 yards on 9 plays.
Brockington capped the drive with a 1-yard run.
The Tigers put the game away early in the fourth quarter when they scored twice in two and a half minutes.
Brockington scampered 68 yards on the last play of the third quarter for six points and scored again in the fourth after Mark Williams recovered a Balwin fumble on its next possession.
Offensive Standouts
JERMAINE HARRIS scored five touchdowns and rushed for a county-record 187 yards as Nyack crushed Port Chester, 54-0.. . .
EMILE FANN scampered for 231 yards and three second-half touchdowns as Roslyn rolled over Great Neck North, 19-0. . . .
CHRIS GOLINI threw two touchdown passes and ran for two more to lead Sachem over Ward Melville, 35-21. . . .PATRICK WALLACE broke out of his individual slump and rushed for 185 yards and three touchdowns as West Islip crushed Newfield, 31-0.
The Lions held Newfield to 61 yards of total offense. . . .
GREG BARNETT AND JASON HOWARD each scored two touchdowns to help Harvey trounce Rye Country Day, 27-6.
Despite posting a 7-1 record, Harvey still did not qualify for a playoff spot. . . .
KEITH FERRY had two touchdown strikes and was 5 of 8 for 180 yards as East Islip cruised past Huntington, 27-0. . . .
CHRIS WALKER scored 3 times and rushed for 128 yards as Lynbrook punished Division, 35-6. . . .
LOU LEGETTE rushed for two scores and Brian Ihm connected with Mike Townscend with a 75-yard touchdown pass to lead Farmingdale past Valley Stream Central, 38-6. . . .PHIL SIMEON AND TIM O'HAGAN accounted for all of East Rockaway's touchdowns as the Rocks broke their eight-game losing streak and defeated Valley Stream South, 34-0. . . .
ANTHONY RUOCCO ran 21 times for 126 yards to power Hotchkiss past Kent, 19-7.
The victory broke a six-year losing streak against Kent. . . .
Defensive Standouts
TIM MORAN of Carle Place made 18 tackles and intercepted two passes as the Frogs stopped North Shore, 21-7.
Jerrod Bowen led the way offensively with two touchdown receptions. . . .
BRIAN LEONE recorded 11 tackles and intercepted two passes to help Lawrence shutout Sewanhaka, 21-0.
Leone also contributed on offense with 4 catches for 110 yards. . . .
Fantastic Finishes
GREAT NECK SOUTH scored 23 fourth-quarter points to defeat Bellmore, 23-3. . . .
BELLPORT rallied with two touchdowns in the last six minutes to stun Bayshore, 19-13. . . .
Record-Setters
GARDEN CITY broke its school mark of 16 consecutive victories by routing Carey, 41-0.
It was the Trojans' fifth consecutive shutout. . . .
Record-Breakers
ROXBURY snapped Randolph's state record 54-game winning streak Friday night when it held the Rams in check, 6-6.
Randolph did extend its unbeaten skein to 55, which is also a state record. . . .


The Flowering of Innovation
SINCE 1983, when the report "A Nation at Risk" documented the mediocre state of public education, a growing number of individuals and institutions have emerged as innovators in hot pursuit of a sometimes elusive goal -- better-quality schools.
Whether it be reducing the spiraling dropout rates, improving science education or incorporating technology in the classroom, some of these innovators have become standard-bearers in the field, their names widely known and their views and approaches adopted in many schools.
Others have worked with little recognition and no accolades.
But their efforts, like those of the standard-bearers, have left no less of a mark.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I recently moved into a nine-year-old house that has windows with double-pane glass.
There are metal or plastic strips between the two panes of glass that divide the large panes into smaller ones, but the strips seem to be falling apart and look terrible.
Is there anything that can be done to fix or replace these strips without having to replace the windows?
A.
Chances are that the two glass panes can be taken apart and the strips replaced, but that depends on how the glass was installed by the manufacturer when the windows were constructed.
Unfortunately, even if it can be done, it is not usually a job for a do-it-yourselfer.
It calls for a professional.


In the Recession, Sweet Are the Uses of Poverty
Times may be tough, but there's a place where being short of cash is actually an advantage: on the screen.
Poverty as a positive cinematic character trait is enjoying a new surge of popularity, one that harks back to the Depression, when the madcap rich yearned to be free of their constraints and the poor were possessed of an automatic nobility.
Today's situation may be less extreme, but there's no question that the marbled hallways of glossy 1980's films have given way to an awful lot of soiled linoleum.
For a contemporary movie character looking to inspire instant trust, economic hardship is an automatic help.
This pendulum swing goes well beyond blue-collar chic and even into no-collar chic.
Just as the expensive physical trappings of the pre-crisis existence of Jeff Bridges in "The Fisher King" are meant to make him seem instantly odious, the grimy simplicity of his old-overcoat phase is intended to suggest a new honesty.
The even worse-dressed Robin Williams is way ahead of him where virtue is concerned, and he has the wardrobe to prove it.
In this film's scheme of things, it takes old clothes to make a new man.


Keeping Watch Over 135 Million Long-Distance Calls a Day
AT 4:40 P.M. on Sept. 17, the wall of video monitors at A.T. &amp; T.'s international control center here painted an electronic portrait of a long-distance network humming along in almost perfect tune.
Seconds later, those same screens virtually screamed for attention as converging lines of colored light stabbed into Manhattan, an unmistakable sign that long-distance telephone service to the busiest city in the world was being strangled.
The implications of what had happened became quickly apparent.
Within minutes, scores of aircraft inbound to the area were being redirected to runways far from their intended destinations while air traffic controllers at Kennedy International, Newark International and La Guardia Airports, unable to exchange critical information, waited anxiously in unprecedented isolation.


Review/Dance; Ballet Hispanico Evokes The Tango's Darker Side
The stage of the Joyce Theater became a smoke-filled room on Thursday night when Ballet Hispanico presented its first performance this season of Graciela Daniele's "Cada Noche . . . Tango." The characters smoked compulsively in this evocation of the Argentine brothels in which the tango's plaintive and seductive sounds were heard early in this century.
The action may have taken place in a haze of cigarette smoke, but the choreography was vivid and the dancers' portrayals were sharp.
Merceditas Manago played a tough-minded Madam, and Kathryn Ross, Alessandra Corona, Miriam Kescherman and Lynne Morrissey were the women she employed.
Their visitors included Eduardo Vilaro, Brian Chung and Gary-David Shaw as men whose slouching gaits and sour dispositions suggested that they had had more than a few drinks too many; Jose Costas and Pedro Ruiz as two sullen brothers, and Nancy Turano as a mysterious woman who may have been slumming.


Going After Bonilla With 2 Full Pockets
When Whitey Herzog was director of the Mets' minor league system, he had a center fielder in Visalia named Dennis Gilbert.
Today, Dennis Gilbert is Bobby Bonilla's agent, and Herzog is the California Angels' general manager.
Could the Visalia connection give Herzog an edge in the upcoming Bonilla chase?
"No," Herzog said, "the only edge you get is the dollar bill."


2 Cases Linking Pretoria to Black Strife Drag On
The wheels of justice grind slowly in the brick Supreme Court building of this provincial capital of Natal, where two court cases are examining the most compelling evidence so far of reported police involvement in the violence terrorizing South Africa's black communities.
In one wood-paneled courtroom, seven policemen are standing trial for the massacre on Dec. 3, 1988, of 11 villagers, including two young children, in Trust Feed, a rural black settlement 20 miles northeast of Pietermaritzburg.
The defendants are two white police captains, a white sergeant and four black special, or auxiliary, policemen accused of the actual killings.


The Imaginary Innkeeper
SOMEWHERE between the village of Half Moon Fort and a place called Husband's Gap we got lost -- an easy accomplishment, as anyone who has ever driven much on Barbados will appreciate.
But never mind.
If we hadn't confused north with east, if we hadn't taken five wrong turns, we never would have come upon the old plantation house that was to spark our imaginations and fuel our fantasies for the remainder of our stay.
Two stone gateposts marked the entrance of a graceful drive shaded by ancient mahogany trees, those slender, delicate giants prized by island shipbuilders and cabinetmakers the world over.
Barbados is scattered about with entranceways such as this; not all of them, however, display a sign saying "For Sale by Owner" and give a Connecticut area code.
Let's go in, we said.
It's for sale, isn't it?
Maybe we'll buy it.
Oh,
sure.
Come on, let's pretend.


A 1992 Wedding for Anne Mengden
Joseph M. Mengden of Grosse Pointe, Mich., has announced the engagement of his daughter Anne Elise Mengden to Salvatore Michael Giliberto, a son of Salvatore Giliberto of West Hartford, Conn.
The wedding is to be next spring.
Miss Mengden, 38 years old, is a daughter also of the late Suzanne Mengden.
She is a senior vice president at Cohen &amp; Steers, a New York investment advisory concern.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received an M.B.A. degree from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a consultant to the First of Michigan Corporation, a Detroit securities concern.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the Department of Veterans Affairs' plan to admit nonveterans to some veterans' hospitals included an erroneous location supplied by a Government document for one hospital.
It is in Salem, Va., not Salem, Ore.


Nina Herman to Wed
Joy Herman of Tenafly, N.J., has announced March wedding plans for her daughter Nina Herman and Howard Scott Seiden, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard Seiden of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Miss Herman, 27 years old, is the manager of the Bergen County, N.J., recycling program.
She graduated from the University of Massachusetts and received a master's degree in public administration from George Washington University.
Mr.
Seiden, 28, is a communications administrator at the Bergen County Office of Emergency Management in Hackensack.


By Definition, an Automobile Is . . .
WE were having our usual disconnected conversation the other night.
About birds and bushes, about people we knew and computers.
And, of course, about cars.
We talked technology, and I remembered a friend who is generally a smart fellow but who knows
NOTHING.
This is a guy with a doctorate in psychology.
And, listening to him some time back, he allowed as how his car was driven by only one wheel.
Huh?
Well, sure, he said.
Has to be.
Because the outside wheel goes faster in a turn.


Ms. Rosenberg Has a Wedding
Linda Carol Rosenberg, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David Rosenberg of Vineland, N.J., was married there last evening to Barry Carl Ableman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester Ableman of New London, Conn.
Rabbi Murray Kohn performed the ceremony at Congregation Beth Israel.
Ms.
Rosenberg, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, is a research analyst at Mathematica Policy Research Inc. in Princeton, N.J.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's in public policy from Princeton University.
Her father is a pediatrician in Vineland.


Screen Robots Tell a Tale of Mankind
Is it progress when a Terminator wants to weep?
"Terminator 2," the summer blockbuster to be released on videocasette next month, reaches its emotional climax when Arnold Schwarzenegger, playing a robot visitor from the future, says to the humans whose lives and species he has just saved, "I know now why you cry, but it's something I can never do."
The poor contraption has everything but tear ducts.
Presumably his eyes don't need them for lubrication the way people's do.
But what he's really saying is that he doesn't have a heart.
A character that was a force of cold, relentless technology in the original, 1984 "Terminator" has by the end of the sequel been transformed into a Tin Woodman on steroids.


The Single Lady Vanishes
Single working women haven't had an easy time of it on television lately.
In her new book "Backlash: The Undeclared War Against American Women," Susan Faludi points to prime time as one of the forces that has undermined feminism.
With the exception of "Murphy Brown," the 80's prime-time lineup offered almost no shows centered on a single woman in the working world, much less one deriving pleasure or pride from her vocation.
The occasional series that were about single women actively involved in their careers, like the lawyer of "Sara," were typically yanked after less than a season.
The networks only seemed willing to support single-women shows when the heroines were confined to the home in nonthreatening roles in a strictly all-female world -- like the elderly widows in "The Golden Girls" or the home-based interior decorators of "Designing Women."


Ms. Swift Wed To A. T. Farley
Nina Elizabeth Swift and Alexander Thomson Farley were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of St.
John's of Lattingtown in Locust Valley, L.I., by the Rev.
Charles G. Newbery.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hampden M. Swift of Lake Forest, Ill.
The bridegroom is a son of Edward I. Farley of Locust Valley and the late Jane T. Farley.
The bride, 36 years old, is the president of the Oxbridge Group, an executive search concern in New York.
She graduated from Lake Forest College.
Her father is the president of the John S. Swift Company, a printing concern in Chicago.
Her mother owns and operates Margaret J. Swift Interiors in Chicago.


Foreign Affairs; Yet Another Summit
When Washington spends billions on something that seems to make little sense, the explanation is almost always the same -- politics, bureaucratic politics, pig-headed shortsightedness and more politics.
Such is the case with the vast, growing and largely ineffectual $2.7 billion program to reduce the flow of illegal drugs into the United States.


Ms. Bronson Wed To J. S. Mezoff
Lisa Bronson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Bronson of New York, was married last evening to James Seth Mezoff, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Mezoff of Woodbridge, Conn.
Rabbi Arthur D. Rulnick officiated at the White Hart Inn in Salisbury, Conn.
Mrs.
Mezoff, 26 years old, is the project director at Becker Hockfield Design Associates, a graphic design company in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.
Her father is an independent television producer and arts management consultant.
Her mother, Doris Bronson, is a special education teacher at P.S. 226 in New York


Corrections
An article on Oct. 20 about county legislative candidates referred incorrectly to a former Mayor of White Plains, Carl J. Delfino.
He is the brother of County Legislator Joseph L. Delfino, not the father.


Unpopular New Taxes Ignite a Rebirth of Populist Politics
Richard Zajicek, a silver-haired local building contractor who never considered running for public office until this year, found his voice at age 59 in denouncing Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and Connecticut's new state income tax.
Now he's running for the Town Council in Tuesday's elections on a quixotic third-party campaign to demolish local government and restore the old town-meeting form of participatory democracy that withered and died here in the 1950's.
Across Connecticut and New Jersey, echoes of Mr.
Zajicek's message and method -- outrage about taxes, combined with a sort of misty-eyed paean to better or simpler times -- are being repeated in dozens of local and legislative races as politicians and those who hate politicians try equally to tap the mood of a dispirited electorate.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
A Blanket of Ivy Q.
We have a number of tall trees on our property.
The ivy I planted around them has grown too dense.
Can I now get rid of it with a lawn mower, or what else should I use? -- Berit Nytzen, Saddle River, N.J.


Teachers to the Front
FOR DECADES teachers have been trained to stand alone at the front of a classroom and follow a highly structured curriculum dictated by a central office.
That job description is rapidly becoming obsolete, but in the view of many experts the institutions that train teachers have been slow to adapt.
Many teachers are now required to work in teams, to develop their own courses and to serve on community school councils as an increasing number of districts around the nation attempt to shift power and responsibility to the educators closest to the students and away from centralized bureaucracies.


A Stanford-Seeking Computer Virus Is Spotted
To the Editor:
I write to warn you that there is a computer virus loose at The New York Times; I know you will want to learn how it works.


Volunteers Take Meals To Shut-Ins With AIDS
ON Joan McGovern's birthday last April, she received a card from a friend in California.
Enclosed was a check for $10,000, sent because, Mrs.
McGovern said, "He knew."
The friend knew that this birthday was no celebration, that one of Mrs.
McGovern's 13 children, her son Tommy, had recently died of AIDS at the age of 28.
That check inspired Mrs.
McGovern of White Plains to start "The Lord's Pantry," the only service in the region that delivers meals to homebound people with AIDS.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 3, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $6.99.) The experiences of a couple on a trek across Europe during the ice age.
2
8
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
3
10
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
4
1
THE RIFT, by Peter David. (Pocket, $4.99.) A precarious meeting of the Federation with aliens from light-years away; a "Star Trek" story.
5
15
THE MUMMY, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Ramses the Great and Cleopatra return to life in Edwardian England.
6
2
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
7 *
3
RENDEZVOUS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $4.99.) A freethinking British woman engaged to an earl has some second thoughts.
8
6
BUFFALO GIRLS, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $5.99.) Calamity Jane and her friends join Buffalo Bill's show in London.
9 *
4
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Avon, $5.99.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.
10
1
THE EAGLE HAS FLOWN, by Jack Higgins. (Pocket, $5.99.) A German attempt to rescue a paratrooper who tried to assassinate Churchill.
11
5
QUESTION QUEST, by Piers Anthony. (Avon, $4.99.) A woman is sent to hell to rescue a missing sorcerer; part of the "Xanth" fantasy series.
12
4
SEASON OF THE SUN, by Catherine Coulter. (Onyx, $5.99.) A historical romance about an Irish belle and a Viking.
13
2
HAWAII HERITAGE, by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam, $4.99.) The Holt family's activities in Florida, in New York and in Hawaii after the downfall of Queen Liliuokalani.
14
2
FOLLOW THE WIND, by Janelle Taylor. (Zebra, $5.95.) A young woman attempts to save her family's Texas ranch from predators.
15 *
1
HOCUS POCUS, by Kurt Vonnegut. (Berkley, $5.99.) Life in the near future, as noted by a college professor and prison administrator.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
19
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
2
24
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
3
16
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
4
417
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
5
102
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
6
6
GET TO THE HEART, by Barbara Mandrell with George Vecsey. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of the country-music singer.
7
25
WHEN RABBIT HOWLS, by the Troops for Truddi Chase. (Jove, $4.95.) A woman voices the 92 personalities that live within her.
8
32
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspiration.
9
17
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
10 *
2
SEXUAL PERSONAE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $15.) The case for regarding all art as a pagan battleground between male and female, form and chaos, civilization and demonic nature.
11 *
4
THE MILWAUKEE MURDERS, by Don Davis. (St. Martin's, $4.99.) The story of Jeffrey L. Dahmer, who has admitted killing 17 people.
12 *
16
A WOMAN NAMED JACKIE, by C. David Heymann. (Signet, $5.95.) A biography of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
5
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
66
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
12
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
46
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
1
UNNATURAL SELECTIONS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Far Side" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Cuisine La Chanze
IN THE THEATER WE CALL EACH other 'the kids,' " says La Chanze, "and 'the kids' know I like to cook." On free evenings, the young actress and a few friends often gather for a meal. "If they had a choice of sitting around or going out, they'd rather I cook," she says.
Impromptu entertaining is the norm for La Chanze.
Best known as Ti Moune in the Broadway musical "Once on This Island," which earned her a Tony nomination, she left the show last month to pursue other interests.
She is looking ahead to her first film role in a production tentatively called "My New Gun," and plans to play the part of Mary Magdalene in "Jesus Christ Superstar" in Philadelphia.
That will mean commuting from her home in New York.


The Architectural Splendor of Big Trees
TREES are on everyone's minds these days.
If it isn't their leafy color (most of which has faded), then it is their leafy abundance that is now cluttering the lawns, gardens, driveways and paths.
But there is a plus to this autumnal ritual.
The trees become architectural features.
Their superstructures can be seen; that is, their trunks, limbs, twigs and shapes are exposed.
Some are splendid and picturesque on the landscape; others are just plain huge.
And these huge trees offer the most excitement.


'Hurrah! They Are Listening!'
To the Editor:
I am not of the generation of "aficionados" of whom Studs Terkel speaks.
But how wonderful that they want to hear and to feel empathy for the moods and troubles of the times that produced the blues.
Maybe they and we could extend ourselves further to understand and project our feelings for other times and places -- the Great Depression, the two World Wars, the several hundred years of African slavery and so on back into history.


Wall Street; American Pacific Against the Odds
War, plague, fire, flood -- no disaster is so vast or so heartbreaking that Wall Street can't find a way to make money from it.
So, too, with the ominous deterioration in the earth's ozone layer.
As scientists have grown increasingly alarmed about the effect that chlorofluorocarbons have on this protective shell in the earth's atmosphere, a few sharp money managers have grown increasingly interested in a small chemical manufacturing company called the American Pacific Corporation, based in Las Vegas, Nev.


Wearing Thin; Facing a Tide of Voter Anger, Politicians Look to Channel It
AMERICA is in a sour mood.
The unemployment rate is rising, the Index of Leading Economic Indicators is slipping, and everyone seems to be thoroughly disgusted with the powers that be, including Congress and, increasingly, the White House.
It should be a dream scenario for Democrats, who have been shut out of the Presidency for more than a decade and who, until recently, had been all but counted out of the race again in 1992.
Instead, there is a sort of low-grade policy panic setting in as elected officials of both parties seek to gauge the depth of the public's anger and formulate a palatable and convincing set of solutions.


Horn of Africa Nations to Meet on Famine Aid
Leaders from the Horn of Africa have agreed to hold a meeting with the United Nations in January to devise a plan for drought and famine relief to the region without the political interference that has hampered such operations in the past.
Diplomats and United Nations officials say an accord would help establish the principle that governments have no right to hinder United Nations humanitarian relief operations in disaster areas or to use emergency supplies of food and medicine as a weapon against rebels by denying them to disloyal segments of the population.


August Wedding For Dana Golden
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Golden of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dana Golden, to Michael Alan Fishman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Fishman of Brooklyn.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Golden, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Wisconsin at Madison.
She is an interior designer for DAT Consultants, a commercial design firm in New York.
Her father is the Borough President of Brooklyn.
Her mother, Aileen R. Golden, is a deputy superintendent in Community School District 21 in Brooklyn.


Joanne Gollomp to Marry in March
Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred M. Gollomp of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter, Joanne Leslie Gollomp, to Dr.
Adam Bennett Pass, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Pass of Brooklyn.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Gollomp, 26 years old, graduated from Bryn Mawr College and is studying for a master's in education at New York University.
Her father is a senior vice president of Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.


New &amp; Noteworthy
VAN GOGH: His Life and His Art, by David Sweetman. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $16.) Although the celebrated painter's psychiatric maladies remain a mystery, this biographer concludes that van Gogh was always in full command of his talents.
Last year, our reviewer, Michael Kimmelman, called this book an "outstanding and judicious job of describing not only the familiar events of van Gogh's life but also the social and artistic circumstances in which the artist found himself."
POSSESSION: A Romance, by A. S. Byatt. (Vintage International, $12.) Both 19th- and 20th-century passions are afire in this novel, whose hero, the academician Roland Mitchell, is struggling to uncover the secrets in the life and loves of Randolph Henry Ash, a fictional Victorian poet modeled after Robert Browning.
" 'Possession' is a tour de force that opens every narrative device of English fiction to inspection without, for a moment, ceasing to delight," Jay Parini said here last year.
Also available in paperback is Ms.
Byatt's earlier novel STILL LIFE (Collier/Macmillan, $8.95), an examination of the lives of two sisters.
Our reviewer, Paul West, said in 1985, "It is not often that we see an English novelist in articulate action picking up where Woolf left off, and where hardly anyone . . . has dared to follow."


Getting Credit For Correcting The Professor
THE University of Chicago's Graduate School of Business has long offered courses in which M.B.A. students help local companies develop new products or adopt new processes.
Now, in true physician-heal-thyself fashion, the school is offering one to itself, launching a one-credit course in which M.B.A. students will help professors fine-tune their syllabuses and teaching methods.
A psychology professor, Selwyn Becker, was the course's guinea pig last summer; five professors are going through it now; 13 others have signed up for subsequent semesters.
Students taking the course audit the professors' classes, videotaping their presentations and questioning their students via focus groups and written questionnaires.
They report the findings to the professors at least once a week.


Golf? Transcendental?
THE LIES BOYS TELL
By Lamar Herrin. 267 pp. New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company.


Catechisms


CAMPUS LIFE: Northwestern; Students Warned Against Hard Sell By Church Group
Northwestern University has issued a pamphlet that warns students about high-pressure proselytizing by religious groups.
Although the pamphlet addresses religious groups in general, university administrators say it was created in response to student complaints about the recruiting efforts of the Chicago Church of Christ.
The church, its leaders say, is an evangelical group whose members want to restore New Testament Christianity.
It is is currently recognized as a legitimate religious organization by the university chaplain, which means it can recruit on campus.


Learning About Death and How to Manage It
LAST Christmas Ed Harney's daughter gave her father a tie, a black tie.
"Just what I wanted," said Mr.
Harney, of North Massapequa.
A few months later he bought a black suit to go with his black tie.
Mr.
Harney believes in dressing for success.
Since the success he seeks is becoming a funeral director, he was wearing his black suit and tie amid the baseball caps and backpacks on the campus of the State University at Farmingdale.


IRAQ IS BLOCKING AID DISTRIBUTION
The Iraqi Government is blocking attempts by international relief organizations to distribute food and medicine directly to hundreds of thousands of Iraqis suffering from poor health and malnutrition in the aftermath of a war and a trade embargo, relief officials and Iraqi authorities say.
Iraq's Minister of Health, Abdul Salam M. Saaid, said in an interview he would not allow food distribution by relief agencies except through the Government's distribution and rationing system.
He accused the relief agencies of food distribution "gimmicks" that he said were "designed to keep quiet the good people in the United States who don't like to see others suffer."


Cal Explodes Against U.S.C.
By the end of the day, all the years of frustration surely must have been eased.
But the University of California, relentless the entire afternoon, still appeared unsatisfied and, to some degree, unwilling to ease up.
The Golden Bears scored 35 points in the first half and eventually crushed Southern California, 52-30, today at Memorial Stadium.
It marked the most points ever scored by an opponent against the Trojans, topping the 51 by Notre Dame in 1966.


New Jersey Leans Republican in Poll, 44% to 35%
Democrats fighting an uphill battle to retain control of the State Legislature got some more bad news today: A new poll has found the strongest statewide preference for Republicans over Democrats in almost a decade.
The Star-Ledger/Eagleton Poll shows that Republicans have a 9 point advantage over the Democrats.
Forty-four percent of the poll's respondents said they would vote for a Republican; 35 percent said they preferred a Democrat.
Eighteen percent said they were undecided and 3 percent said they would vote for an independent.


New City College Sports Complex Raises Some Neighbors' Ire
Over the protest of some Harlem neighbors, City College is poised to build a $6.8 million outdoor sports center on its south campus -- its first full-fledged athletic field since Lewisohn Stadium was razed 18 years ago.
Demolition began last week on Wagner Hall near 133d Street and St.
Nicholas Terrace, a vestige of Manhattanville College of the Sacred Heart, whose property was taken over by City College in 1952.
It stands at the edge of the sports center site.


Cornwall
To the Editor: Beth Greenberg's article, "Room, Board and Trails in Cornwall" (Travel, Oct. 6) related her experience with H.F.
Holidays' walking tour in Cornwall.
She said it might be difficult to find an American agency that distributes H.F.
Holidays' brochures.
In fact, the British Tourist Authority will refer you to our agency, Hometours International Inc. (1170 Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10001), which represents H.F.
Holiday tours.
We will send a 50-page brochure for $2 for postage and handling, or a short flier free of charge.
MOTI BEN-AMI  President, Hometours International


Looking for New Fashion Markets, Designers From America Go Global
The latest buzzword in fashion isn't mini or maxi or stretch. It's globalization.
In seeking areas for expansion, American designers, manufacturers and retailers have gone about as far as they can go in this country and have turned their eyes to the rest of the world.
And the world is taking notice: the spring shows opening on Seventh Avenue on Monday will be attended not only by store buyers from all over the United States but also by buyers from Canada, Europe and Asia.


Filmmakers' Union Threatens to Disrupt New York Job Sites
A local filmmakers' union has threatened to disrupt job sites on Monday if a group of commercial producers imposes a contract that reduces time off allowed between work shifts, union officials said yesterday.
Members of Local 644 of the International Photographers of the Motion Picture and Television Industries yesterday rejected a proposed contract with the Association of Independent Commercial Producers because of the producers' demand that time between shifts be cut from 10 hours to as few as seven hours in some circumstances, union officials said.
The vote was 75 to 24 against the contract.


Tech Notes; New Wrinkle to Aged Jeans
new blue jeans that look old have been popular with consumers for years.
But making them has created problems for manufacturers: the quality of the "finish" can be uneven, and the chemicals used in some processes are unhealthy for their handlers.
But only if the handlers are human.
The GMFanuc Robotics Corporation, the nation's largest robotics manufacturer, based in Auburn Hills, Mich., has developed a robot that is garnering interest among jeans makers and industrial launderers that do much of the finishing.
Its system is intended to replace people who spray potassium permanganate onto jeans, particularly the seat, knee and thigh areas, in a technique known as localized abrasion.


Reporter's Notebook; As Cuomo's Dance Nears End, Apprehension Grips His Aides
As if watching a tabletop dancer in the final stage of a striptease, aides to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo feel their hearts flutter a bit each time the Governor begins a speech or a news conference these days.
Mr.
Cuomo has promised to reveal his Presidential intentions "very, very soon" and members of his staff assume they will have no advance warning.
That was the case in 1987 when Mr.
Cuomo used a statewide radio call-in show to disclose his decision not to run in the 1988 race.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Civil Rights: Vote on passage of a compromise civil rights bill intended to make it easier to sue in job bias cases.
Approved 93 to 5, Oct. 30.
2.
Arts: Vote to kill an amendment to a Department of Interior money bill that would bar the National Endowment for the Arts from awarding grants for "patently offensive" works of art.
Approved 73 to 25, Oct. 31.
3.
Energy: Vote to shut off debate and allow the National Energy Policy Act to be considered by the Senate.
Failed, with 50 votes in favor and 44 opposed (60 votes were needed), Nov. 1.
1
2
3
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Y
Y
Y
Lieberman (D)
Y
Y
N
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Y
Y
N
Lautenberg (D)
Y
Y
N
New York
D'Amato (R)
Y
N
Y
Moynihan (D)
Y
Y
N
House
1.
Banks: Vote on an amendment to a comprehensive banking bill that would a strike a provision in the bill that imposes more restrictions on banks expanding into new business than the Administration sought.
Rejected 216 to 200, with 2 voting predent, Oct. 31.
1
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
N
2. Gejdenson (D)
N
3. DeLauro (D)
N
4. Shays (R)
Y
5. Franks (R)
Y
6. Johnson (R)
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Y
2. Hughes (D)
Y
3. Pallone (D)
N
4. Smith (R)
N
5. Roukema (R)
N
6. Dwyer (D)
N
7. Rinaldo (R)
Y
8. Roe (D)
Y
9. Torricelli (D)
N
10. Payne (D)
N
11. Gallo (R)
Y
12. Zimmer (R)
Y
13. Saxton (R)
N
14. Guarini (D)
N
New York
1. Hochbrueckner(D)
N
2. Downey (D)
N
3. Mrazek (D)
N
4. Lent (R)
Y
5. McGrath (R)
P
6. Flake (D)
Y
7. Ackerman (D)
N
8. Scheuer (D)
N
9. Manton (D)
N
10. Schumer (D)
N
11. Towns (D)
N
12. Owens (D)
N
13. Solarz (D)
N
14. Molinari (R)
Y
15. Green (R)
Y
16. Rangel (D)
N
17. Weiss (D)
N
18. Serrano (D)
N
19. Engel (D)
Y
20. Lowey (D)
N
21. Fish (R)
N
22. Gilman (R)
Y
23. McNulty (D)
N
24. Solomon (R)
N
25. Boehlert (R)
Y
26. Martin (R)
Y
27. Walsh (R)
N
28. McHugh (D)
Y
29. Horton (R)
Y
30. Slaughter (D)
Y
31. Paxon (R)
N
32. LaFalce (D)
N
33. Nowak (D)
Y
34. Houghton (R)
Y
HEADLINE&gt;KEY Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Mutual Funds; The No-Load, Closed-End Munis
The closed-end municipal bond fund industry is a sedate business -- a haven for investors seeking high tax-free yields.
But a spark of creativity has energized the $19.5 billion industry.
One fund group has eliminated the upfront sales charges, and some people think this approach is likely to spread.
The investing public is snapping up Van Kampen Merritt's no-load series of six closed-end municipal bond funds.
The offerings have raised more than $980 million since the initial subscription started in August.
"It was a tremendous success, far beyond our expectations," said Stephen J. Hodgdon, marketing director for Van Kampen Merritt, which is based in Oak Brook, Ill.


Crime in Belize Is Cited by U.S.
Visitors to Belize in Central America should exercise caution to avoid becoming crime victims, says a travel advisory from the State Department.
While the vast majority of the thousands of tourists and business travelers who visit Belize each year experience no problems, the Oct. 22 advisory states, robberies and related assaults have increased.
Visitors are advised not to walk alone on city streets, especially at night, not to wear jewelry or carry valuables, and to travel in a group when visiting remote tourist sites.
The department added that the Belize Government was trying to improve security in Belize City and inland tourist sites.
The State Department issues a pamphlet, Tips for Travelers to Central and South America.
The pamphlet costs $1 and is available from the Superintendent, of Documents, U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402.


Sports of The Times; Anthony's Self-Grade Is D-Minus
THE last time he played an official game, Greg Anthony was the oracle, the source, the young Republican, the future senator from the University of Nevada-Las Vegas.
Back last spring, people wanted to hear Greg Anthony's opinion on international trade, the breakdown of the Eastern bloc, the benefits of blacks' participating in both political parties.


Ms. Cresci Sets Winter Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence Cresci of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elisa Cresci, to Timothy Joseph McEvoy, a son of James McEvoy of Cheshire, Conn., and the late Alice McEvoy.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cresci, 26 years old, graduated from Tufts University and received a master's degree in broadcast journalism from Emerson College.
Her father owns the Manhattan Cafe in New York.


Shopping At Home
EDUCATIONAL software is getting better all the time, which is good news, but finding good educational software is getting harder.
Discount stores, department stores and even some grocery stores are selling educational software these days, but prices are still too high to warrant indiscriminate shopping.
So where does one turn for reliable recommendations?
Two independent sources are "The Latest &amp; Best of Tess" (The Educational Software Selector) and, for younger students, the "1991 High/Scope Survey of Early Childhood Software."


Double Agents


Nature Is Surely Nice, but at Times You Have to Have a Fish
Anglers will tell you that a fishless day is not a disappointment, that tarrying on lake or stream or beside the sounding surf is sufficient reward.
A string of such days is a different matter, however, and there comes a time when glorious sunsets, misty dawns, grouse bursting from trailside thickets or a loon's call are not enough -- when, above all else, the angler desperately needs to catch something.


5 in G.O.P. See Real Chance to Win a Council Seat
When Charles Millard, a 34-year-old lawyer with blond hair and all-American looks, first approached New York Republican leaders about his political ambitions a year ago, a Republican candidate was thought to have a better chance of winning in Moscow than in Manhattan, where the City Council has been a one-party preserve.
But as Mr.
Millard handed out literature last week on East 86th Street pressing his campaign for the District 5 seat on the Upper East Side, he was full of optimism, and even Democratic political strategists were giving him even odds of winning.


Cloudy Skies Can't Dampen a Favorite Pursuit


MOTHER CONFESSES SHE KILLED GIRL, 6
A Manhattan woman who told her minister she killed her 6-year-old daughter and left the child's body in a Queens park was arrested yesterday after turning herself in.
The woman, Karen Lowray, 24 years old, was charged with second-degree murder in the death of her daughter, Lacey, after arriving with the minister at the 75th Precinct station house in Brooklyn on Friday night and repeating the confession, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Edward Burns.


With This Tough Audience, Fair-Haired Is Fair Game
Except for bigots and buffoons, everyone knows that ethnic and racial jokes have become unacceptable in this enlightened age.
The old genre of Polish jokes, for example, has become as dusty as it is moronic.
This has left many lowbrow humorists in a quandary: When it comes to zingers, who is it safe to zing these days?


THE WORDS THEY CAN'T SAY
It was with great pleasure that I read Mary Makarushka's article "The Words They Can't Say" (Oct. 6).
At the Children's Annex, we have been using facilitated communication for the past six months with students classified as autistic or as having other developmental disabilities.
My initial skepticism turned to excitement and then to joy as our students developed the abilities to put their thoughts into words.
One of my students typed his definition of autism: "Autism for me has been understanding what everyone else says but nobody understands me." JAMEY WOLFF Program Director, The Children's Annex
Kingston, N.Y.


Host of Anniversaries Inspiring Chamber Events
IN striking contrast to almost all other chamber music groups in the area, which organize visits from a wide spectrum of performers, the Concert Society of Putnam and Northern Westchester maintains its own cadre of artists.
It has also built an enviable programming reputation through the years, juxtaposing standard repertory pieces with premieres and other recent works by Americans, usually with the composers present to discuss their musical ideas.
It has now been 20 years, and the society's anniversary celebration begins with an 8 P.M. recital in St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Somers, with its repetition next Sunday at 3 P.M. in Mount Carmel Baptist Church.


Waiting for Payback On Social Security
To the Editor:
"A Valuable Government Document, Free" (Consumer's World page, Oct. 19) describes the personal earnings and benefit statements that the Social Security Administration sends to wage earners on request.
You note that from them workers can learn the estimated benefits at various ages of retirement and how long after retirement it will take to recover what they contributed in payroll taxes over a working lifetime.


Pets in Co-ops
To the Editor:
In reference to your response to the question about pets in co-op apartments in the Sept. 8 Q &amp; A column, please be advised that Section 27-2009.1 has been construed by the courts to protect co-op tenants in virtually every case in which the issue has been raised.
Furthermore, in the only two cases we are aware of which have addressed as a central point the issue of acquiring a new pet after the death of an earlier one, the courts have ruled in the tenants' favor.
JOLENE R. MARION The writer is staff attorney with Legal Action for Animals, a public interest law firm in Manhattan.


Military Spending Binge Got Us Into This Mess
To the Editor:
The Republican Party line points proudly to the country's "longest peacetime expansion" during the Reagan-Bush decade of the 1980's.
The intended point is that the second longest economic expansion of the post-World War II period was achieved without the stimulus of a wartime buildup, as occurred during the Vietnam War era, when the longest expansion was recorded.


Sunday Outing; For Horses and Riders, The Annual Ride-Off
Baseball fans have the World Series, tennis aficionados have the United States Open and the equestrian set has the National Horse Show.
The 108th National Horse Show began last Tuesday at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., and will run through this afternoon.


LAW ON THE FEMINIST FRONTIER
One has to wonder whether MacKinnon has forgotten that her achievements in the area of sexual harassment occurred in the context of a broad-based feminist movement.
In the mid-1970's, feminist advocacy and self-help efforts paralleled legal advances and brought what had been a deeply hidden, shame- and guilt-inducing phenomenon to public attention.
Activists formed such organizations as Working Women's Institute, which coined the term "sexual harassment," and the Alliance Against Sexual Coercion to combat sexual harassment.
This groundswell of feminist analysis and advocacy fashioned a growing range of legal and non-legal solutions for working women.
KAREN SAUVIGNE
Brooklyn


Mary Rowell Weds Michael Tierney
Mary Allison Rowell, a daughter of Janel G. Larson of Phoenix and Fred A. Rowell of Sante Fe, N.M., was married yesterday to Michael Sean Tierney, the son of Amelia C. Tierney of New York and Longview, Tex., and Robert B. Tierney of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Michael C. Macey, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Arizona Biltmore in Phoenix.
Mrs.
Tierney, 26 years old, is the director of Jernigan Wicker Fine Arts, an art dealer in San Francisco.
She graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father is the national and regional manager of marketing and sales for Pioneer Wear in Albuquerque, N.M.
Her mother teaches at the Isaac Mitchell Elementary School in Phoenix.


SYRIANS BALKING, BUT OTHER ARABS FAVOR MORE TALKS
Syria continued to balk today at direct talks with Israel on Sunday, but the joint Jordanian and Palestinian delegation went ahead with plans to attend a face-to-face meeting with the Israelis, and joined Egypt and Saudi Arabia in pressing Syria to do likewise.
"We will go even if Syria doesn't," said a spokesman for the joint delegation.


Corrections
A report in the Headliners column on Oct. 20 about the Senate Intelligence Committee's approval of Robert L. Gates for Director of Central Intelligence misstated the party affiliation of Senator David L. Boren of Oklahoma in some copies.
He is a Democrat.


Two Men With Time On Their Shoulders
One is a gentle Tanzanian, an army major who speaks in soft tones about the zen of marathoning.
The other is the more extroverted sort, a Kenyan with an allergy and an attitude.
Together again, leading men Juma Ikangaa and Ibrahim Hussein are here to save the New York City Marathon, or at least to restore its luster in international circles.
If the two African runners cross the finish line near Tavern on the Green this afternoon a few minutes before one o'clock, they will have done their jobs and earned fat incentive bonuses besides.


Facing Down Protests, Eastern Germany Goes Private
More than a year after German unification, the dirtiest word in eastern Germany is still "Treuhand."
The giant Treuhandanstalt privatization agency, popularly known as Treuhand (pronounced TROY hond), is continuing to throw many people out of work in eastern Germany as it tries to prepare companies previously run by the Communist Government for sale to private entrepreneurs.


Traffic Alert
New York City Marathon: Several streets and bridges will be closed for much of today.
A map appears in SportsSunday.


The Architectural Splendor of Big Trees
TREES are on everyone's minds these days.
If it isn't their leafy color (most of which has faded), then it is their leafy abundance that is now cluttering the lawns, gardens, driveways and paths.
But there is a plus to this autumnal ritual.
The trees become architectural features.
Their superstructures can be seen; that is, their trunks, limbs, twigs and shapes are exposed.
Some are splendid and picturesque on the landscape; others are just plain huge.
And these huge trees offer the most excitement.


Failure to Sign Anderson Hobbles Nets' Backcourt
A delicious matchup was supposed to have been unveiled here at the Charlotte Coliseum tonight.
Forget about the Nets and the Hornets.
It was going to be Larry Johnson against Kenny Anderson.
The muscular forward and the slick guard.
The No. 1 draft pick opposing No. 2.
Excitement galore.
Slow down.
Relax.
Anderson was not here because of a contract squabble with New Jersey, so the sweet matchup of two of the most heralded rookies in the league had to be scrapped.
Instead, fans had to settle for the Hornets against the Nets.
Wait a second, how about Johnson against Mookie Blaylock?
It just does not sound right.


Gunman in Iowa Wrote of Plans In Five Letters
Late Friday afternoon when the University of Iowa was slipping into what students here call "the weekend mode," a brilliant former graduate student in physics stood up during a scheduled meeting in his department and began, without a word, to methodically extinguish some of the brightest minds the campus has known.
In a melee of no more than 10 minutes, the student, Gang Lu swiftly moved through two university buildings, seeking out six specific targets and shooting each person at close range with a .38-caliber revolver before fatally turning the weapon on himself, the authorities said here today.
Four were killed immediately, a fifth died today and the sixth victim is in critical condition.


From Tiny Grants Big Payoffs Grow
AT A TIME when school districts nationwide are in financial straits, a nonprofit program in Los Angeles is proving that small, targeted amounts of money can generate large classroom benefits.
The program, called Small Grants for Teachers, was created by the Los Angeles Educational Partnership, an organization of educators and business leaders that is independent of the school district, to finance small-scale projects designed and carried out by Los Angeles teachers.


Julia Kaminski Has Wedding
Julia Robert Kaminski, an associate director of Chase Manhattan in London, and Richard Nix, a principal managing director of Bear Stearns in London, were married yesterday in Osprey, Fla.
The Rev.
G.
Francis Burrill, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother and stepfather, Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Richard Matson.
The bride's father is Amos Kaminski of New York.
Mrs.
Nix, 30 years old, graduated from Vanderbilt University; Mr.
Nix, 32, from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of the Interfid Group, an investment concern in New York.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Nix of Sheffield, Yorkshire, England.
His father is retired.


Carol Andreuzzi Wed in Scarsdale
Carol Elizabeth Andreuzzi, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Denis Andreuzzi of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Geoffrey Bracken Fitzgerald, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas M. Fitzgerald Jr. of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
George Reinheimer, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Pius X Church in Scarsdale.
Mrs.
Fitzgerald, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College.
She is the director of marketing for Kensington Microware Limited in San Mateo, Calif.
Her father is the president of Witco Corporation, a manufacturer of chemical and petroleum products in New York.


Add Another Hero To Long Blue Line
Nick Crawford's belated emergence as the latest in a long line of Yale football heroes reached new heights today as the Eli battled back to beat Pennsylvania, 31-12.
The senior quarterback, who spent the last two seasons backing up Darin Kehler, scored two touchdowns in the third quarter to lead a comeback by Yale, which had trailed by 6-3 at the half.


Seeking a Racial Mix, Dubuque Finds Tension
For years now, along the rolling bluffs in this Mississippi River city of Victorian houses and church steeples, nobody ever thought much about race and prejudice.
Nobody ever had to.
There were only a handful of black people in town.
A resident could go for years without seeing a black.
And besides, people thought, racism was something that happened in the big cities or the Deep South, not in a nice, quiet place like Dubuque.


SOCIAL EVENTS
For the Young
Nov. 3 -- A concert by musical-theater performers starting at 7:30 P.M. at the Dalton School Theater, 108 East 89th Street, will benefit Artspower, a national program that brings art programs to schoolchildren.
A champagne reception follows the two-hour concert.
Tickets, $45; (201) 368-8486.
Cookout at the Plaza


Spices and Seasonings Enter the Mainstream
STATISTICS show that Americans have acquired a taste for spices.
Consumption of spices, especially red and black pepper, has increased dramatically in the last decade.
Several factors have contributed to the trend toward more highly seasoned food.
Spices and seasonings are essential in processed foods, they compensate for decreased use of salt and there is a greater interest in ethnic foods, especially Mexican.
Freshly ground black pepper has become the rule, not the exception, in homes and restaurants.


Textbooks Are Puttin' On the Ritz
WHEN IT was published in 1955, Joseph Machlis's "The Enjoyment of Music" (W. W. Norton &amp; Company) was adorned by little more than the author's graceful prose style and illustrations in black and white.
Today its style and the basic text have remained much the same, but its format and colorful look are far, far different.
So is its marketing.
Where once there was just the standard textbook, now there are two spinoff versions plus supplements ranging from a $10.95 study guide to a collection of recordings available for $44.95 on eight LP records or cassettes, or for $80 on compact disk.


A New Concept: Flexibility and Fidelity
In audio, the wheel is being constantly reinvented.
Competitive pressure leads to ceaseless innovation for its own sake.
Mere gadgeteering often passes for progress, and in an atmosphere of gimmickry, a genuine advance is especially welcome.
A case in point is a new design principle for loudspeakers developed by Paul Paddock, an Oregonian who combines the talents of a musician and an engineer.
As a solitary inventor, unconstrained by corporate tradition, he felt free to take a radical approach toward certain ingrained shortcomings of conventional loudspeakers.


Dinner Dressing


Toward Defining Free Speech in The Computer Age
As electronic information services confront charges that they are becoming high-tech conduits for bigotry and libel, business executives and courts are beginning to outline the limits of free speech in the electronic age.
The focus in recent weeks has been on Prodigy Services Company, a computer information service that is a joint venture of the International Business Machines Corporation and Sears Roebuck &amp; Company.
The service had been accused by the Anti-Defamation League of the B'nai B'rith of fostering anti-Semitism by allowing hateful and false statements to be posted on its electronic bulletin boards.
Prodigy and the A.D.L. reached a truce of sorts last Monday even though Prodigy, which has 1.1 million subscribers, will continue displaying some messages that the human-rights group calls "unconscionable," including assertions that the Holocaust never occurred.


Dr. Elisa Ventur to Wed in February
Dr.
Elisa Denise Ventur and Dr.
John Christopher Muran, clinical psychologists practicing on Long Island and in New York, are to marry in February.
Dr.
Ventur is a daughter of Theresa Ventur of Mill Neck, L.I., and the late Dr.
Pierre Ventur.
Dr.
Muran is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Van V. Muran of Brookville, L.I.
Dr.
Ventur, 31 years old, is on the staff of the Child and Adolescent Day Hospital of Long Island Jewish Medical Center.
She graduated magna cum laude from the State University at Stony Brook, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a doctorate from Hofstra University.
Her father was also a clinical psychologist.


INSIDE
Counting Up Damages In Wake of Storm Diasaster officials, environmental experts and grim property owners - including President Bush - surveyed the wreckage of homes and beaches as estimates of last week's storm damage climbed into the hundreds of millions of dollars.
Page 42.
A Student's Revenge
The graduate student who shot six people at the University of Iowa, five fatally, before killing himself had written letters telling of his intentions and his motive: revenge.
Page 26.
Fear Wins a Championship
The top high school football team in Los Angeles forfeited a game at the home field of the No. 2 team because of past violence there and fears that it would be repeated.
Page 26.
Next Spring's Look: Global
In seeking expansion, the American fashion industry has gone about as far as it can domestically, and it is now seeking markets in the rest of the world.
Page 20.


Susanna Hodges Is Wed to Eric Salk
Susanna Hodges, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur C. Hodges of Essex, Mass., was married yesterday in Ipswich, Mass., to Eric Daniel Salk, the son of Dr.
Lee Salk and Kerstin Andersson, both of New York.
The Rev.
Carl R. Scovel performed the Unitarian ceremony at Castle Hill, a historic house.
Mrs.
Salk, 27 years old, is the interior design manager at Elle Decor magazine in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College, as did her husband.
Her father is a partner at Welch &amp; Forbes, a Boston investment counseling concern.
Mr.
Salk, 30, is in his final year at Cornell Medical College, where his father is a professor of pediatrics and psychiatry.


Susan Kriveloff Weds Andrew Cott
Susan Phoebe Kriveloff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Kriveloff of New York, was married yesterday evening to Andrew Ian Cott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry L. Cott of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi Ronald Brown officiated at Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I.
Mrs.
Cott, 29 years old, is a senior manager in new market development at American Express in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rochester, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of P.I.E.
Facilities, a general agency for life insurance companies in New York.
Her mother, Natalie Kriveloff, retired as an educational evaluator in the New York City public school system.


Review/Dance; Charting Passages In Time And Space
Nancy Topf and Linda Austin made choreographic effects with time as well as space in the program they presented on Monday night as part of the Movement Research series at the Judson Memorial Church on Washington Square in Greenwich Village.
Dancers slowly entered in "The Garden Gate," collaboratively choreographed by Ms.
Topf and members of her workshop group.
They leaned against the church's pillars and walls, rooting themselves solidly so that they virtually became part of the architecture.
When they changed positions, passages of activity were followed by other statuesque poses.
Even when they began to cross the church floor, their pacing was unhurried.
They were not afraid to take time to let movements grow.


Pacer Coach Calls First Game 'Awful'
The Washington Bullets, who did not win an exhibition game, are expected to be awful this season.
The Indiana Pacers are expected to make their biggest challenge ever in the Central Division.
But expectations had little to do with reality in Indianapolis on Friday night.
With Michael Adams posting 23 points, 13 assists and 9 steals, the Bullets upset the Pacers, 109-103, on the National Basketball Association's opening night.


Roberta Rosen, Banker, Weds
Roberta Lynn Rosen, a second vice president at Chase Manhattan, and Adam Frederic Weissenberg, an M.B.A. candidate at Columbia University, were married yesterday evening by Rabbi Martin S. Halpern at the Washington Vista Hotel.
Ms.
Weissenberg, 28 years old, graduated from Cornell University, as did her husband.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Rosen of Silver Spring, Md.
Her father is the manager of information systems and the marketing director of Logicon Inc., an Arlington, Va., security systems contractor.
Her mother, Doris Rosen, is an elementary-school teaching assistant in Montgomery County, Md.


In the Nation; A Necessary Change?
The snowballing term-limitation movement will get a powerful shove if Washington State votes Tuesday to restrict the number of terms both its state and Federal officeholders can serve.
It's not constitutionally clear that a state
can
limit the terms of Federal officials.
The Washington initiative specifies, however, three terms (six years) for members of the House of Representatives and two (12 years) for U.S. senators.
Among the casualties, if voters approve, would be Speaker Thomas Foley, who would have to step down in three years.


Dorothy Chute To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Mortimer H. Chute Jr. of Garden City, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dorothy Louise Chute to Dr.
Peter William Jankowski, the son of Walter Jankowski of Garden City and the late Bernice Jankowski.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Chute, 28 years old, graduated from Princeton University and received master's degrees in social work and public health from Columbia University.
She is a clinical social worker at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
Her father is a vice president for development at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.


What's New Under the Sun
AFTER two troublesome seasons, last winter's due to the recession and the Gulf war, the previous one to Hurricane Hugo, the Caribbean islands are hoping for a rebound in the 1991-92 high season.
Statistics showing the declines are not complete, but figures compiled by the Caribbean Tourism Organization for the first six months of this year indicate sharp drops in the number of visitors to some islands.
In addition to hopes for more vacationers, emphasizing ecological goals, the growth of all-inclusive resorts and events in recognition of Columbus's arrival in the New World are talking points in the islands.


CRIME
"My problem," admits Owen Keane, " [ is ]  a mind that tends to wander dangerously without occupation." Too flighty a mind for his pragmatic girlfriend, and much too unpredictable to suit the lawyer who employs him as a legal researcher, it's a nice mind, nonetheless, for a metaphysical detective -- the role that Keane plays in Terence Faherty's intriguing first mystery, DEADSTICK (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $17.95).
Keane's little brain cells warn him that something's odd about his assignment to look into a plane crash that took the lives of a young banker and his fiancee 40 years ago.
It seems fishy that the financier brother of the dead man should distance himself from the investigation he supposedly ordered.
Even fishier is the fact that Keane's firm seems to expect a whitewashed report.


Sitting Down to Business
IF THE OCCASION calls for entertaining business clients or the boss, the style for the 1990's is to do it at home.
Sitting down to dinner in a personal setting is replacing the expensive meals in important restaurants that characterized the freewheeling 80's.
This trend reflects not only tightened expense accounts and limitations on tax deductions, but it also mirrors a homier, more welcoming and less ostentatious mood.
"A small party is about bonding and building relationships, and that is often best accomplished in intimate surroundings," says Nancy Kahan, an entertaining and public-relations consultant and the author, with Eleanor Berman, of "Entertaining for Business" (Clarkson N. Potter, 1990).


Style Makers; Rochelle Weithorn, Corporate Make-Up Artist
When Rochelle Weit horn decided to specialize in making up executives for annual reports and corporate videos, she asked herself: what makes people look powerful?
She decided the secret was simply "looking healthy, which is exactly how lots of business people
don't
look."
"They work long hours, so they have bags under their eyes from lack of sleep," she said.
"They eat bad food. They're pale. Maybe their noses are red from a few too many martinis."


Judicial Candidate Performed Good Works
"Electing Little-Known Candidates as Judges"  [ Oct. 20 ]  addresses a major flaw in our electoral system.
The candidates are relatively unknown to the voters, and on Long Island the only selection process takes place within the political hierarchy.
This makes the rules of journalistic fair play crucial to the operation of a decidedly imperfect process.
You list 3 Supreme Court nominees out of a field of 24 who have "come under scrutiny." This pregnant phrase is followed in the first instance by a paragraph devoted to Edward Hart.


Chain Store Massacre
GOING FOR BROKE
How Robert Campeau Bankrupted the Retail Industry, Jolted the Junk Bond Market, and Brought the Booming Eighties to a Crashing Halt.
By John Rothchild.
Illustrated. 286 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.


CAMPUS LIFE: Rochester; In Class to Play a Game (And to Grasp a Culture)
Playing games in class is usually not acceptable at the University of Rochester.
But if the game is Go, it is worth two credits.
Created in China more than 4,000 years ago, the game is the basis of a semesterlong course being offered by the College of Arts and Sciences.
Entitled "Go: Game and Culture," the course is meant to acquaint students with the game's strategies and tactics and to study Go as part of the culture of Japan, where it has achieved its greatest popularity.


Making a Difference; For Cosby, It's No Secret The Word Is Syndication
In 1987, Robert Jacobs completed a legendary television deal.
He got 156 local stations to commit to buying a new series, sight unseen.
It was considered the greatest sale in the history of the television syndication business.
Unfortunately, the show turned out to be the loudest flop in the history of the syndication business: "USA Today on Television."


Anonymous Storm Hits the Beaches
A storm with no name and questionable parentage ambushed the Atlantic Coast last week, smashing homes, washing out roads, stripping beaches and killing at least four people.
Springing from the Northeast rather than the tropics, its near hurricane force winds blew straight inland, pushing mountains of sea water ahead of it.
Waves a house high and a megaton heavy swept over and through oceanfront homes, sea walls, piers and boardwalks from Maine to Florida.
The breakers crashed through windows like vandals, strewing sand and rocks, and left like looters, hauling appliances, furniture and whole houses out to sea.
President Bush's compound in Kennebunkport, Maine, was severely damaged, with local officials saying the first floor of the main house was virtually gutted.
Mr.
Bush's spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said there were "reports of windows and walls being caved in, and a disastrous situation there with regard to their personal property."


Haiti's Divisions Deepen Over Aristide's Removal
For a brief moment after the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide won the first democratic elections in this country's 186 years of independence in December, Haiti appeared more unified than at any time in a history filled with violent strife.
But in the nearly eight months that he governed as President, and in the four weeks since Father Aristide was exiled in a bloody military coup, Haiti's ancient class divisions have so deepened that many familiar with the political scene here say that the stringent international trade embargo imposed on the country this week could do little to return Father Aristide to office.


THIS SCHOOL IS OUT
Jesse Green's article "This School Is Out" (Oct. 13) is a remarkable piece of journalism.
As a gay man struggling daily with homophobia, underemployment, violence and HIV, I was impressed with the dignity and courage exemplified both by teachers and students at the Harvey Milk School.
I'm sure the article will be difficult for many.
However, I thank you for enlightening and uplifting me.
MICHAEL R. PARKS
Philadelphia


Data Update
BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Sept. 91
Aug. 91
Sept. 90
New York
2,491
2,831
2,450
New Jersey
1,364
1,894
1,276
Connecticut
609
632
627
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.13
9.04
10.39
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.71
6.73
8.31
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.98
8.92
10.20
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.59
6.59
8.03
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.98
8.90
10.29
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.64
6.62
8.16
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.30
9.05
10.59
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.21
7.20
8.54
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
5.39
5.33
7.50
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.93
8.93
9.70
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


As Pavarotti Judges, Opera Students Practice Fear
"Don't be afraid of anything! Yell! Sing what is written!" Luciano Pavarotti instructed in staccato Italian.
"If a beautiful voice is coming out, that won't bother anybody."
In a rare stage appearance as teacher, not tenor, Mr.
Pavarotti taught a class on Wednesday to 14 opera students at the Juilliard School.
More than 930 opera enthusiasts, agents and donors showed up, paying $20 for the privilege of seeing Mr.
Pavarotti teach.


MRS. MARCOS SET TO END HER EXILE
Vowing to return for his remains, the widow of Ferdinand E. Marcos bade farewell to the still-unburied body of the former Philippine President as she prepared to depart tonight for Manila after nearly six years in exile.
Under a large embroidered Philippine presidential seal, Imelda Marcos bent to kiss a flag-draped coffin in the air-conditioned mausoleum where her husband's body has lain since his death in Hawaii in September 1989.


Chernobyl Is Said to Affect Health of Thousands in a Soviet Region
Scientists here say they have found widespread degradation of the health of thousands of people living in areas contaminated by fallout from the fire five years ago at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant.
"The medical and biological consequences of Chernobyl appear much more serious and diverse than had been expected during the first years," said Dr.
Tamara V. Belookaya, head of diagnostics at the Institute of Radiation Medicine in this town in the Minsk metropolitan area.


Fisk Is Free Agent
The Chicago White Sox decided yesterday not to exercise their $2.28 million option on CARLTON FISK and will allow the 43-year-old catcher to become a free agent.
The White Sox also decided to exercise their $800,000 option on 43-year-old pitcher CHARLIE HOUGH.
They could have given him a $100,000 buyout instead.


Sparkling Send-Offs
SAY WHAT THEY WILL, sparkling-wine makers the world over would give anything to be able to duplicate the true Champagne taste.
Tell a sparkling-wine maker that it's difficult to tell his wine from the real thing and he may wince -- but he'll be flattered.
And since France is the only place where true Champagne is made, it should come as no surprise that the French make some of the best sparkling wines.
The single great advantage of sparkling wines over Champagne is price.
Some of the best are in the $10-a-bottle range, which puts them well below Champagne, whose prices have been climbing steadily in recent years and now run between $20 and $110 a bottle.
For large-scale parties and receptions in particular, Champagne prices can become prohibitive, and sparkling wines can serve as a fine alternative.


Interception on Last Drive Saves 13-7 Alabama Victory
Stacy Harrison scored on a 64-yard interception return and stopped Mississippi State's last drive with an end-zone interception today to help Alabama win the Southeastern Conference game, 13-7.
Matt Wethington's two fourth-quarter field goals provided the difference as the Crimson Tide (7-1 over all, 4-1 in the conference) defeated Mississippi State for the 11th straight year.
Alabama is No. 18 in The New York Times computer ranking.


Fear of AIDS Keeps Dentist Chairs Empty
To the Editor:
As a dentist practicing in New York City, I am increasingly alarmed by a trend I see among patients -- fear of going to the dentist.
The hysteria surrounding the truly unfortunate and heartbreaking case of Kimberly Bergalis has caused many patients to stop seeking dental care.
Ms.
Bergalis and four other patients of the same dentist are the only suspected cases of any health care professional's transmitting the human immunodeficiency virus to a patient.


What Price Convenience? New Devices Can Reveal a Lot
NEW high-tech devices installed in supermarkets, on televisions and telephones and even at toll plazas are creating new worries for civil libertarians, who say they can violate users' privacy.
The new devices no doubt make it easier for consumers to shop for groceries, screen phone calls, retrieve messages and pay bridge tolls.
They also keep detailed records of what the user buys at the grocery or watches on television, the exact time a driver crosses a bridge or even the messages a phone company customer gets.


Magically, de Keersmaeker Remixes the Familiar
Anne Teresa de Keersmaeker continues to go her own way -- a startling and gratifying feat on an experimental dance scene that settles only too easily into definable categories.
The evidence was there again when the 31-year-old Belgian choreographer recently presented two North American premieres with her company, Rosas: "Stella," at the Kitchen in New York and the International Festival of New Dance in Montreal, and "Achterland (Hinterland)," performed only in Montreal.
More than in the past, these two pieces from 1990 bring into relief the distinctive qualities of Miss de Keersmaeker's work.
Her choreography is both formal and emotional.
But it also carries a strong social critique rooted in a literary and political sensibility that American choreographers would not share.
Even when some of the cultural references are familiar ("Stella" uses dialogue from Goethe's play "Stella," Akira Kurosawa's film "Rashomon" and the 1951 film version of Tennessee Williams's play "A Street Named Desire"), they are placed in an unfamiliar context.
Specific relationships are thus generalized into fresh statements, often about women.


Princeton Makes Sure There Is No Upset
A year ago, Princeton traveled to Columbia for the Lions' homecoming.
The home team pulled off a colossal upset, beating the Tigers for the second time in three meetings, 17-15.
This year, with Princeton making a run for the Ivy League title, and with Columbia playing at the level to which it seems accustomed, an upset seemed unlikely.


Big Snowstorm Cancels Games
A heavy snowstorm wiped out college football games in Minnesota, North and South Dakota and Iowa yesterday.
Northern Intercollegiate Conference games in Minnesota between Moorhead State and Minnesota-Duluth and Winona State and Bemidji State were moved to this afternoon, weather permitting.
Also in Minnesota, the game between Concordia of Moorhead and St.
Thomas was also rescheduled for today, and moved from St.
Paul to Moorhead.


Plugging Into The Network
MOST SCHOOLS are struggling to get more computers and more software to run on them.
When scarce technology dollars become available, the temptation is to use them for immediate hardware and software needs, not for the invisible wiring, training and labor costs needed to connect PC's to one another.
But a growing number of teachers and administrators believe that the full potential of personal computers can be tapped only by connecting them to one another within a school, and by linking each school to others throughout the state, the nation and the world.


Magicians of a Thousand and One Nights
Whether or not you should drop by the Broadhurst Theater for "Andre Heller's Wonderhouse" can be determined fairly easily by your answers to the following questions:
1) Do you continue to miss "The Ed Sullivan Show" and believe that Sunday night has never been the same since it went off the air?


Brooklyn Boss


J. P. Morgan Jr.'s House Is Back
This Autumn has brought forth a torrent of praise for the Pierpont Morgan Library, which can no longer claim to be New York's least appreciated major cultural resource.
With the opening last month of the first major expansion of the library since its annex was completed in 1928, one critic after another has been moved to celebrate the virtues of this unusual institution, part scholarly center, part exhibition gallery, and every bit the anchor of the Murray Hill neighborhood of Manhattan.
Expect no dissent here.
The Morgan -- which now fills the eastern block-front of Madison Avenue from 36th to 37th Streets --
is
extraordinary, and not only because of its remarkable collections of books, illuminated manuscripts, drawings and musical manuscripts.
It is also the aura of cultivation that surrounds these treasured objects.
Here, as in so few other cultural institutions, life seems to proceed at a measured pace.
There is room to look at things.
There is order to the way they are presented.
And no matter how harried the rest of your life may be, when you go through the Morgan Library's door you feel as if you have all the time these objects demand.


THE Answers
1.
Ottawa, in Ontario, and Mexico City, which forms part of the Federal District of Mexico.
2.
Mexico is divided into states (31) and one Federal District.
Canada is divided into 10 provinces and the Northwest Territories and Yukon Territory.


The 60's According to Lou Reed
Back in the 1960's Lou Reed (in photograph) wrote lyrics for the Velvet Underground that spoke of alienation, drugs and downtown New York.
His verse is being published this week in a book titled "Between Thought and Expression: Selected Lyrics of Lou Reed" (Hyperion).
In addition, Mr.
Reed will read portions of his work at the New York Ethical Culture Theater on Thursday night.
Two of his more famous lyrics are for the songs "Heroin" and "Chelsea Girls." The lyrics for "Heroin" were written in 1966, while Mr.
Reed was still in college, and were heard on the Velvet Underground's first album.
"Chelsea Girls" was written for the 1966 Andy Warhol film of the same name but was not heard in the movie.
HEROIN


Editors' Note
An article on page 1 of the Arts and Leisure section today describes the route by which the musical "Nick and Nora" made its way to Broadway.
After the section went ot press, the producers announced that the opening, originally scheduled for Nov. 10, had been postponed to Dec. 2.
In the article's continuatio, on page 29, two picture captions in a grouping headed "Cast of (Fiscal) Characters" are reversed in some copies.
James Pentecost is wearing a dark jacket and Charles Suisman a light-colored one.


Barbara Basuk to Wed Andrew Ship
Dr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Basuk of Gloversville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Barbara Jo Basuk, to Andrew Geoffrey Ship, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur G. Ship of Larchmont, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.
The bride, 37 years old, is an internist in Washington and Landover, Md.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her medical degree from Duke University.
Her father is a retired dentist.
Her mother, Ruth Basuk, also retired, was an actuary for Metropolitan Life Insurance in New York.


Roses Are Red, Columbus Is Angry
The sun had disappeared long before, and the air was chilled all day.
But in the final seconds of Ohio State's 16-9 loss to Iowa late this afternoon, as the record crowd began to file out, Ohio Stadium suddenly became a darker, colder place.
If a Rose Bowl victory is necessary for Coach John Cooper to complete his five-year contract next season, angry members of the crowd of 95,357 were ready to initiate a spontaneous referendum.


Baby Bells as Big Brother
Two official decisions in October, one liberating and the other frightening, may shape telecommunications -- and America -- for decades.
The liberating decision, by the Federal Communications Commission, proposes to allow the seven regional telephone companies to transmit TV programs.
If implemented, that proposal for video-by-phone would free families to tell cable operators, if they misbehave, to get lost.


Mansion Guests In Old San Juan
Casa San Jose, a 17th-century mansion that has been converted into a small hotel, will be the first new hotel in Old San Juan in Puerto Rico in nearly 30 years when it opens on Dec. 1.
The hotel is steps away from the Plaza de Armas and the City Hall building.
Balconies surround an interior patio, and the salon grande on the second floor, where afternoon tea and drinks will be served, spans the width of the house.
The hotel, with old marble floors throughout, will offer four one-bedroom suites, a two-bedroom suite and four double rooms.
The rates are from $150 single and from $170 double and include full breakfast and evening drinks.
Breakfast and a light lunch will be served in the dining room.
The house was restored as a private home in 1975; later it was used as offices.
Casa San Jose, 159 San Jose Street, Old San Juan, Puerto Rico 00901; (809) 723-1212.


Struggling to Keep a Blanket of Leaves Out of the Waste Stream
AS the weather turns cooler, Westchester's streets and lawns are increasingly blanketed with leaves.
To keep those leaves out of the county's overburdened waste disposal system, county officials have recently completed a series of contracts with private companies for leaf collection and disposal.
Yard waste makes up 17 percent, or 85,000 tons, of the county's residential waste each year, according to the latest study completed for the county, a 1988 study by the consulting firm of Malcolm Pirnie Inc.
While most of that yard waste represents grass clippings and wood waste, 26,000 tons consist of leaves.


More Towns Regulating Yard Sales
IN communities throughout the state, garage and yard sales are so numerous that traffic comes to a halt and sidewalks take on the appearance of a bazaar, with knickknacks, haggling customers and, for the more industrious, even refreshments.
But in recent years a growing number of municipalities have begun to regulate or to enforce existing regulations on such sales.
The new regulations take a variety of approaches, often in combination with one another.
Some require permits, others limit the number of sales a homeowner can hold in a year and still others restrict how many days they may last.


5 Democratic Hopefuls Mount Attack on Bush
Five of the major Democratic candidates for President mounted a fierce assault on President Bush here today, assailing his economic stewardship and asserting that the human cost of the recession was a direct result of Republican neglect.
One after another, the Democrats took the stage and spoke of the suffering of the jobless, the economically insecure, the parents who are working now but fear for their children's future.
"These are the forgotten middle class," said Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
"George Bush took their votes and walked away from them."


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Edison 225,000
32 Stephenville Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 24-year-old ranch; new heating system, finished basement; taxes $3,580.
Farmingdale 138,000
339 Belmar Boulevard  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; butler's pantry, deck, fenced yard, w/b stove; taxes $2,691.
Jackson 113,000
38 Citadel Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; remodeled kitchen, new furnace; taxes $3,300.
Lakewood 79,900
31 High Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old ranch; w/w carpeting, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $989.
Morristown 249,000
8 Tiffany Road  3-bedroom, 2.5-bath, 7-year-old executive ranch; close to transportation, master bedroom on first floor; taxes $4,847.
Ramsey 180,000
166 Prospect Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; new deck, fenced yard, h/w floors; taxes $4,333.
OTHER AREAS Rocky Hill, Conn. 155,000
28 Gilbert Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 34-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, walk-up attic, glass-enclosed porch, 0.75 acre; taxes $2,100.
Armonk, N.Y. 420,000
14 Long Pond Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 39-year-old colonial; family room, brick fireplace, eat-in kitchen, deck, 1.8 acres; taxes $8,455.
Centereach, L.I. 100,000
15 Stirrup Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $2,600.


Morality Play's Twist
Among liberals, the civil rights bill that passed the Senate this week has been an occasion for cheer not only for what it contains but also for what it represents: a repudiation of the Supreme Court's conservative majority who made the whole painful exercise necessary with a series of restrictive interpretations of existing civil rights laws.
Now that Congress has agreed to legislatively overrule those decisions, it may be tempting for liberals to view the two-year-long political struggle as a morality play with a happy and instructive ending: the arrogant and agenda-driven Justices taught a lesson by the people's representatives.


Bridge Over Troubled Waters
To the Editor:
Studs Terkel's gnawing doubt about whether a white man can understand a black man's blues brings to mind two anecdotes and an observation  [ "The Blues in Black and White," Oct. 13 ] .


Automatic? Then Why a Tach?
Dear Sir:  This letter is prompted by your article on the '92 Ford, which had special interest for me because I have a '91 Ford Taurus.
You mention that the instrument panel has a 7,000-r.p.m. tachometer.
What is its purpose, especially in a car with an automatic transmission?


Caterpillar and U.A.W. Far Apart as Strike Deadline Looms
Far apart on major issues, Caterpillar Inc. and the United Automobile Workers are moving toward a Sunday midnight deadline that could produce the first strike against the giant tractor and heavy equipment manufacturer since 1983.
The struggle, involving nearly 16,000 factory workers in seven cities, centers on the union's demand that Caterpillar accept, as it has in the past, the major provisions of the union's newly signed agreement with Deere &amp; Company.
Caterpillar is trying to break this system of "pattern bargaining" to reduce its labor costs.


CORRECTION
A report in the Postings column last Sunday about Eae J. Mitchell Terrace, a low-income housing project in the Bronx, described its developers incompletely.
It was developed jointly by the Procida Construction Corporation of the Bronx and the Mid-Bronx Desperadoes.


Look Inward, World Bank
To the Editor:
"Running Aid in Tandem With Reform" (Forum, Oct. 20) rightly emphasizes the need for reforms involving market incentives and development of "market-friendly" institutions supported by foreign finance.


Mug Shot


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the wedding of Jessica Phillips and James Lawler misstated the bridegroom's middle name and omitted the name of a Roman Catholic priest who participated in the ceremony along with the rabbi.
Mr.
Lawler's middle name is Edmonds.
The priest was Msgr.
Walter J. Kenny.


THIS SCHOOL IS OUT
It's surprising that, despite how far the gay rights movement has come in recent years, there has been virtually no change in the experience of gay childhood.
It remains a childhood of paranoia.
The hatred is scribbled on classroom desks.
"Faggot" is still the worst thing you can be, yet children hardly even know what it means.
Gay children get the message early on.
They're told that if they are to be loved and accepted by their families and friends, they must pretend to be something they are not.
They hear that if they try very hard, they can change the way they feel.
But, of course, they can't.
But the Harvey Milk School is an exception.
It has the potential to make the difference between a young adulthood of self-esteem and one of self-denial.
JEFFREY R. NICKEL Washington


Don't Fret, the Knicks Have 81 Games to Go
At least two things were clear Friday night after the Knicks' dreary season-opening performance in Orlando.
First, Pat Riley will need more than his designer suits to make the Knicks look good.
Second, unless Mark Jackson's play improves, the point-guard position may again become a focus of concern and controversy.
As the Knicks prepared for tonight's game here against the Heat, they were still trying to shake off the shock of Friday's 106-96 loss to the Magic.
Controlling play from the opening tap, Orlando held an opening-night party at New York's expense.
The Knicks were outworked, their offense lacked direction and they looked nothing like a team ready to contend for a division title.


School Sports' Last Rah-Rah?
FOR THE first time in the collective memory of Lorain, Ohio, autumn blew into the small, blue-collar town this year and no season of public high school football was there to greet it.
No cheerleaders.
No pep rallies.
No football players hitting the field and each other in the name of school pride and personal glory.
"It feels kind of messed up," said Frank (Scooter) Shrieves, the 17-year-old quarterback for the Lorain High School Steelmen, who still wears his football jacket to school.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Sparking Children's Interest in Vivaldi, Without Lasers or Videos
THE assignment: To capture children's interest in instrumental music without lasers, videos, flashy costumes or superstars.
Nationwide, music educators scratch their heads to devise a theme, a scheme that will open youngsters' ears to unamplified sound.
But as money for music education dwindles, the specter of orchestral extinction haunts the concert halls.
This is the tense climate for music programs for children, like the one conducted recently after school here at the Ardsley Children's Center.


U.N.L.V. Official Regrets Taping
The University of Nevada-Las Vegas official who ordered the secret videotaping of a conditioning class has apologized for his actions, but he said he was trying to keep the school's basketball program from getting the National Collegiate Athletic Association "death penalty."
Brad Booke, the U.N.L.V. legal counsel, said he was sorry for the controversy over the taping, but said he was worried that additional N.C.A.A. violations could prompt the association to shut down the powerful program.


Results Plus
RUGBY  Australia Wins Cup  Tony Daly scored the final's only try, and Michael Lynagh kicked the conversion and two penalty goals as Australia beat England, 12-6, yesterday to win the World Cup in Twickenham, England.
Queen Elizabeth II presented the trophy to Australian captain Nick Farr-Jones after his team withstood a late English comeback. (AP) TENNIS  Sampras Beats Chang  Pete Sampras defeated Michael Chang, 2-6, 6-4, 6-3, yesterday in an all-American semifinal at the Paris Open.
Sampras will face Guy Forget today in what could be a preview of the Davis Cup final between the United States and France, which will take place in Lyons at the end of this month.
Forget beat Jonas Svensson of Sweden, 7-5, 6-4, in the other semifinal.


Dr. Lisa Cohen To Wed in '92
D.
Bruce Cohen of Schenectady, N.Y., and Joan Dean of San Diego have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Lisa Cohen to Dr.
John Freedman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Albert Freedman of Jericho, L.I.
A March wedding is planned.
Dr.
Cohen, 28 years old, is a dermatology resident at the University of Louisville Medical School.
She graduated from Cornell University and received her M.D. degree from the University of Vermont.
Her father is an assistant principal at Shaker Junior High School in Latham, N.Y.
Her mother is an aide in San Diego for Lieut.
Gov.
Leo McCarthy of California.


Dartmouth Rally Gains a Tie and No. 1
Dartmouth and Harvard played to a 31-31 tie today, which did the Green more good than it did the Crimson.
The Dartmouth team continued alone in first place of the Ivy League, but only because Harvard botched a 27-yard field-goal attempt with 30 seconds left to play.
If that kick by Scott Johnson had been good then there would have been a four-way tie for first among these two teams plus Princeton and Yale with three games left for each.


Women in Waiting
ONE OF THE most striking paradoxes in education is the vast number of women in the rank and file of teaching staffs and the few among them who manage to ascend to positions in top-level administration.
Indeed, according to the American Association of University Women, about two-thirds of all public-school teachers are women.
But women make up only about 5 percent of the nation's superintendents.
They hold fewer than 350 of the nation's approximately 3,000 college and university presidencies, the association said.


American Blacks Back Mandela on Sanctions
The African National Congress has won the support of some prominent African-Americans in its campaign to maintain sanctions against South Africa and press the Pretoria Government to move faster to post-apartheid democracy.
The 33 black Americans, who included politicians, entertainers, sport celebrities, businessmen and trade-union officials, paid a brief but emotionally intense visit to South Africa from Oct. 20 to 22 at the invitation of the congress's president, Nelson Mandela, who sought their help in discouraging the Bush Administration from making new concessions to Pretoria.


Freighter Travel
To the Editor: The response in the Q&amp;A column to a request for freighter travel information (Travel, Oct. 6) omitted a source: Freighter Travel News, a monthly bulletin published by the Freighter Travel Club of America.
It consists mainly of articles by freighter travelers about their trips and also has news items about freighter travel and ads for travel agents.
An $18 annual subscription includes membership in the club: The Freighter Travel Club, 3524 Harts Lake Road, Roy, Wash. 98580.
MARJORIE DOVMAN Forest Hills, Queens


Spas in Telluride And Cotswolds
Telluride, the 19th-century mining town in southwestern Colorado is about to gain its first large full-service resort.
In April, the Doral Hotels &amp; Resort Management Corporation, based in New York, is scheduled to open DORAL TELLURIDE RESORT AND SPA, a complex of 177 guest rooms, 20 condominium penthouses and an array of recreational facilities.
The resort is in Telluride Mountain Village, a resort community overlooking the original town of Telluride.
Bonnie Reuben, a Doral spokeswoman, said the new resort would include an 18-hole golf course and 42,000-square-foot spa equipped with three swimming pools, Jacuzzi baths, saunas, massage facilities and a cardiovascular fitness center.
The company said double rooms would start at $150 most of the year but rise to a minimum of $325 in the ski season, November to early March.


Evacuated in Southern Lebanon


Let Soviet Private Enterprise Handle Aid
To the Editor:
Proposals for food and emergency assistance to the republics of the Soviet Union spring up, only to wither and die in the face of the Soviet Union's difficulties in aid distribution.
The old state transportation and distribution infrastructure in the republics is notoriously unreliable; it is widely felt that emergency aid channeled through disintegrating or inappropriate government structures is likely to be lost or misused.


Commercial Property: Livingston Plaza; Designed for a Dozen, but One Tenant's Enough
DESIGNED for as many as a dozen tenants, Livingston Plaza, the newest office building in downtown Brooklyn, wound up with only one occupant, the New York City Transit Authority.
But that suited the developers, Cohen Brothers Realty Corporation and Starrett Housing Corporation.
After all, the Transit Authority did more than take all 600,000 square feet; it bought the whole building, at a reported profit to the developers of $12 million.
The agency is using Livingston Plaza to house some 2,500 workers who had been dispersed through downtown Brooklyn.
Headquarters remains at 370 Jay Street.


Q and A
On the Trail of Ellis Peters
Q.
We are big fans of Ellis Peters, the medieval mystery writer who bases her stories in Shropshire, England.
Are there any tours of Shropshire with an Ellis Peters connection? -- Lisa and Kirk Werner, Morris Plains, N.J.
A.
The British Tourist Authority in New York says it is not aware of any organized tours, although local travel agents may well put together tours of their own.


World War II: Words and Pictures
Exhibits ranging from correspondence between Winston Churchill and Franklin D. Roosevelt to the sword of the Japanese commander of the River Kwai prison camp will be displayed at a World War II exhibition to be opened by the National Archives in San Antonio on Dec. 7.
The exhibition, "World War II: Personal Accounts -- Pearl Harbor to V-J Day," will travel across the nation during the commemorative period of 1991-1995 to eight of the nine Presidential libraries and other sites.
The San Antonio Museum of Art will house the display through April 5.
The exhibition focuses on 15 major episodes seen through the eyes of the rank and file and of Generals Eisenhower and Patton and the German Field Marshal, Erwin Rommel, and other leaders.
Diaries, letters, personal effects, photographs and films will be shown.
The items include Eisenhower's personal campaign jacket, Hitler's will and the Japanese surrender document.


Camera
In 1887, William Henry Jackson's photographs of Yellowstone were a critical factor in the United States Government's decision to make it the country's first national park.
Now the United Nations Environment Program is holding a large photography competition that it hopes will aid its efforts to save the planet from those who inhabit it.
The contest, "Focus on Your World," is in conjunction with the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro from June 1 to 12.
Winning photographs will be exhibited at the conference, and afterward, 206 of them will be shown around the world.


Dr. Kaltenbacher to Wed Next Year
Dr.
Laura Jean Kaltenbacher and Dr.
Robert Michael Freund, physicians in New York, have announced their engagement.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
Robert Blum of South Orange, N.J., and Philip Kaltenbacher of West Orange.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Freund of Lido Beach, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Dr.
Kaltenbacher, 27 years old, is a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at the Mount Sinai Medical Center.
She graduated from Yale University and received her M.D. degree from New York University.
Her father, a former chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, is the chairman of the Seton Company, a maker of automobile leather in Newark.


Cuttings; A House Plants Can Call Home in Winter
Victor Nelson stared rather gloomily at the variegated hibiscus filling the south window of his Victorian parlor on West 82d Street.
To the casual eye, it looked just fine; it even had a few red blossoms left.
But Mr.
Nelson pointed to the crinkled leaves on the floor.
"The maid doesn't like this plant," he said.
"By spring it's lost all its variegated leaves. It just gets thinner and thinner through the winter, but it holds on."


Jill Leslie Stein Is Engaged to Charles J. Meyer
Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Stein of Allentown, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jill Leslie Stein to Charles Joshua Meyer, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Meyer of Elkins Park, Pa.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Stein, 26 years old, is an assistant vice president at Financial Security Assurance in New York.
She graduated from Emory University.
Her father is a pediatrician in Allentown.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Carrying the State's Flag
TO the Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria, add the Christianne from Port Washington.
When an armada of 200 ships sets sail from Spain next summer, recreating the Atlantic crossing that Christopher Columbus made 500 years ago, a Long Island boat will be among them.


Beached Boy
WOULDN'T IT BE NICE
My Own Story.
By Brian Wilson with Todd Gold.
Illustrated. 398 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $20.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
GLASNOST BALLET
The First International Glasnost Ballet will perform this evening at 7:30 in the Shubert Theater in New Haven.
Artists from the Bolshoi Ballet of Moscow, the Kirov Ballet of St.
Petersburg, and the National Ballet of Prague, cohered into a new company, will dance excerpts from "Giselle," "Swan Lake," "Raymonda" and other classics.
Following this performance the company will embark on a tour of 50 cities across the country.


New Flights To Caribbean
AIR fares to the Caribbean this winter will be little changed from last year, and airlines will offer almost the same number of seats.
What has changed, however, are the many new flights to Caribbean destinations and greater accessibility for travelers who do not live near such traditional Caribbean gateways as New York and Miami.
Delta Air Lines will begin nonstop service from Atlanta to St.
Thomas on Dec. 15, the start of the high season to the Caribbean.
Continental Airlines has tripled, to 30, the number of cities -- including Denver and Cleveland -- that will feed passengers onto its 34 weekly Caribbean-bound flights from Newark.
And Northwest's schedule this winter includes the Detroit-Boston-Bermuda flight that it inaugurated last May.


Terreri Seems Blinded by His Own Light
Devils Coach Tom McVie says the only person who doesn't know that Chris Terreri is a star goaltender in the National Hockey League is Terreri himself.
The unimposing goalie stopped 21 shots, many difficult, and Claude Lemieux scored twice as the Devils defeated the Edmonton Oilers, 3-1, Friday night.


Jane Vaughn Love Planning to Wed James Henry McGraw 4th Next Year
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard M. Love of Pittsburgh have announced the engagement of their daughter Jane Vaughn Love to James Henry McGraw 4th, a son of Virginia S. Parker of Chatham, Mass., and Mr.
McGraw 3d of Hobe Sound, Fla.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Love, who graduated from Lake Forest College, is the financial accounts manager for Institutional Investor magazine in New York.
Her father retired as the chairman and chief executive of National Intergroup Inc., a pharmaceuticals distributor in Dallas, and is the honorary chairman of National Steel in Pittsburgh.
She is a granddaughter of Mrs.
George A. Vaughn of Staten Island, whose late husband was a World War I flying ace and a founder of the College of Aeronautics, and the late George H. Love, a chairman of Chrysler.


Miss Harrison Has Wedding
Sharon Lou Harrison, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar L. Harrison 2d of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Richard Lilly Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lilly of Ocean City, N.J.
The Rev.
Roger Vaughn, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Manhattanville College Chapel in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Lilly, 27 years old, is the research analyst for the Foreign Exchange Consulting Group of First Boston Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Rosemont College.
Her father is the advertising manager for Natural History magazine.


Syria's Tough Choice
Despite Syria's serious hesitation in the last two days over joining the next stage of the Middle East peace conference here, Arab delegates say neither Syria, nor any other participant, can afford to stay out of the process indefinitely.
Most of those attending the talks, including the Israelis, say they view the Syrian position as part of what they predict will be years of exhaustive negotiations.
The general sentiment here is that the Syrians will eventually take up a role in the talks, if not Sunday, then in a few days or a few weeks.


The Architectural Splendor of Big Trees
TREES are on everyone's minds these days.
If it isn't their leafy color (most of which has faded), then it is their leafy abundance that is now cluttering the lawns, gardens, driveways and paths.
But there is a plus to this autumnal ritual.
The trees become architectural features.
Their superstructures can be seen; that is, their trunks, limbs, twigs and shapes are exposed.
Some are splendid and picturesque on the landscape; others are just plain huge.
And these huge trees offer the most excitement.


A Fusing Of Forms
To the Editor:
In his article on the Black Rock Coalition  [ "No Rap. No Jazz. They Want to Rock," Sept. 1 ] , Tom Sinclair declares that rock-and-roll is "a music invented by blacks." Not so.
No one person or group "invented" rock, and devoted listeners as well as music historians disagree on what was the first rock-and-roll song.
Rock-and-roll is an amalgam of several music styles, of which black blues or rhythm-and-blues is a major component.
However, the distinctiveness of rock lives in its fusing of these black styles with various white forms, primarily country, folk or crooning.
Most of the pioneer rockers combined white and black styles to produced a music often superior to either of its parents.
Most obviously, this can be seen in the seminal rockabilly styles of early Elvis Presley, Carl Perkins, Jerry Lee Lewis and Gene Vincent.
It can also be seen in Chuck Berry's borrowing from country.
The influence of these performers is also evident in the work of many rock bands today.
Equally important are the contributions made by white groups of the 1960's that have no black roots.
These include British dance-hall motifs, standard songwriting structure, neo-folk, psychedelic, borrowings from Eastern musics and the electronics revolution, which includes everything from fuzz and flanger effects to drum machines and synthesizers.
None of today's rock bands are uninfluenced by these developments, and heavy metal and its offshoots are impossible without them.
Ignoring white contributions to American popular music is the politically correct orthodoxy of much music criticism in the United States today.
This is one instance in which some genuine multiculturalism is in order.
RICHARD F. WELCH  Huntington, N. Y.


Older Travelers
To the Editor: In addition to the organizations mentioned in the two articles on travel opportunities for older Americans (Travel, Aug. 25), I would add another possibility: The Close Up Foundation, a nonprofit, nonpolitical, educational organization at 44 Canal Center Plaza, Alexandria, Va. 22314; telephone 800-232-2000.
Last fall, I spent a happy week with them -- two days in Williamsburg, five days in Washington.
All meals were included with the exception of one lunch.
Rooms with bath were in typical large chain hotels.
My only expense was getting there.
The persons in charge of the week were extremely pleasant, helpful and knowledgeable about the area.
Our time was spent in a mix of sightseeing and worthwhile educational activities that taught us about the workings of our Government.
It was also possible to arrange meetings with our state Representatives.


Principals of Success
SCRATCH the surface of a good school, one where learning is abundant and real joy accompanies the search for knowledge, and it is almost certain that a good principal will be there leading the way.
While there is no consensus on what makes one principal more successful than another, there is consensus on the need to find out.
"The traditional role of the principal has to change if schools are going to change," said Phillip C. Schechty, president of the Center for Leadership in School Reform, a nonprofit organization in Louisville, Ky., that works with school leaders nationwide.
"If principals keep on doing what principals have always done, schools will keep on doing what they've always done. Even if they were real good at it before, that may not be good enough today."


Corrections
A report in the Political Talk column last Sunday about New York City's Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, misstated results of a poll conducted by the Marist Institute for Publicn Opinion concerning New York's 1992 Senate race.
The poll, of 624 registered voters, indicated that if the eclection were held now, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Republican incumbent, would defeat Ms.
Holtzman, a Democrat, 43 percent to 40 percent, and that Senator D'Amato would defeat former Representative Geraldine Ferraro, a Democrat, 46 percent to 38 percent.
It had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points.


Brett Aronow to Wed Keith Stein
Dr. and Mrs.
Phillip Z. Aronow of Haddonfield, N.J., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Jennifer Brett Aronow and Keith Haywood Stein, a son of Dorothy Price of Ojai, Calif., and Robert Stein of New York.
Ms.
Aronow, who is 28 years old and is known as Brett, is the manager of circulation and operations for Calyx and Corolla, a mail-order flower company in San Francisco.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University.
Her father is a surgeon in Malton, N.J., and is chief of surgery for the Malton division of the West Jersey Health System hospital network.
Her mother, Nila Aronow, is executive producer for arts programming at the New Jersey Network, the state public television system, in Trenton.


Military Spending Binge Got Us Into This Mess; Put People to Work
To the Editor:
There appears to be a consensus that the United States will emerge from recession by consumer spending.
Some members of Congress have proposed tax reductions, which they believe will put more disposable income into our pockets.


Talking: Trees; A Special Branch of The Law
GOOD fences are supposed to make good neighbors.
But the adage doesn't seem to extend to the trees hanging over those fences.
For years the courts have been cluttered with cases disputing the rights, liabilities and responsibilities of homeowners with trees that are close to a property line.
There is good reason.
A boundary tree, as it is known in legal circles, can become an annoying trespasser, dropping leaves into a neighbor's pool, shading a garden, clogging gutters, blocking sunlight from solar panels, denting a car when a limb crashes down and threatening damage from branches hanging precariously over a patio.
Meanwhile the encroaching roots may grab at the very foundations of the neighbor's house.


REPORT ON DAMAGE IN STORM IS GRIM
Disaster relief officials, environmental experts and grim property owners surveyed the wreckage of homes and eroded beaches along wave-battered coasts from New England to the mid-Atlantic states yesterday as estimates of last week's storm damage climbed into the hundreds of millions of dollars.
At least four deaths were attributed to the storm, which howled and hit like a hurricane and then moved slowly down the coast on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.
The storm reduced coastal homes to kindling and tossed ships and boats like toys, endangering scores of people at sea.


Drop in Births Reported, And Recession Is Blamed
Five years of steady increases in the number of births in America ended abruptly this year, and many demographers and economists are blaming the recession.
The Federal Department of Health and Human Services reported last week that 2,361,000 babies had been born in the first seven months of 1991, a decrease from the same period in 1990.
Since 1987, births had been increasing by more than 100,000 a year.


Cordialities and Crushes
THE confirmation hearings of Clarence Thomas continue to have linguistic and grammatical reverberations.
Trying to reconcile the differences in testimony, a puzzled Senator Hank Brown of Colorado said, "Most members are like I." The nation winced; the preposition
like
requires the object
me
.


Introducing the Poor to the Middle Class
In the 30'S, when the documentary impulse ran rampant across the nation, the Federal Government compiled the largest photographic record ever made of rural -- and some urban -- life in America.
From 1935 to 1943, the Historical Section of the Resettlement Administration and the Farm Security Administration produced something like 80,000 prints and 200,000 unprinted negatives.
These images, which influenced "The Grapes of Wrath" (both book and film), remain the chief source for the country's vision of the Depression.
Dorothea Lange's "Migrant Mother" and Arthur Rothstein's "Dust Storm, Cimarron County" have achieved iconic status; much of Walker Evans's finest work was taken for the F.S.A.


Inspiration From Sea, Earth and Sky
If you peer very closely at some of the new Bulgari jewelry, you might make out tiny fish swimming around a necklace, a tulip sprouting from a brooch or dolphins cavorting in the waves.
But you really need to take a close look.
The collection, called Naturalia, is inspired by the sea, earth and sky but not in a literal way.
"It's not obvious; it's very subtle," said Nicola Bulgari, vice chairman of the company.
He was seated in his office above the Bulgari store on Fifth Avenue at 56th Street in Manhattan, with jewels scattered across his desk.


Prof. Ellis R. Kolchin Dies at 75; A Shaper of Differential Algebra
Ellis R. Kolchin, a pioneer in the field of differential algebra and a Columbia University professor for 50 years, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 75 years old.
Dr. Kolchin died of pancreatic cancer, said his son, Peter of Newark, Del.


. . . And Another Question
To the Editor:
Has anyone who has ever listened to Jessye Norman or Kathleen Battle asked themselves, "Can a black woman understand European opera?" ELLEN J. CHRYSTAL New York


CORRECTION
The Residential Resales column last Sunday misstated the closing price of a co-op at 19 East 88th Street and omitted the identity of the seller's broker.
The price was $595,000; the broker was William B. May.


Uniting the Players
To the Editor:
As a former baseball player, I must respond to James Edward Miller's review of Marvin Miller's book, "A Whole Different Ball Game" (July 14).


Provocative Quilts Stand Out in a Dignified Show
THE craft exhibition of the New Jersey Arts Annual looks spectacular in the spacious new gallery of the Morris Museum.
At last, individual works are given ample room.
Strong pieces do not intrude on the message or style of subtler works; some large works have an entire wall to themselves.
There is a strength and dignity to this show that should silence forever that tired old question, "Is it art or is it craft?" Who cares about picayune semantics?
Here are artistic expressions in wood, fiber, metal, glass or clay, well made and well displayed.


Naughty Miyazawa
Reason No. 42 why never the twain etc.: In America, popular female entertainers routinely appear naked for magazines, movies or videos before they are old enough to vote; when it happened for the first time in Japan recently -- courtesy of Rie Miyazawa, an 18-year-old sitcom star -- the nation gasped.
It wasn't some sleazy magazine spread, but a presumably artistic bit of modeling in a soon-to-be-published book by a top photographer.
The book got a nice send-off recently when two of the country's biggest newspapers, the Asahi Shimbun and the Yomiuri Shimbun, broke another taboo by including nude photos of Miss Miyazawa in full page ads for the book.
"The acceptance level on all these issues is changing," said the head of the book publishing company.
An added fillip is that the young star shares the same name as the country's new -- and unrelated -- Prime Minister, Kiichi Miyazawa.
He had sought, and got, the star's endorsement shortly before the photographs became known.


Topics of The Times; Hype Versus Health
"A diet low in cholesterol . . . can reduce your risk of heart disease," stated an advertisement last spring for a popular margarine, implying that margarine is a healthy choice.
It is a fatty food that can actually increase the risk of heart disease.
Sensible legislation introduced by Representative Joe Moakley, Democrat of Massachusetts, would fight such deception by extending new food labeling standards to food advertising.
Last year's food labeling reform requires the Food and Drug Administration to strictly limit health claims on food packages to those supported by "significant" scientific agreement.
The measure also restricts use of terms like "low fat" and "light" on packages.
But the law doesn't cover such claims in food advertising.


Topics of The Times; The Bomb, in Latin America
It took courage for the Presidents of Brazil and Argentina to agree to ban the bomb.
But it takes persistence to follow through with detailed arrangements for international nuclear inspection.
Regrettably, these efforts seem to be flagging.
Last fall, Brazil's Fernando Collor and Argentina's Carlos Menem defied their military bureaucracies, renounced their nuclear arms programs and promised to open facilities to international inspection within a year.
Officials from the two countries have exchanged visits to some nuclear facilities.
But they have yet to sign agreements with the International Atomic Energy Agency opening the doors of all their facilities to inspectors.
Such safeguards are the best guarantee that future governments won't reverse course and resume a nuclear weapons program.


Leaking Chemical Shells In Iraq Cannot Be Moved
Thousands of leaking chemical shells scattered throughout Iraq are too dangerous to be moved and will have to be destroyed on the spot, the head of a United Nations chemical weapons inspection team said today.
The inspector, Bernard Brunner of Switzerland, said at the end of a two-week mission to Iraq that one-fourth of the bombs, shells and rockets found by his team at six sites could not be taken to a central location as planned.


Sunday Brunch, Chinese Style
WHEN NINA SIMONDS invites friends in to exorcise the midwinter blahs, it seems fitting that she should draw on her expertise to turn brunch, an old standby, into a culinary adventure.
The Chinese-cookbook author and resident of Salem, Mass., is quick to point out that brunch is a relaxed way to entertain adults and children together -- including her toddler, Jesse -- and that it leaves a lot of room for experimentation.
"It makes it more interesting to entertain if I try out new ideas," says Ms.
Simonds, an imaginative cook who has trained in Taiwan, China and Paris.
For this brunch, she combined influences from the Chinese provinces of Hunan and Sichuan and the port city of Canton with the Jewish culinary traditions of her youth.
In addition to tea-smoked Cornish hens with sesame vinaigrette and other Chinese-inspired favorites, she offered lox, bagels and orange juice as well as mimosas, coffee and tea.


Robin Feingold to Marry Richard Schottenfeld
Norma Revman of Interlaken, N.J., and Marshall Feingold of Oakhurst, N.J., have announced April wedding plans for their daughter Robin Merryll Feingold and Richard Paul Schottenfeld, the son of Marvin and Barbara Schottenfeld of Harrison, N.Y.
Miss Feingold, 24 years old, graduated and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
She is a social worker at Pride Site, a residential drug treatment clinic in New York.
Mr.
Schottenfeld, 30, graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.
He is a vice president of Cantor &amp; Weiss, a New York investment management concern.


Lynching Increases in Brazil's Shantytowns
In Palestina, a crowded slum of narrow alleys and raw brick shanties, word traveled fast on a recent Tuesday night.
According to the rumor, Doralice Santa Rita, a local girl, had been raped by Jose Adilson Reis, a stranger.
Within minutes, a furious mob cornered Mr.
Reis, who was terrified.
Taunts became kicks, and kicks turned into a fatal rain of blows with clubs and paving stones.


RADIATION STUDY FINDS LITTLE RISK
After 13 years of investigation, a team of scientists from the Johns Hopkins University has concluded that naval shipyard workers here and at seven other ports were not harmed by low levels of radiation while overhauling the Navy's fleet of nuclear submarines and ships.
The $10 million study, financed by the Department of Energy, is based on the work and medical records of more than 70,000 millwrights, welders, painters, electricians, pipefitters, machinists and other skilled employees who repaired and refueled the Navy's nuclear fleet.
Among the installations studied was the Electric Boat Division of the General Dynamics Corporation in Groton, Conn.


Steven Soderbergh: The Sequel
JUST BEYOND THE SET, extras cast as office clerks circa 1919 come and go.
Women sweep by in floor-length wool dresses, while men lumber out of costuming in stiff-front shirts and mutton chops.
In the purposeful, hectic half-hour before filming begins, all the 100-odd members of the cast and crew appear seriously busy, save for the director, who stands, hands jammed in pockets, looking happily useless.
Steven Soderbergh has never commanded such a large cast.
In fact, he says, "I've never been into double digits before."
The $12 million budget for this film, "Kafka," although modest by Hollywood standards, is many times what was spent on "Sex, Lies and Videotape," Soderbergh's acclaimed 1989 debut, which a number of critics called the best first feature of the decade.
Produced in obscurity in Soderbergh's hometown of Baton Rouge, La., it became a sacred text of the video-literate generation, its title entering the language and its success setting off a feeding frenzy for Soderbergh's talents.
Shot for just $1.2 million, it recently passed the $100 million mark in worldwide earnings.


Making a Difference; Desperate Straits for Mr. Tobiyama
American companies looking for a quick way into the Japanese market discovered long ago that one trick was to invest in a Japanese partner.
So 20 years ago, when Japanese cars were still a source of amusement for American auto makers, the General Motors Corporation took a 38 percent stake in Isuzu Motors Ltd., relying on Isuzu's senior executives, like Kazuo Tobiyama, to teach it a few things.
Now, just as G.M. is reeling from a $1.1 billion third-quarter loss, it is discovering that its partner is in equally desperate straits -- and Mr.
Tobiyama, Isuzu's president since 1984, may be on his way out the door.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
WHAT CAN RABBIT HEAR?
Written and illustrated by Lucy Cousins.
Tambourine Books. $12.95. (Ages 2 to 5) Rabbit is a very cheerful creature, who explores the senses in a series of question and lift-the-flap-for-the-answer picture books for very young children.
Rabbit hears the phone ring, sheep baa and ducks quack in this volume.
Fun with toddlers.


Florio Counterattack Carries Risks
GOV.
JIM FLORIO'S name isn't on the ballot in Tuesday's legislative elections, but if there were any doubts about his importance to the outcome of the voting, the Governor cleared them up during the last two weeks by joining the campaign debate.
The Governor's $2.8 billion tax program, enacted last year, has angered voters and raised the hopes of the Legislature's Republican minority, which is looking to wrest control of the State Senate and the Assembly from the Democrats for the first time in 20 years.
Democrats currently have a 23-to-17 majority in the Senate and a 43-to-37 edge in the Assembly.


China Issues Rebuttal to Human Rights Critics
As part of an increasingly vigorous and sophisticated campaign to debate foreign critics on human rights questions, the Government has issued a 62-page rebuttal to allegations that it violates human rights.
The report, which argues that Chinese have extensive legal protections, is well bound and translated into excellent English.
It appears to be the latest product of a new strategy to confront foreign critics head on instead of avoiding the topic of human rights.


Why Older People Are Richer Than Other Americans
The cherished idea that life gets a little better for each succeeding generation of Americans is being challenged anew by economic research suggesting that if present trends persist, only the best trained will continue to prosper while other Americans remain stuck at current standards of living or fall behind.
The notion that some Americans will be the first generation to live at a lower level than their parents has emerged as a campaign theme for some Democratic presidential candidates.
More important, it seems to be gaining ground as an issue in public opinion polls.
In a New York Times/CBS News poll taken last month, 52 percent of respondents said the next generation will be worse off than today's.
In March, the number was half that, 26 percent.


A Hole In the Heart Of 'Bathgate'
Why did they have to lose abbadabba?
In the film version of "Billy Bathgate," as in the E. L. Doctorow novel on which it is based, Abbadabba Berman is a man who computes numbers magically in his head.
In the real-life gangsterhood of the 1930's, this wizardry made Berman a valuable member of Dutch Schultz's gang, and turned ordinary Otto into Abbadabba, a name he reportedly liked.
This character is the solid foundation of both novel and film.
The fictional Billy Bathgate (Loren Dean) idolizes the legendary Dutch Schultz (Dustin Hoffman).
But when the 15-year-old Billy hooks up with the Schultz gang in its declining days, it is Abbadabba Berman who becomes his father figure.
Steven Hill gives the film its richest performance as Abbadabba, who is older, wiser and as decent as a crook can be; at least he hopes that in Billy's up-and-coming generation, crime will be an accountant's business, with no need to kill.


When Chainsaws Pare the Hills of Ancient Trees
Not counting Alaska, only about 5 percent of the virgin American forests that existed when the first iron axes arrived on Leif Ericson's ships still stand.
Many of the last ancient trees have been spared only by a celebrated diversion, the Fish and Wildlife Service's decision in 1990 to protect a little bird called the northern spotted owl.
That ruling infuriates Washington and Oregon loggers whose jobs are threatened -- the bodies of spotted owls have been found nailed to road signs.
But like the snail darter in Tennessee and the delta smelt in California, the last 3,000 pairs of owls were fading bit players in world ecology until they became the symbol of their habitat and the legal tripwire for rescuing it.
They can only survive in the mix of 300- to 1,000-year-old trees, fallen logs, dead snags, new seedlings and rich forest floor that characterizes old-growth forest.


Karen B. Wohl Plans a Wedding
Harold L. Wohl of New York and Arlene R. Buckley of West Nyack, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Karen Beth Wohl, to Raymond Alan Schmitt, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman J. Schmitt of Newington, Conn.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Wohl, 27 years old, is an associate at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from M.I.T. and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in the accounting firm of Braunstein, Stern &amp; Wohl.
Her mother is a personnel administrator at Rockland Community College.


An Ocean Away, Pundits and Former Players Offer Views of Madrid Talks
William B. Quandt  Political Analyst Brookings Institution
I think the Palestinian-Israeli talks will almost certainly begin and there will be some substance in those quickly.
The Palestinians have the most to gain, and the best chance to score a public relations coup by looking reasonable and moderate during these talks.
They might even surprise everyone with specific proposals early on.
They want this process to succeed more than anyone else.


Warriors Sign Owens To 7-Year Contract
The Golden State Warriors yesterday signed BILLY OWENS to a seven-year contract, less than 24 hours after acquiring the rights to negotiate with the forward from the Sacramento Kings in exchange for the high-scoring guard MITCH RICHMOND.
No other terms of the deal were announced by the Warriors.
The 6-foot-9-inch Owens, a former star at Syracuse, was obtained Friday from the Kings in exchange for Richmond, center Les Jepsen and a second-round draft pick in 1995.
Owens, Sacramento's unsigned top draft choice, was the third player selected in the 1991 draft.


Dr. Lipson Marries
Dr.
Rachel Elizabeth Lipson, an instructor in psychiatry, and Prof.
Gary D. Glick, an assistant professor of chemistry, both at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, were married last evening by Rabbi David Neiman at the Royal Sonesta Hotel in Cambridge, Mass.
The bride, 32 years old, graduated from Michigan and its medical school.
She is the daughter of Dr.
Milton Peter Lipson and Dr.
Marilyn Heins of Tucson, Ariz.
Professor Glick, 30, graduated from Rutgers University and received a Ph.D. degree from Columbia University.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Glick of Somerset, N.J.


Stumping in New Hampshire
On the day Jesse Jackson announced that he would not run for President, other Democrats were running fiercely, delivering blistering criticism of President Bush.
Page 32.


Breeden View on Litigation
The head of the Securities and Exchange Commission has called for a curb on civil lawsuits in securities cases and said the Federal racketeering law should not be used to put more pressure on defendants in such cases.
"There seems to be litigation over every conceivable item," the commission's chairman, Richard C. Breeden said Friday at a forum in New York sponsored by the Practicising Law Institute.
"The pendulum has swung too far in the direction of litigation."


Bridge
The Grosvenor Gambit is a peculiar play intended to annoy an opponent.
It cannot gain, might lose but never does, because the opponent cannot believe the gambiter would do such a thing.
There are also some pseudo-Grosvenor situations, when there is a subtle gain from an apparently foolish play.
In the heart situation shown in the diagram it might seem automatic for East to lead the king if he is attacking the suit, but that is not necessarily so.


Baker to Visit China
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d announced that he would visit China this month, in a trip bound to revive the debate over how to deal with Beijing's hard-line Government.
Article, page A5.


Writers' Loyalties Are Split When Their Editors Depart
When editors or executives leave publishing houses, they take their Rolodexes and their paperweights -- but do they take their authors?
Writers, after all, sign contracts not with editors, nor even with heads of publishing houses, but with the houses themselves.
Still, they develop relationships with people, not institutions.
Often when editors are recruited, it is not just for their talents but for the authors who may follow.


IN FIRST DIRECT NEGOTIATION, ISRAELIS AND PALESTINIANS AGREE TO DISCUSS SELF-RULE
In a day of intense diplomatic maneuvering that finally brought Israel into separate and direct talks with its Arab neighbors, the Israelis and Palestinians announced today that they would soon begin negotiations on self-rule for the West Bank and Gaza Strip, which are occupied by Israel.
The session in an ornate palace here, held after decades of war and hatred in the Middle East, was the first time the Israelis had openly met with a Palestinian group that publicly said it represented Palestinian national aspirations.
It was also the first time Israel had met with the Syrians, who regard Israel as their sworn enemy.


Books of The Times; The Gorbachev Version Of the August Coup
The August Coup The Truth and the Lessons By Mikhail S. Gorbachev 127 pages.
HarperCollins. $18.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Southdown Inc., Houston, completed an offering of $125 million in senior subordinated notes that include warrants to purchase common shares through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
The notes, which have a 14 percent coupon, mature in 2001. *
Stone Container Corp., Chicago, filed for up to $600 million in senior debt securities that it might sell directly to purchasers, through agents or through underwriters, which it said could include Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
COMMON STOCK *
Duff &amp; Phelps Inc., Chicago, has formed a closed-end investment company, Duff &amp; Phelps Utilities Tax-Free Income Inc. of Chicago, which is offering seven million common shares at $15 a share.
It will be listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
RATINGS *
Nueces County, Texas, Hospital District's $26 million in hospital revenue bonds, rated BBB, have been placed on credit watch by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Noble Drilling Corp.'s $65 million issue of convertible exchangeable preferred stock received a B rating from S.&amp; P. The company is based in Houston.


Public Relations Conference Is Devoted to Ethical Topics
ASKED if it were not paradoxical for the annual meeting of the Public Relations Society of America to be devoted to ethics, the organization's president offered a response worthy of his profession.
"Some people could be cynical about it; some people are cynical about the news media and reporters, too," said Joe S. Epley in a telephone interview last week from Phoenix as he prepared for his society's 44th national conference, which began yesterday.


Market Place; An Initial Offering That Lost Its Way
THE deluge of initial public offerings this year has been accompanied by a few missteps in which underwriters predicted strong earnings for the newly public companies, investors snapped up the stock, and -- surprise! -- earnings collapsed, leaving the underwriters red-faced and investors seething.
But rarely has the new-offerings market seen an episode like the one last week, when Prudential Securities had to grab back shares in Leewards Creative Crafts Inc. only a few days after offering them.
The reason: earnings by the chain of yarn and craft stores took an unexpectedly disappointing turn.
Rather than increasing 30 percent in the third quarter from a year earlier, as had been expected, the earnings were flat.


New Campaigns
*
"I refuse to sell your product," says the rock musician Frank Zappa in a commercial for Portland General Electric Co.
The spot, created by Borders, Perrin &amp; Norrander Inc., Portland, Ore., is part of a campaign to promote energy efficiency and conservation.


Smog Fight Is Dividing 2 Industries
Every time a car is refueled, the air in the gas tank, heavy with fumes, has to go somewhere.
If the fumes go into the atmosphere, they add to smog.
One solution requires changes in the car; the other, changes in the gasoline pump.
So far, this choice has made the problem unsolvable.


People
*
Scott J. Messinger, executive vice president at Scali, McCabe, Sloves, New York, has been promoted to the newly created position of director of client services from group account director.


Marathon Provides a Test for Rank-and-File as Well as for Stars


On the Phone From Philadelphia
For about $40, which doesn't even cover most course texts at Wharton these days, Penn fans who were out of radio range could have heard the Quakers' game last Saturday against Yale.
The trick: a telephone.


Bumpy Ride for C.I.A. in Effort to Hire Minorities
As the Central Intelligence Agency struggles to catch up to a changing world while simultaneously changing its image, one of its major tasks is attracting the right people to do the job.
But its first post-cold war recruiting campaign -- a full-page advertisement in Ebony magazine to lure black Americans into the traditionally white intelligence world -- has met with brickbats from lawmakers and prominent blacks.


The Soviet Disunion's Missiles
The disintegration of the Soviet Union has left hundreds of nuclear arms in republics eager for independence.
That risks perilous proliferation.
The world was reassured by the republics' initial virtuous commitment to become nuclear-free.
Now, however, nationalism is pushing them in the opposite direction.
The breakdown of authority at all levels of Soviet government makes prompt U.S. action imperative.
Yet the Bush Administration has failed to press for ratification of a strategic arms treaty that makes deep cuts in these arms.
With the Start treaty in place, Washington could quickly agree to deeper cuts eliminating the missiles outside Russia.
And it could insist on isolation of any republic that insisted on keeping nuclear arms.
What is the President waiting for?
No good can come of permitting nuclear arms to fall under local control in a region with uncertain borders and long-suppressed ethnic rivalries.
A nuclear-armed Ukraine would cause special alarm not only in Russia, but also in neighboring Lithuania, Poland and Germany.
Of special concern to the U.S. are long-range missiles based in Kazakhstan, the Ukraine and Byelorussia.
Washington took heart from a grass-roots anti-nuclear movement that prompted the parliaments in all three republics to declare nuclear-free status.
Washington expected them to turn their arms over to Russia, and even negotiated a Start treaty provision to facilitate that.
But irked by Russian pressure, the republics have had second thoughts.
Kazakhstan's President, Nursultan Nazarbayev, is now trying to use the 100 SS-18 missiles on his soil as a bargaining chip in negotiations with Moscow.
And ardent nationalists threaten to overwhelm the nuclear abolitionists in the Ukraine.
There have been disturbing efforts to bar removal of nuclear arms.
Washington remains unaccountably placid.
There is even talk of delaying Start ratification until the lines of political authority in the Soviet Union are clarified.
But that could take years.
Prompt ratification would put the U.S. in a better position to insist that successor governments live up to Soviet international obligations, including the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, which prohibits nuclear-armed states from transferring arms.
Washington could prevent proliferation by negotiating elimination of the missiles in the outlying republics.
The republics know that those missiles were not slated for destruction under Start.
Rising nationalism demands that they be given up only in return for cuts in Russian missiles.
The U.S. could make that easier by offering equivalent cuts -- accepting a lower warhead ceiling in Start.
Washington could also facilitate Start-mandated destruction of missiles by providing storage facilities and other help.
The Pentagon resists deeper cuts, saying there is no one in Moscow with authority to negotiate.
But appropriate interlocutors do exist in the form of a State Council meant to deal with nuclear arms and Foreign Ministry negotiating teams that include representatives of the republics.
The Soviet republics, splitting at the seams, have nuclear weapons.
The only rational American goal is the fastest possible nuclear disarmament.


Review/Theater; 'A Piece of My Heart,' Women In Vietnam
At the end of "A Piece of My Heart," Shirley Lauro's new play about the unsung American women who served in Vietnam, the characters appear before a replica of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington and place homely mementos of the war at its base.
It is a powerful tableau -- like every other glimpse of that long, dark wall -- and it allows Ms.
Lauro at last to stir up the feelings of grief and anger that she has been chasing all night.
Yet, for me at least, the feelings evaporated the moment I was back on the street, at which point I resented having my buttons pushed so cheaply.
Right until its coda, "A Piece of My Heart," a Manhattan Theater Club presentation by way of the Actors Theater of Louisville, is embarrassingly cliched in its efforts to bring home the stories of forgotten survivors of the Vietnam nightmare.
Are we to applaud a playwright who uses the wall to prop up what is otherwise an incompetent piece of work?


Army Rushes to Take a Croatian Town
Pro-Serbian Yugoslav Army forces attacked the besieged Croatian town of Vukovar today with the apparent aim of capturing it before a Tuesday deadline set by the European Community for Serbia to accept a peace plan or face sanctions.
At the same time, advancing Croatian units routed Serbian irregulars from eastern villages between the towns of Daruvar and Slavonska Pozega in Croatia, prompting as many as 20,000 Serbs to flee, Yugoslav press agency reports said.
Some accounts asserted that Croats had burned more than 25 villages populated by Serbs in the region.
The reports could not be confirmed.


Essay; Sununu Whitewash
Relax, everybody the White House counsel has "investigated" the case of the departing Sununu aide with no legal experience who was hired for $600,000 by a B.C.C.I. figure, and rendered this verdict: Nobody did anything wrong.
Influence peddling?
An attempt by intermediaries to obstruct justice?
Forget it.
Sununu's man agrees to give back the money; case closed.


Music; In a Rare Dvorak Opera, Man and Nature at Odds
More than the Iron Curtain has hidden the Romantic operas of Central and Eastern Europe from the rest of the world.
In the nationalistic upheavals of the last century, the musical stage became a place where shared mythology, folk song, dance rhythms and, above all, language met in defense of local cultures.
While Verdi spoke music's lingua franca and exported themes universally understood, Slavonic composers looked to themselves and stayed at home.
A few have broken free.
There could be, for example, no harder currency in international opera houses today than Janacek's.
Smetana's "Bartered Bride" is not at the center of the repertory, but it endears and endures.
"Rusalka" -- perhaps the most celebrated event in Dvorak's long but largely invisible opera career -- has come to Texas this fall in a production by the Houston Grand Opera.
Friday night's performance at the Brown Theater of the Wortham Theater Center helped explain why we should know it better and also why we do not.


Lure Talent, Urban Experts Tell New York
Manhattan remains the economic engine of the metropolitan region, but New York City is misdirecting its development efforts in a futile drive to retain traditional factories and back offices, a new study has found.
With the regional economy reeling from the recession, the study's authors say the city is wasting much of the hundreds of millions of dollars it offers each year in development incentives by directing such a large proportion to the real-estate industry.


Iowa Gunman Was Torn by Academic Challenge
To many of the 28,000 students who attend the University of Iowa, the Department of Physics and Astronomy seemed as if it existed in a universe all its own.
For six years, Gang Lu, one of the department's most gifted graduate students, knew that universe well as he explored the mind-bending complexities of space plasma theory, his specialty.
It is a stream of science so narrow, experts say, that only about 300 people in the world are conducting research in the field.


Danielle Leonhard-Spark Is Wed
Danielle Leonhard-Spark, the daughter of Dr.
Philip Leonhard of Hoboken, N.J., and Dr.
Arlene Spark of Demarest, N.J., was married yesterday to David Philip Bier, the son of Mrs.
Neil F. Luberti of Short Hills, N.J.
Rabbi Ely E. Pilchik officiated at Temple B'nai Jeshurun in Short Hills.
Mrs.
Bier, 25 years old, graduated from Cornell University, as did her husband.
She is a vice president at Mabon Securities Corporation, a New York investment banking firm.
Her father is an associate professor of sociology at City College in New York.
Her mother is an assistant professor at New York Medical College and the director of nutrition at the college's Preventive Cardiology Center.


As Maine Voters Cut Back Spending, Police Force May Go From 1 to None
Ted Reed, the police chief in this rundown town of weatherbeaten houses by Penobscot Bay, now exists on a salary made up of donations.
His old cruiser runs on gasoline provided by a garage owner.
Chief Reed's plight has been brought about by growing anger among the town's 1,383 residents over the recession and rising property taxes.
In September they voted to do away with their one-man police force, and the drive stalled temporarily only after some townspeople took up a door-to-door collection to keep Chief Reed on the job.


When Macaulay Culkin Speaks, A Hollywood Studio Listens
Has 11-year-old Macaulay Culkin flexed his considerable muscle with 20th Century Fox over the sequel to the phenomenal hit "Home Alone"?
Will his death scene in another film, soon to be released, traumatize the nation's children?
Is Macaulay's hardball game with Hollywood too rough -- even for the movie colony?
Film executives, many of whom would speak only on condition of anonymity, said that the responses to these questions were open to debate, but that the negotiations between Macaulay's representatives and 20th Century Fox have been about as delicate and sensitive -- and, by Hollywood's standards, as important -- as the current Mideast peace talks in Madrid.


Thomas's Wife Says She Was Harassed at Job
The wife of Justice Clarence Thomas of the Supreme Court has said in a magazine article that she was sexually harassed at work before she met her future husband in 1986 but did nothing about it until he persuaded her to go to management, which handled the problem "discreetly and directly."
In an article in the Nov. 11 People magazine, Virginia Thomas, a 34-year-old Labor Department lawyer and lobbyist, also described as "hell" last month's Senate confirmation hearings, in which Prof.
Anita F. Hill accused Justice Thomas of sexually harassing her when he was her boss at the Education Department and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission from 1981 to 1983.


. . . And Arbitron Tries To Track Buying Habits
The broadcast networks have complained about the A. C. Nielsen Company's national ratings system for several years.
Now one of them is backing a potential competitor.
CBS has signed on as one of the first clients of Scan America, a ratings service of the Arbitron Company, which has for years been a serious competitor to Nielsen in measuring ratings for local television stations.


CHRONICLE
It's going to be a spicy lunch for PAUL NEWMAN today at the Rainbow Room, but that's a matter of his own doing.
He is serving as the sole judge of a contest intended to help shoppers figure out what to do with his Spicy Diavolo Sauce.
The product was introduced last December by his company, Newman's Own Inc., which donates all its profits to charity, and reports began to filter back that consumers were baffled about what to put it on.
According to A. E. HOTCHNER, the company's executive vice president and chief executive officer and by his own description "incidental author," Mr.
Newman, who is president and "incidental actor," suggested running a recipe contest to generate ideas.
He proposed that the prizes be donations to the winners' favorite charities.
"But the people who know about these things said that would never work," Mr.
Hotchner said.
"People only want money for themselves. The minute you say money will go to something like the American Red Cross or the Cancer Society, they won't do recipes. Newman said, 'Rot. People want to give as much as they want to receive.' "
He was right.
More than 4,000 people responded to a notice in Good Housekeeping magazine, and the magazine winnowed the entries down to six contestants -- five women and one man -- from various regions of the country.
ANDREW WILKINSON, executive chef of the Rainbow Room, will prepare their recipes today, and Mr.
Newman will sample them, then declare the winner.
The grand prize winner will donate $50,000 to a charity, the other contenders, $10,000 each, and the stores where they purchased the sauce, $5,000 each.
The moral of the story, according to Mr.
Hotchner: "Through the devil will come great good."


Ogata Journal; Japan's Unlikely Rebels: The Fabled Rice Farmers
When this village on the edge of the Japan Sea was created as a giant national experiment 25 years ago, it was called frontier land in a nation with no frontiers.
Farmers were lured from all over the country with promises of vast, cheap land and a stake in a new Japan.
It was here, they were told, that the Japanese would teach themselves how to rival America's biggest farms and ease the country's perpetual worries about its over-reliance on foreign-grown food.


World Economies


Glossy Finish Buffered by a New Lease
The 108th National Horse Show, which made a point of accentuating the positive in the third and final year of its lease at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, concluded on a thrilling note this afternoon.
Rider-of-the-Year and Horse-of-the-Year honors had to be determined by a flash finish, a timed jump-off in the $100,000 Johnnie Walker Championship Grand Prix.
It was a rousing ending to a show that barely survived last year's austerity budget.
In keeping with the great expectations of its new president, Sallie Wheeler, adrenaline and attendance were on an upswing.


A Day of Rising Stars and Swan Songs
The Breeders' Cup series of championships confused more championships than it decided, but horse people agreed today that it had produced several new leading contenders like Arazi and Black Tie Affair.
And it also produced a record total of $71.7 million in wagering around the country on the heaviest day of betting on horses in North American racing.


Dismayed Homeowners View the Storm's Damage
As the summer ended, Joan and Morris Monowitz drained the pipes of their Fire Island home, stripped the beds and locked up tight for the winter, much as they have done for the last 21 years.
But today they returned prematurely from their Upper East Side apartment, joining many seasonal compatriots and the permanent population in assessing the damage and trying to salvage clothing, furniture and appliances from the wind-driven sea water that washed in relentlessly from the Great South Bay last week.


Faces at the Race


Workers Go on Strike At 2 Caterpillar Plants
In an effort to get Caterpillar Inc. to make concessions at the bargaining table, the United Auto Workers announced a strike last night at two Caterpillar factories.
The union's workers at Caterpillar's mining equipment factory in Decatur, Ill., and tractor assembly factory in East Peoria, Ill., did not report for work at midnight.
The Decatur factory employs 2,000 U.A.W. members, and the East Peoria plant 400.
There are 16,000 U.A.W. members at seven Caterpillar plants in the United States.
Caterpillar has refused to accept the union's demand that it sign the same agreement accepted recently by Deere &amp; Company, a manufacturer of farm equipment and other heavy equipment.
At a news conference last night, Bill Casstevens, the union's secretary-treasurer, said the union wanted to persuade the company to "abandon attempts at takeaways" but to limit the impact of a broader strike.
Caterpillar last night asked for a Federal mediator's help.


Metro Matters; After 50 Years, a New Powell On an Expanded City Council
FIFTY years ago today, a 33-year-old minister named Adam Clayton Powell Jr. melded protest and electoral politics to become the first black member of the New York City Council.
Tomorrow, his legacy will be rekindled when 29-year-old Adam Clayton Powell 4th is assured of election to the Council.
The Puerto Rico-born Mr.
Powell decisively won a special primary last week in a Harlem district where twice as many Hispanic people live as blacks.
In January, he will join 20 other black and Hispanic members of an expanded Council.


A Lions Quarterback Gets Mauled by Bears
After all the places Erik Kramer has known along the bumpy road to his first start as a National Football League quarterback, after the two years in Canada, the replacement games and the injuries, the bitter cold of Soldier Field was not going to present a terrible problem today.
Bear Weather? Have you ever spent November in Edmonton?


BAKER WILL VISIT CHINA THIS MONTH
After several months of secret negotiations, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d announced tonight that he would visit China this month, a trip that is bound to revive the debate over the Bush Administration's stance toward the hard-line Beijing Government.
Mr.
Baker will be the highest-level Bush Administration official to visit Beijing since the violent crackdown on democracy demonstrators at Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
His announcement of the trip, in a news conference at the close of Middle East peace talks in Madrid, came only a few days after reports that China may be helping Iran develop a nuclear bomb.


It Takes a Near Miracle, But Falcons Shock 49ers
Falcons 17, 49ers 14
ATLANTA, Nov. 3 (AP) -- It took a wild finish for the Atlanta Falcons to sweep the San Francisco 49ers for the first time in 11 years.
With one second remaining today, Michael Haynes went up among eight players in the end zone to catch a 44-yard pass and give the Falcons a 17-14 victory.


Legislators Ready to Review New Tax in Special Session
A special legislative session to consider repealing or amending the state's unpopular new income tax is now a certainty, the state Senate president said today.
The session is expected to include daylong public hearings in each Congressional district.
A vote on the tax in the legislature could be held as early as the first week of December.


Leaders Fade Into Also-Rans
He won the New York City Marathon in 1989, and came into the race this year as the runner with the best personal time: 2 hours 8 minutes 1 second.
That made Juma Ikangaa of Tanzania one of the favorites, and by the halfway mark yesterday he looked the part, leading the pack with a time of 1:04:32.


CONTEST IS TIGHT IN SAN FRANCISCO
Mayor Art Agnos can't wait until Wednesday, the day after an election that was supposed to be easy but has instead turned into a fight for his political life.
Swept into office in a landslide four years ago, Mr.
Agnos now holds the slimmest of leads going into Tuesday's nonpartisan election, which will be followed by a runoff in December if none of the five major candidates wins a majority of votes.


Democracy's Lies
Remember Elliott Abrams?
Just a few short years ago, the former Assistant Secretary of State was everywhere.
The youngest, most visible neo-conservative in the Reagan foreign policy apparatus, Mr.
Abrams logged more time on "Nightline" than anyone but Henry Kissinger and Alexander Haig.
On Oct. 7, Mr.
Abrams pleaded guilty to two misdemeanors of "withholding" evidence from Congress.
The Washington media, preoccupied with Clarence Thomas and Robert Gates, has once again let Mr.
Abrams slip through the cracks.
Elliott Abrams and his fellow young Reaganites were a tough-minded gang.
Steeped in 40 years of cold war myopia, they argued that if the Russians could lie, cheat and steal to extend their empire, well, then, so should we.


Abroad at Home; Where Is the Outrage?
Suppose that at this moment Venice were being shelled and bombed in a civil war, its treasured monuments menaced, its population starved.
Would the Western world be silent?
Of course not.
It would react in outrage.
It would intervene to stop such a crime against history and humanity.
But across the Adriatic today another historic jewel of a city, Dubrovnik,
is
being bombed, its population strangled by blockade.
And where are the world's protests?
Where is any effective action to stop the crime?


U.S. Olympian Got His Revenge
BILLY MILLS never got the autograph he was after. But he did get a gold medal.


Clement J. Wyle Public Relations Expert, 88
Clement J. Wyle, a magazine and broadcast writer and public relations expert, died on Thursday at University Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 88 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Closes Cochrane Chase
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. has closed Cochrane Chase, Livingston in Irvine, Calif., several weeks after placing the agency's parent, AC&amp;R Advertising, under the umbrella of another Saatchi unit, Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide.
Cochrane Chase's 33 employees have been dismissed, said Martin Tucker, president of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Holdings (U.S.A.) in New York.
Its clients, which included Pirelli-Armstrong Tire, with an estimated $2 million in billings, have been offered services through the Los Angeles offices of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, or Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York.


Accounts
*
Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston, to Frankfurt Gips Balkind Advertising, New York, to advertise the third edition of its American Heritage Dictionary.
The company plans to spend about $5 million for advertising and other publicity, to begin in July.


INSIDE
Imelda Marcos Returns
The widow of President Ferdinand E. Marcos returned to Manila to face graft charges, and perhaps to run for President.
Page A3.
Speaker on the Spot
Representative Thomas S. Foley of Washington is campaigning for his political survival, and he isn't even on the ballot this year.
Page A16.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week: Advance Interventional Systems Inc., 2.1 million shares.
Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.
Agricultural Minerals Co., 7.6 million senior preference units.
Lehman Brothers.
American Business Information Inc. three million shares.
Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.
Amphenol Corp., 16 million class A shares, Lehman Brothers.
Appliance Recycling Centers of America, 675,000 shares.
Craig-Hallum Inc.
Athena Neurosciences Inc., 3.5 million shares.
Paine Webber Inc.
Cambridge Neuroscience Inc., 1.5 million shares.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Century Cellular Corp., three million class A shares.
Lehman Brothers.
Checkers Drive-In Restaurants Inc., 2.1 million shares.
Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.
Collective Bancorp Inc., 1.3 million shares.
Lehman Brothers.
Custom Chrome Inc., 2.5 million shares, Prudential Securities.
Dateq Information Network Inc., 800,000 shares.
Chicago Corp.
Diversicare Inc., 1.35 million shares.
Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Elscint Ltd., six million shares.
Lehman Brothers.
Embrex Inc., 1.7 million units (one share/one warrant), Josephthal &amp; Co.
Guaranty National Corp., 6.25 million shares.
Lehman Brothers.
Health Management Associates, 2.6 million class A shares.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Namic USA Corp., the million shares.
First Boston Corp.
National Rehabilitation Centers, 1.2 million shares.
Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
Nutrition Management Services Co., one million class A units (one share/one warrant).
Stratton Oakmont.
Pacific Physician Services, 1.7 million shares, Furman, Selz Inc.
Platinum Tech Inc., 4.3 million shares.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist Inc.
PNC Financial Corp., nine million shares.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Sizeler Property Investors Inc., 1.5 million shares, Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.
Waban Inc., four million shares.
Wertheim Schroder &amp; Co.
Wabash National Corp., 2.4 million shares.
Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.
Source: MCM CorporateWatch


5 Issues in This Week's Treasury Auctions
In addition to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills totaling $20.8 billion, $14 billion in three-year notes will be offered tomorrow by the Treasury, as part of its quarterly refunding, followed on Wednesday by $12 billion of 10-year notes.
On Thursday, the Treasury will offer $12 billion of 30-year bonds.
Late on Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 4.76 percent, and the six-month bill at 4.78 percent.
The yield for current three-year notes was 6.05 percent, while the 10-year maturity's yield was 7.47 percent.
The 30-year bond ended last week at 7.93 percent.


Absolut Teaser Was Accidental
There is a glitch in the $1 million holiday advertising extravaganza from Absolut vodka -- a specially designed silk handkerchief to be inserted into tens of thousands of magazines.
The seven-color handkerchief, created by the designer Nicole Miller, is decorated with drawings of bottles of Absolut's four flavors: regular, citrus, pepper and currant.


Insurer Deal Hits Deadline
An insurance industry group is expected to work through the day Monday in an attempt to complete a plan to take over the failed Executive Life Insurance Company.
But it was unclear over the weekend whether the group, the National Organization of Life and Health Insurance Guaranty Associations, would be able to meet its Monday deadline for providing complete details of how it intends to complete the complex transaction.


Paul Russell Carro, AIDS Group Official, 34
Paul Russell Carro, a former official of the Gay Men's Health Crisis, died on Friday.
He was 34 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Carro died of complications from AIDS, said Greg Lugliani, the assistant director of the AIDS service and health advocacy organization.


Patriotism, Gumby and Rock 'n' Roll
Dressed in star-spangled uniforms and stretching their patriotic limbs before the start of the marathon yesterday were Ralph Perricella, a 23-year-old student at Queens College, and his wife, Colleen Cronin, a 21-year-old student from St.
John's University.
"I ran this marathon in 1989, and I met so many foreigners," said Perricella, toying with the brim of his red-white-and-blue top hat.
"I said to myself, 'The next time I run this race, I'm going to let people know that I'm from America.' "


Rare Miscalculation by Honda
Among automotive cognoscenti, the Honda Motor Company sits on a tall pedestal for its almost uncanny ability to aim at a market niche and fill it with a wildly popular car.
But after Honda's introduction of its Accord station wagon, that pedestal is not quite so high.
Nearly a year after Honda showed off its first Accord wagons at its Marysville, Ohio, assembly plant, American sales are running at about 2,000 cars a month, well short of the 3,000 cars Honda had hoped for.


A Critic of Justice's B.C.C.I. Query
The Senator who has led the Congressional investigation into the Bank of Credit and Commerce International says that while his inquiries have etched the broad outlines of wrongdoing at the bank, the Bush Administration and the Justice Department are still dragging their feet on prosecuting the wrongdoers.
Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, said he had prodded Justice officials to act against B.C.C.I. since early 1989, when he turned over to the department tape-recorded conversations of bank employees and other evidence of crimes.
He said he remained mystified by the lack of indictments against the bank or its officials. 'People Are Fed Up'
"I truly do not have the answer; it raises huge questions," Mr.
Kerry said in an interview on Friday morning in which he was asked to summarize the status of the B.C.C.I. inquiry by the Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee he heads, which monitors terrorism, narcotics and international operations.


Junius Jay Bleiman, Ex-Mayor, 68
Junius Jay Bleiman, a former Mayor of Princeton Township, N.J., and an administrator at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University, died on Thursday.
He was 68 years old and lived in Princeton Township.
Mr.
Bleiman (pronounced BLY-man) died of cancer, said a university spokesman, Justin Harmon.


The Green Slime: Jets Slither Past Packers
The Jets, playing as if they were still on vacation, sleepwalked for four quarters and allowed Green Bay to draw them into overtime before taking a 19-16 victory over the Packers today.
Pat Leahy's 37-yard game-winning field goal with 5 minutes 20 seconds to play in overtime was the only thing that salvaged the afternoon for the Jets and their fans.
Otherwise, 67,435 people at Giants Stadium would have wasted a beautiful, sunny afternoon and the Jets (5-4) would have been re-evaluating their playoff hopes.


Baby Death Is Homicide
A 17-month-old girl died on Saturday at Metropolitan Hospital in Manhattan, and the Medical Examiner's office yesterday ruled the death a homicide.
An autopsy found that the baby had died of injuries to the small intestine and a membrane surrounding it, apparently caused by a blunt blow to her stomach, said Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the Medical Examiner's office.
The child, Crystal Pierre, was brought to the hospital at 3:30 P.M. on Friday and died 16 hours later, officials said.
The police said family members, whom they would not identify, took the girl to the hospital from the family's apartment at 342 East 100th Street in East Harlem.


Sports of The Times; Jets Sputter Toward the Playoffs
AT the start of the season, who would have predicted that the Jets would win five games before the Giants did?
If the Giants win tonight in Philadelphia, their record will be 5-4, but with yesterday's 19-16 overtime victory over the Green Bay Packers, the Jets are already 5-4 and rolling toward the Super Bowl XXVI playoffs.
Well, not rolling really.
Sputtering is more like it.
But unlike their situation in other recent seasons, at least the Jets are not in reverse.


Haitian General Says Misdeeds Prompted the Coup
Brig.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, the leader of the Haitian Army in the military coup that deposed the country's first elected President last month, says he has no use for power but only seeks respect for the country's institutions.
In a three-hour interview in his army headquarters on Friday night, during which he was surrounded by nine of the majors and colonels who make up his high command, General Cedras sought to portray himself as an earnest democrat.
He said the responsibility thrust upon him to unseat the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide was "the greatest disappointment of my life, both as a citizen and a soldier."


White Plains Faces Vote to Limit Council Terms
In the final days before Tuesday's election, White Plains politics is focusing on the local version of the throw-the-rascals-out drive: a proposition on the ballot that would restrict the city's Council members to two consecutive four-year terms.
The proposition, the only one of its kind in the state, is opening in the East a debate about term limits that has been sweeping much of the West.
In Washington State, voters are to consider a term-limit initiative on Tuesday.


I May Have Been Lax, Says Beleaguered Dye
In the wake of damaging published reports describing alleged payments to a player, Pat Dye, Auburn's head football coach and athletic director, conceded today that he may have been lax in his administration of his football program.
"If the tapes are true, and the allegations are true," Dye said, referring to recordings made by Eric Ramsey, who played football at Auburn from 1986-90, "then what I'm guilty of is doing a damn poor job of management. I knew that there was a danger there and I didn't manage it the way I should have."


U.S. Is Shopping as Soviets Offer To Sell Once-Secret Technology
The Soviet Union is marketing an array of secretive items from its space program -- things that no spies or reconnaissance satellites could have pried loose during the cold war -- and the United States is so interested that it is sending teams of bargain hunters to look at the merchandise.
Items on the block include nuclear reactors, satellites, rocket engines, space stations, plutonium for compact power sources and a host of scientific reports on space testing and experiments.
The goods are seen as the cream of the Soviet industrial complex and in some cases are considered better than similar items in the West.


Giants Meet Eagles in the Battle for Survival
In recent years when the Giants have played the Eagles, the prize has usually been a division lead or a title.
Tonight, when these old rivals meet at Veterans Stadium in Philadelphia, both will simply be trying to stay alive for a wild-card playoff berth.
Halfway through this National Football League season, the Super Bowl champion Giants are 4-4 and the Eagles are 3-5.
The 9 P.M. game will be carried in New York by Channel 7 and WNEW (1130 AM).


New Today: The Metro Section
Today The New York Times begins expanded coverage of the New York region and the five boroughs in an enlarged and redesigned section.
More pages will be devoted to metropolitan news, gathered and organized by a larger staff of reporters, photographers, editors and graphic artists.
In Today's Issue *
Inside Cuomo's mind. *
Reinventing Manhattan's economic role. *
This week's traffic outlook. *
Metro Digest, page B1.


More Clubs Admit Single Women
Once upon a time, as far back as right now, some golf clubs wouldn't accept single women as members.


CHRONICLE
The voice will have a familiar ring to those who served in Vietnam when ADRIAN CRONAUER, about whom the movie "Good Morning, Vietnam" was made, makes his National Public Radio debut in a special Veterans Day program.
Now a communications lawyer in Washington, Mr.
Cronauer, who spent several years after leaving Vietnam in 1966 working in radio, said he would "look at the role Armed Forces Radio played in the lives of the G.I. in Vietnam."
"I will have excerpts of interviews with people who were there," he said.
"I will play music of that era and public service announcements like, 'Don't forget to take your malaria pills.' "
How will the show start out, he was asked.
"It will be 'Goooood morning Vietnam,' but done by ROBIN WILLIAMS, not me," he said.
"I did it differently, this way," he said, uttering the word "good" longer than Mr.
Williams ever did.
Mr.
Cronauer said, "Only now am I beginning to understand the impact the Armed Forces Radio had on G.I.'s then. It is not unusual to have a Vietnam veteran come up to me at a speaking engagement and say, 'Thank you for helping me to get through Nam.' That hits hard. The first time it happened I could hardly speak."


New Rockers Learn the Art of Schmoozing
A long-haired guitarist for the Electric Killer Grasshoppers, Rich Rosso Jr., roamed the Vista International Hotel in the World Trade Center carrying a duffel bag full of demos, promos and business cards -- like a traveling salesman at a salesmen's convention except possibly for the half T-shirt he was wearing and the silver chain linking his left nostril and left ear.
"We're basically trying to talk to record labels, trying to get a deal," explained Mr.
Rosso, 19 years old.
"They have all kinds of seminars, things about management and promotion, stuff like that. Getting inside the seminars, that's where you're going to make contacts. It's an investment for us."


No Evidence for Breast-Implant Cancer
To the Editor:
Contrary to your Oct. 21 front-page report that the Food and Drug Administration is considering a ban on breast implants, there is no credible scientific evidence that silicone implants cause cancer or immunological disease in human beings, but extensive epidemiological data about silicone's harmlessness -- in breast implants and other medical devices over a 30-year period.
Silicone is not an antigen, and therefore, by definition does not cause allergic reactions.
The hardness that can be seen in breasts reconstructed with silicone implants is caused by tightening of the internal scar around the implant, and is a cosmetic, not a health, issue.


Portrait of Gunman's Victims
Following are biographical sketches of the victims in the shooting rampage here Friday, drawn from information from the University of Iowa and interviews.
LINHUA SHAN, 27 years old, was a research investigator for the university's Department of Physics and Astronomy and had received a doctorate from the department in May.
A native of China, Mr.
Shan was a member of the theoretical space physics group organized by two of the slain professors, Christoph K. Goertz and Robert Alan Smith.
Mr.
Shan was married and had no children.
ROBERT ALAN SMITH, 45, came to the university in 1989 after eight years as a research physicist for a private company.
Dr.
Smith, a graduate of Northwestern University and the University of Maryland, was known as a leader in the field of space plasma theory.
He was married and the father of a six-year-old son.
CHRISTOPH K. GOERTZ, 47, came to the university in 1973 as a research associate and was appointed a full professor of physics in 1981.
Dr.
Goertz published more than 150 scientific articles and served as editor of the Journal of Geophysical Research.
A native of Danzig, Germany, he received degrees from the Technische University Berlin in Berlin and Rhodes University in Grahamstown, South Africa.
DWIGHT R. NICHOLSON, 44, came to the university in 1978 and became a full professor of physics in 1986.
He had been chairman of the Department of Physics and Astronomy since 1985.
A graduate of the University of Wisconsin and the University of California at Berkeley, Dr.
Nicholson was active in plasma physics research and had published a graduate-level textbook on plasma theory.
T.
ANNE CLEARY, 56, was the vice president for academic affairs.
She came to the university in 1979 as a professor of educational measurement and statistics.
Dr.
Cleary, an authority in educational testing, graduated from Marquette University in Milwaukee and the University of Illinois, Urbana.
MIYA SONYA RODOLPHO-SIOSON, 23, who is listed in critical condition, was working temporarily as a receptionist in the office of academic affairs.
Ms.
Rodolpho-Sioson is an honors student majoring in Spanish and Portuguese and global studies.
Born in the Philippines, she received her American citizenship last month.


Quotation of the Day
"Nobody ever contemplated that the Soviet military-industrial complex would end up in Chapter 11. It's the yard sale at the end of history." -- RUSSELL SEITZ, of the Olin Center for Strategic Studies at Harvard.  [ A1:5 ]


No Evidence for Breast-Implant Cancer; Burden on the Maker
To the Editor:
In "Beauty and the Breast" (editorial, Oct. 25), you state that we lack "evidence that silicone implants are truly dangerous or truly harmless." Plenty of women around the country testify to problems.
Manufacturers and doctors acknowledge harm.
The Food and Drug Administration is mandating a simpler package insert listing risks for the patient.


Israel Scales Back Its Lebanon Shelling but Denies Yielding to U.S. Pressure
Israeli forces scaled back their artillery bombardment of guerrilla targets in southern Lebanon today, but officials here rejected suggestions that they had yielded to United States pressure to avoid actions that might derail the Middle East peace talks.
Hundreds of Lebanese families who had fled the shelling returned to their homes today.


Ms. Turin Weds David Halper
Lynn Marlene Turin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Turin of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to David Grad Halper, the son of Rose Lee Halper and Charles Halper of Westport.
Rabbi Jonathan Rubenstein officiated at Temple Israel in Westport.
Mrs.
Turin Halper, 27 years old, is a systems engineer for International Business Machines in Norwalk, Conn., and a graduate of Bucknell University.
Her father heads Turin Associates, a management consulting concern in Westport.


Sports of The Times; Starts and Finishes: The Tale of the Tape
BY half past six, the morning gray and chilly at the foot of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, Becky Clark was already pinning to runners snippets of orange ribbon.
"Finish line tape," she would say.
"If you start having trouble, just give it a touch. It's magic."
In her red-and-white windbreaker, patting runners on the back and laughing her hearty laugh, Becky Clark yesterday was herself a touch of New York City magic.
On the day of Fred Lebow's annual town meeting known as the Marathon, she was one of the many social workers, psychologists and psychiatrists who formed the Psych Team.
But here was one with her own special story of inspiration.


Camden Gets Ready to Serve the Next Course


THE MIDDLE EAST TALKS: A Step Ahead in Madrid; At Last, all the Players in the Middle East Have Sat Down and Talked to Each Other
The Madrid peace conference started off with kicking and screaming, but it ended with about as much as Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d could have hoped for: the beginning of the first viable negotiating process between Arabs and Israelis since the Camp David talks in 1978.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Saturday about Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa of Syria referred incorrectly in some editions to the wanted poster of Yitzhak Shamir that he held.
It was a 1948 poster.


Trials Face a Hurdle Named David Duke
As the United States Olympic Committee ended five days of meetings today with approval of new procedures to resolve questions of ethical behavior, officials from the national governing body for track and field, The Athletics Congress, found themselves worrying about a far more urgent matter.
With the 1992 Olympic trials scheduled to be held next June in New Orleans, the officials acknowledged they were concerned that State Representative David Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan leader, might win election Nov. 16 to become Governor of Louisiana.
If he succeeds, they said, it is probable that the trials will be moved to another site.


Teachers Try to Pass On A Zeal for Rain Forests
Unlikely as it sounds, the Garden State better known for pinelands and beaches -- has what is probably the country's greatest talent pool of teachers knowledgeable about tropical rain forests, with expertise in Amazon katydids, the venom-squirting Bufo-Marinus toad of Trinidad and Costa Rica's poisonous fer-de-lance.
The teachers came by their knowledge first-hand because a creative philanthropy based in Morristown has been sending them to places like Papua New Guinea, the South China Sea Islands and just about every South and Central American country with a rain forest.


80 Are Reported Dead In North Korean Blast
An explosion that rocked a North Korean town four days ago killed up to 80 people and wrecked or damaged hundreds of buildings, a South Korean Defense Ministry official said today.
"I heard between 60 and 80 residents were killed and many others injured in the explosion," said the official, who spoke on condition that he not be identified.


Dividend Meetings


New Jersey Residents Look to Election


'90 Pact Failing To Curb Deficit, Lawmakers Say
Members of Congress say that last year's budget agreement, despite its heralded promise to reduce the Federal deficit, has given them virtual license to disregard a deficit that has swollen to its highest level ever.
The budget agreement, reached a year ago by Congressional leaders and the Bush Administration, imposed new fiscal discipline on Congress, requiring it to pay for new spending with tax increases or spending cuts elsewhere.
And it included yearly targets for the size of the deficit.


Missing a Couple of Key Moments
The New York City Marathon is ABC's annual chance to produce a dazzling moveable feast of video imagery, an achievement made difficult by the topography of a city that conspires to zap radio signals and satellite transmissions.
From the top of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge to shots taken of runners with hand-held cameras on motorcycles, the pictures were almost always spectacular, compensating for the fact that the marathon is not usually a spellbinder from start to finish.


Review/Pop; Audience Participation In Reverie and Dancing
The groups in the newest wave of English bands often have names like Lush, or Blur, or Slow Dive, names that imply some sort of extremity or a manipulation of the senses.
The groups play music that, gauzy and wavelike, reproduces a type of ecstatic experience; words are secondary to the whispers of melody that their singing produces.
And though the bands make the music with guitars, bass and drums, it's often disembodied and ethereal, treated with electronics.
The music allows dissonances to hide in chords that move slowly from tonality to tonality; clouds of metallic overtones billow as if blown by wind.
Since the bands keep their rock posture -- they play guitars, dress casually -- with all the implications of a local poverty-stricken scene, the music is the triumph of small-scale, affordable technology.
Slow Dive and Blur made it to the Marquee on Friday night and the bands produced radically different sets.
Slow Dive opened the show, and the band members just stood there.
Using 2 or 3 guitars, including a 12-string, the group produced huge, shimmering exhalations of sound.
Though the music appeared to stand still at times, with sung melodies creeping along lengthened by electronic delay, and the guitar puffs seemingly static, the group's drummer kept a faster tempo going.
Not much happened in the music; the duration of each piece stretched out, with hardly any major rhythmic, harmonic or textural change and there were no solos.
It's interior music, music that allows listeners to participate as individuals involved in their own reverie.


Why We Couldn't Stop Watching the Hearings; A Classless Society?
To the Editor:
It can be argued that the ceremony in which Clarence Thomas took the constitutional oath Oct. 18 as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court witnessed the enduring power of a central American myth -- the myth of classlessness.
Prof.
Benjamin DeMott in "The Imperial Middle: Why Americans Can't Think Straight About Class" explains that "by talking class while denying explicitly or implicitly that class is meant, speakers cope with a central paradox, namely that they belong to a class society that is nevertheless highly gratified by its egalitarian ideals."


CHRONICLE
The usually lively cast of "Star Trek: The Next Generation" settled down when LEONARD NIMOY showed up for a guest appearance, said BRENT SPINER, who plays Data.
Mr.
Nimoy, in his old "Star Trek" role of Mr.
Spock, appears in a two-part episode of the successor to the original science-fiction show set on the starship Enterprise.
The shows will be broadcast this week and next.
"We have a raucous set," Mr.
Spiner said in the current issue of TV Guide, The Associated Press reported.
"We all regard the bridge of the ship as one big nightclub that goes on all day, only to be interrupted by having to do scenes from the show."
"But we were on our best behavior when Leonard was on the set," he said.
"It was kind of like we were working with a visiting dignitary."
Mr.
Spock was "Star Trek's" egghead, not unlike Mr.
Spiner's character, who often reels off scientific jargon.
"Leonard told me that by the third year of the original 'Star Trek,' he was losing brain cells," Mr.
Spiner said.
"I said, 'I had the advantage of starting this series with no brain cells to begin with.' "


Speaker Campaigns to Save Political Life
His personal prestige and that of Congress on the line, Speaker Thomas S. Foley campaigned for his political life throughout his home state this weekend.
Mr.
Foley, a Democrat, is not running against anyone.
Rather, he is campaigning against a ballot initiative that, by limiting the number of terms politicians can serve, would end his career in Washington.


In Houston, a Mythic Ecological Struggle by Dvorak


Driver Hits A Bus Stop In the Bronx, Injuring 5
A driver crashed her car into five women who were waiting at a Bronx bus stop on their way to work at Jacobi Hospital yesterday morning, injuring one of them critically, the police said.
The driver, Dianne Damelio, 32 years old, of Clinton, Conn., was driving a blue 1985 Chevrolet Cavalier eastbound on Pelham Parkway South near the intersection of Williamsbridge Road in the Morris Park section at 7 A.M. when her car jumped the curb and struck the women, said a police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch.


Despite Odds, Many of Them, A Bedeviled Orchestra Persists
Over the last dozen years, the Detroit Symphony Orchestra has faced financial, artistic and labor problems that have come close to killing it several times.
It has even confronted challenges about its racial makeup.
But every time the music world thought it was down for the count, the orchestra has managed to rise again.
Its latest crisis, which hit three weeks ago, is a cut in the Michigan budget that the orchestra says will cost it $1.9 million in state support.
Nevertheless, tonight the Detroit Symphony is to give its first Carnegie Hall concert since 1988 in its first New York City appearance with Neeme Jarvi, the 53-year-old Estonian conductor who became its music director in September.


Review/Music; Still Avant-Garde After All These Years
The Kitchen celebrated its 20th anniversary with the last of three special concerts on Saturday night devoted to "Five Generations of Composers." It was an avant-garde institution's tribute to itself upon nearly reaching its majority: by traditional avant-garde standards such a birthday would be a sign of sclerotic old age.
In fact, the Kitchen may have already achieved what any self-respecting avant-gardist dares not hope for: success.
The Kitchen's early presentations of the Minimalism of La Monte Young, for example, helped nudge the style into the mainstream; the Kitchen's emphasis on "performance" art and multi-media installations has had a similar effect, and its devotion to improvisatory rock with self-consciously high aspirations even started to inspire programming at Lincoln Center's Serious Fun series.
Uptown has taken on as much of the downtown sensibility as it can afford; the nearly out-of-town Brooklyn Academy of Music has institutionalized the rest.


Cuomo, Through His Own Looking Glass
Mario M. Cuomo knows he's driving everyone crazy, and says he dearly wishes he'd just get a sign from the heavens.
"I often wonder why God was so good to Paul," the Governor of New York mused, sitting in his Manhattan office Thursday evening, sipping coffee as the skyline grew dark and talking about the Biblical conversion of Saul of Tarsus to Paul.


Television Gets on the Bandwagon Of the Thomas-Hill Contretemps
Given the national fascination with the televised hearings on the confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas for the Supreme Court, it was inevitable that entertainment television would jump to include material taken from the headlines.
The shows that depend on headlines for satire, such as "Saturday Night Live" and "In Living Color" were on the case immediately, of course; "Saturday Night Live" had a sketch based on the Senate hearings.
Several series also began considering some kind of examination of sexual harassment in the workplace, though the issue has been well covered in the past.
The producers of the CBS drama "The Trials of Rosie O'Neill," are considering such a plot line.
Other shows may only make some fleeting reference to the Thomas case.
NBC's "A Different World" may include one small plot element that would touch on the case.
CBS's "Murphy Brown" plans to follow its standard policy of commenting comically, though pointedly, on stories in the news.


Cuomo Seeks New Environmental Fund to Aid Economy
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo will propose the establishment of a special state fund to pay for tens of millions of dollars of water, sewage and other environmental improvements on Long Island, as part of a new state effort to rebuild the region's faltering economy, administration officials said today.
The environmental fund, the officials said, will be part of a broader plan to speed up public works projects immediately, to work on long-term development of airports, roads and ferry service, and to help Long Island cope with its rising unemployment and faltering defense industries.
Mr.
Cuomo is scheduled to unveil the plan next week.


Vote 'Yes,' Three Times
New York voters will find three proposals on their ballots tomorrow, one big and two little; all three make sense and deserve approval.
The truly important ballot measure is
Proposal One
, which would expand the borrowing power of the Job Development Authority.
This is a state agency that makes low-interest loans to businesses trying to expand.
Its record of loan repayment is impeccable.
Though opponents fear further indebtedness by state authorities, the authority is one of the state's most effective levers for economic growth.
A "yes" vote is all the more important in light of the current economic slump.
Proposal Two
would authorize a 50-acre land swap.
Piseco Airport, a one-runway haven for small planes in Hamilton County, and the only airport in the southern Adirondacks, is threatened by the growth of trees.
A constitutional amendment is required to authorize a swap of locally owned land for 50 acres of forest preserve that will enable local authorities to clear land around the runway.
The impact on the forest would be negligible; the additional safety factor is extremely significant.
Vote "yes."
Proposal Three
would authorize new development along the Erie Canal, which crosses the state, connecting the Hudson River with the Great Lakes.
This early 19th-century development was instrumental in opening the Midwest to settlement.
It has become a lively tourist attraction; to expand that role, a constitutional change is required to permit leasing and development of adjacent areas.
Tolls would also be authorized.
Objectors are right to insist that a comprehensive plan should be developed, but the time to develop it is after the voters have indicated their support.
Again, vote "yes."


Review/Television; Groucho Marx Behind the Mustache
Woman, shocked by marriage proposal: "But that's bigamy!"
Leering suitor: "Yes, and it's big of me, too."
Anyone even remotely interested in comedy will recognize this daffy exchange as vintage Groucho Marx.
The painted mustache and restless eyebrows, the loping walk and cigar were only props.
The humor and wit were in the words and the deadpan rat-a-tat-tat delivery suggesting unbounded devilishness.
Groucho, who was named Julius Henry Marx when he was born in 1891, was an original, as we are reminded all over again in a documentary written by David Ansen, narrated by David Steinberg and produced by Ellen M. Krass and Susan F. Walker.
With a trendy long title, "Here He Is . . . the One, the Only . . . Groucho" will have its premiere at 10 tonight on Home Box Office.


Autumn Pizazz
From what can be seen while driving along the parkways, the autumn foliage this year has been so-so, a nice mix of standard colors but nothing much to knock your eye out -- except, that is, for what the sumacs have come up with.
A lowbrow kind of tree, the sumacs have broken out into gaudy scarlets, mottled crimsons and green-tinged oranges, adding a flashy fringe to the roadsides and giving the season a last little bit of pizazz.


Imelda Marcos Returns to Philippines
Nearly six years after fleeing in disgrace with crates of gold and pesos, Imelda Marcos set foot on Philippine soil again today to face court charges of graft and tax evasion, and perhaps to run for President.
She was greeted here with tight security as she arrived with all the flamboyance that had made her a symbol of the excesses of her husband, the late President Ferdinand E. Marcos.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Paris Title for Forget Guy Forget of France rallied from a set down to beat Pete Sampras of the United States, 7-6, 4-6, 5-7, 6-4, 6-4, and win the Paris Open yesterday.
In a match billed as a possible preview of a Davis Cup match later this month, Forget duplicated his victory over Sampras in the Association of Tennis Professionals Championships in Mason, Ohio, last August.
Sampras and Forget are almost sure to be picked to represent their countries in the Davis Cup championship matches Nov. 29-Dec.1 in Lyons, France.
The 3-hour-45-minute final came down to the 10th game in the fifth set.
Sampras got himself into a hole with three errors to make it 15-40.
He saved one match point with an an ace.
Then he rushed the net and Forget set the ball back long and wide to save another and put it at deuce.
A net approach by Forget forced Sampras into a forehand long.
Then on the third match point another attack by Forget set up an easy volley into the open court.
Forget won $270,000 for the vic- tory.(AP) Rubin Loses to Applemans: Third-seeded Sabine Appelmans of Belgium won 11 of the last 13 games to capture her first professional title with a 7-5, 6-1 victory over 15-year-old American Chanda Rubin in the $150,000 Arizona Tennis Classic in Scottsdale, Ariz.
Appelmans's $27,000 winner's check was the biggest of her three-year career.
The victory lifted Appelmans, 19, to a career-high 18th in the rankings.
Rubin was seeking her first title in only her second tournament since turning pro at the United States Open in September. (Reuters) GOLF Green Leads Americans Tammie Green shot a 69, the day's best score, and led the American Ladies Professional Golf Association tour players to victories in 9 of 16 matches yesterday as the United States team completed a 21 1/2-10 1/2 victory over a Japanese L.P.G.A. tour team in the Nichirei International in Ina, Japan.
Green beat Fusako Nagata, 69-78, on the 6,265-yard, par-72 Tsukuba Country Club course. (AP)
Sweden Defeats Wales: Anders Forsbrand and Per-Ulrik Johansson of Sweden came from behind in the final round yesterday to edge Ian Woosnam and Philip Price of Wales by a single stroke and win the World Cup in Rome.
Woosnam, the Masters champion, shot a five-under-par 67 and won the individual title with a 273. (AP) AUTO RACING Short Victory for Senna Ayrton Senna won the shortest Formula One race ever run yesterday and led McLaren-Honda to the manufacturers championship when a chaotic Australian Grand Prix was stopped after torrential rain caused a series of wild crashes in Adelaide.
No one was seriously injured, but there were a number of close calls.
The street-course race was halted after 17 laps and called off an hour later as the heavy rain continued.
Senna was timed at 24 minutes 34.899 seconds for 14 laps, an average of 80.262 miles an hour.
Under the rules, the standing after 14 laps was adapted as the official result.
Nigel Mansell of Britain, who crashed on the 16th lap, was awarded second place in his Williams-Renault.
The previous shortest race in Formula One history was the 1985 Spanish Grand Prix, halted after 29 laps following an accident in which five people died. (AP) N.H.L.
Canucks Win Big Both Igor Larionov and the Canucks broke out of slumps yesterday in a 7-2 victory over the Edmonton Oilers in Vancouver.
Laroniov hadn't had a goal in 10 games and the Canucks had been having problems with their special-teams play.
But both became a thing of the past.
Larionov had three goals and the Canucks scored four power-play goals and a short-handed goal. (AP) Blues 3, Jets 3: Defenseman Jeff Brown scored with 28 seconds left in regulation as visiting St.
Louis rallied from a two-goal deficit late in the third period to tie Winnipeg. (AP) North Stars 4, Blackhawks 4: Mike Modano's second goal of the game -- also his second of the season -- with 3:58 left in regulation enabled the Minnesota North Stars to salvage a 4-4 tie with the Blackhawks in Chicago.
Minnesota goaltender Jon Casey returned to the nets after sitting out Saturday night's game against Chicago in a contract dispute. (AP) N.B.A.
Robinson Leads Spurs David Robinson scored 33 points and hit two free throws that broke a late tie in leading San Antonio to a 106-98 victory over the SuperSonics in Seattle.
Gary Payton's steal and layup for Seattle tied the game at 95-95 with 2:29 left.
But Robinson scored 7 points in the final two minutes on three free throws and two dunks as San Antonio pulled away. (AP)


Good Reasons Not to Forget Tomorrow's City Council Election
To the Editor:
Next January, 51 people will come together as a group and form the second most powerful political force in New York City, after the Mayor.
They are probably not well known by people outside their inner circles.
They may never become civic or national leaders.
But, they will be the members of the City Council.
On Nov. 5, the city's voters will elect 51 people to serve as Council members for two years.
Changes in the City Charter have increased the Council size from 35 to 51, and greatly increased the political power and influence of the Council.
Before these changes, the Council was little more than a debating club.


Corrections
The Home Video column on Thursday misstated the year the film "E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial" was released on video.
It was 1988.


Time's Blending Print With Video
Even as the formidable impact of television news is forcing Time magazine to redefine itself, the Time Inc.
Magazine Company is vigorously developing new ways to use television to market its magazines.
Some Time magazine correspondents now carry small eight-millimeter cameras when they go out on assignments in order to shoot footage for possible use on network and local television.


Seven Liquor Brands Are Likely to Switch
Though the seven liquor brands sold last week by the Seagram Company to American Brands Inc. have not been advertised recently, the sale is likely to result in a change in agencies for them.
The brands, including Ronrico Rum, Kessler Whiskey and Calvert Gin, are being added to a long list of spirits sold by the Jim Beam Brands Company, an American Brands subsidiary, which has as its agency of record Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis.
An American Brands spokesman said a discussion of ad changes would be premature.


Japanese Learn a Lesson in Bureaucratic Rule
For many people here, the bright spot in the summer's financial scandals was the belief that the public had become so outraged that the Finance Ministry would be unable to block reform of its discredited system for policing the stock market.
Today, that optimism has turned to bitterness.
Not even the worst financial scandals in the postwar era could force the bureaucracy to cede powers to a body outside its control.


Reds Are Sued Over Biblical Snub
These are dark times for the Cincinnati Reds.
Not only were the champions of last year's World Series mere spectators at this year's, they have been hit with a lawsuit by a minister who was asked to dispose of a sign he displayed at games.


Fed Delay Of Rate Cut Expected
On the eve of the Treasury's quarterly refunding auctions, many credit market traders and investors expect the Federal Reserve Board to move today or tomorrow to push short-term interest rates down to levels that have not been seen since Richard M. Nixon was President.
But many analysts who agree that another cut is coming say the Fed may wait a bit before pushing rates down to the levels of the early 1970's.


Leahy Earns Redemption; Majkowski Pays the Price
It wasn't a game in which one team or one player stood out and dominated the landscape.
The Jets escaped from Giants Stadium with a 19-16 overtime victory over the Green Bay Packers today because different players did a lot of different things, some of them new, some of them familiar.
Pat Leahy stood in front of his locker as a hero after his 37-yard game-winning field goal.
And when asked if this made up for the one he missed in overtime against Chicago, he could say, "Chicago who?"


Man Shot Dead in Driveway of His Queens Home
A retired longshoreman was shot dead early yesterday when someone apparently tried to rob him in the driveway of his home in Queens, the police said.
The victim, Nestor Lopez, 71 years old, and his wife of 46 years, Rafaela, were returning from an anniversary party about 3 A.M. when he left her at the door of their house at 97-24 Waltham Street in Jamaica and negotiated the narrow driveway to park his Chevrolet Celebrity in the car-port.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
The Fed is expected to push short-term interest rates down this week to levels not seen since Richard Nixon was President.
But many analysts who agree that another cut is coming say the Fed may wait a bit longer to make its move.  [ Page D1. ]
Lawmakers say the "deficit reduction" agreement has given them a virtual license to disregard the deficit, even as it has liberated them from dreary negotiations over how spending should change to reflect new priorities.
One professor of public policy calls the result "the age of no-fault budgeting."  [ A1. ]


To Unite or Crumble: Knicks Must Decide
The Knicks left town on Thursday, determined and confident.
They returned yesterday, dazed and confused.
Trouble has found the 1991-92 Knicks after just two games.
Beaten badly by both the Orlando Magic and the Miami Heat over the weekend, the New York players looked about as ready to contend for a division title as the Charlotte Hornets.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10 ISRAELIS AND PALESTINIANS
In a day that finally brought Israel into separate, direct talks with its Arab neighbors, the Israelis and Palestinians announced they would soon discuss Palestinian self-rule for the occupied territories.
Page A1  SILENCE REPLACED BY SCREAMING
News Analysis: The Middle East peace conference started off with kicking and screaming, but it opened the first viable negotiating process since Camp David in 1978.
A1  ISRAEL CURBS SHELLING IN LEBANON
Israeli forces scaled back their shelling of guerrilla targets in southern Lebanon, and hundreds of families who had fled returned home.
A8  U.S.
SEEKING SOVIET SPACE BARGAINS
The United States, once indifferent to Soviet efforts to market space goods and services, now shows the zeal of a bargain hunter.
A1  BAKER VISIT TO CHINA ANNOUNCED
Secretary of State Baker will soon become the highest American official to visit China since the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989.
A5  THE RETURN OF IMELDA MARCOS
Nearly six years after fleeing in disgrace with crates of gold and pesos, Imelda Marcos set foot on Philippine soil again to face court charges of graft and tax evasion, and perhaps to run for President.
A3  RICE AND REBELLION IN JAPAN
Ogata Journal: A rural village is the site of a rice rebellion, one that Tokyo is eager to put down before it spreads throughout Japan.
A4  HAITIAN COUP LEADER'S RATIONALE
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, the leader of the army in last month's coup in Haiti, says he has no use for power but only seeks respect for the country's institutions.
A7  An army camp in Zaire illustrates an economic and political crisis.
A6  The Yugoslav Army attacked the Croatian town of Vukovar.
A3  National A12-17  UNDERGROUND PHARMACIES
More and more people with AIDS are getting together to buy drugs from abroad that are not otherwise available.
Government has looked the other way but is beginning to scrutinize the operations.
A1  THE BALLOONING DEFICIT
A year after the five-year budget agreement was sealed, the deficit has swollen by $100 billion, to a record $360 billion.
But the deal has proved advantageous in other, more political, ways.
A1  CBS PAYS $8 MILLION FOR 'SCARLETT'
CBS and a group of foreign investors agreed to buy the rights to the recently published sequel to "Gone With the Wind." The price is nearly four times the previous record for rights to a book.
A1.
SLAYER AND VICTIMS
Who was Gang Lu, the student who killed five people at the University of Iowa?
Where did he get his gun?
Who were his victims?
A12  THE C.I.A.
REACHES OUT. . .
. . .and gets its fingers slapped.
The spy agency's new recruiting campaign woos blacks and others, but in ways that rub some the wrong way.
A14  BIG CITY, BIG TROUBLES
Philadelphia, a city with lots of problems, gets ready to choose a successor to Mayor Wilson Goode.
A17  LAW, ORDER AND ANGER
Hit by recession and taxes, a tiny Maine community may vote to end its one-man police force.
The issue has split the townspeople.
A12  FOLEY'S BIG STAKE
The term-limit initiative in Washington State could end the career of Thomas S. Foley.
The Speaker of the House is fighting mad, and fighting back.
A16
Washington State voters will also vote on legal euthanasia.
A16  Mayor Art Agnos faces a free-for-all in San Francisco.
A16  BARBS IN LOUISIANA
Former Governor Edwin Edwards and State Representative David Duke trade nasty remarks about each other's past in their race for Louisiana governor.
A17  A RARE MISCALCULATION BY HONDA
Known for its marketing savvy, the Japanese auto maker seems to have made its Accord station wagon too small and its price too high.
D1.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 SHELTERS BREED DEPENDENCY
Some residents of New York City's huge, barrack-style shelters for adults are growing comfortable there, staying on for months and even years.
The conditions are so grim that many homeless adults prefer to live on the streets.
But for some residents, the shelters have become home.
A1  Business Digest, D1 Sports C1-13  THEY TAKE NEW YORK
On a perfect day for running 26.2 miles, Salvador Garcia of Mexico and Liz McColgan of Scotland were the winners in the New York City Marathon.
Gates and the C.I.A.
A18  Autumn Pizazz A18  Vote "Yes," three times A18  Letters A18  Anthony Lewis: Where is the outrage?
A19  William Safire: Sununu Whitewash A19  Andrei Shoumikhin, Steven L. Spiegel: Don't give up hope yet A19  Eric Alterman: Democracy's lies A19


Foes of Euthanasia Measure Gain Ground in Washington State
With Washington's voters preparing to decide Tuesday on a ballot measure that would legalize euthanasia, political analysts say the public is deeply divided over the measure and the campaigns are running at a dead heat.
The measure, Initiative 119, would allow doctors to give "aid in dying" to terminally ill patients who ask for such help.
It was heavily favored in a statewide opinion survey in the first week in October.
But while no later polls have shown a change, analysts say opponents have gained considerable ground in recent weeks with a million-dollar campaign that focuses on voters' doubts about euthanasia.


Patients Going Underground To Buy Experimental Drugs
A growing and ever more audacious number of underground pharmacies are springing up around the country to help people with AIDS and other diseases get experimental and unapproved drugs.
Frustrated by the absence of drugs to treat their conditions, patients are turning to the buyers clubs, as they are known, which sell drugs that are still being tested.
The clubs also provide drugs approved in other countries but not in the United States, buying the drugs overseas and shipping them here.


Motorists Are Still Shunning Car Pools: They Want to Be Alone
Every weekday, Janet Perkins commutes between her home in Fairfield, Conn., and her job 15 miles away in Greenwich, blissfully alone in her car and clearly not doing her part to reduce traffic congestion on Interstate 95.
The very picture of someone who ought to be car pooling.
Tell her about it.


Charles Willard Memorial
A memorial service for the Broadway producer and manager Charles Willard is to be held on Wednesday at noon at the Helen Hayes Theater, 240 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
The actress Julie Harris is to be the featured speaker.
Also scheduled to participate are the composer Richard Adler and the singer and pianist Steve Ross.
Mr.
Willard died in a boating accident on Aug. 11 at the age of 48.


Why We Couldn't Stop Watching the Hearings
To the Editor:
Now that the stormy hearings on the Supreme Court nomination of Clarence Thomas and the allegations by Prof.
Anita F. Hill are behind us, there may be room for questions that have nothing to do with who lied and who told the truth.
What was it that riveted Americans to the television screen for a number of days and roused us from the habitual lethargy with which we view political events?
Psychoanalysts have for some time accepted the idea that our attention is never wholly directed toward the outside world, that in one part of our minds we are always daydreaming, whether we drive, do household chores or look at the television screen.
When something excites us, the chances are that it's tapping even more strongly into the reservoir of our personal concerns.


Reviews/Pop; For Nat (King) Cole's Daughter, the Difference Counts
Natalie Cole's triumphant "Unforgettable" album of songs her father Nat (King) Cole popularized more than 30 years ago is by its very nature a singular phenomenon.
But the record's being a one-of-a-kind tribute should not obscure the fact that on the album Ms.
Cole stylistically comes into her own as an accomplished pop-jazz singer.
And on Friday evening at Radio City Music Hall, where she sang much of the record with a 40-piece orchestra, her uptempo singing carried an extra clout.
Among the characterstics Ms.
Cole inherited from her father, the most prominent is a well-oiled turn of phrase.
Gliding, dipping and delicately embellishing the material, she displays a polished, innately musical diction that maintains a steady undercurrent of swing.


Why We Couldn't Stop Watching the Hearings; The Oath in Question
To the Editor:
Orlando Patterson probably came closer to the mark than most commentators in "Race, Gender and Liberal Fallacies" (Op-Ed, Oct. 20), when he reasoned that Clarence Thomas may well have said what Anita Hill alleged, but that in context, it was not nearly the offense his opponents tried to make it out to be.
Then Professor Patterson states that Judge Thomas was justified in denying that he made the remarks "on the utilitarian moral grounds that any admission would have immediately incurred a self-destructive and grossly unfair punishment."


Hasidic Rabbis Gather for Annual Convention in Brooklyn


Community Center Collapses in Belgium, Killing Three


Does Dirt Sell? Next Question.
Inside dirt sells, not only in tell-all movie-star biographies but also in sports books.
In order to allow the busy fan to keep abreast of the latest in sports literature and get a jump on holiday gift-giving, here are some gossipy synopses from recently issued sports books.
This was not what JOHN TUNIS, a popular sports novelist of an earlier era whose books always had happy endings, had in mind.


Economic Calendar
Listed below is the schedule of major economic indicators expected to be released this week.
Monday None Tuesday Auto Sales...Oct.
Productivity...3d Qtr.
Wednesday None Thursday Consumer Credit...Sept.
Wholesale Trade...Sept.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday None


Corrections
A headline in some editions on Saturday about a protest by parents of some Bronx schoolchildren described their complaint incorrectly.
Their children had been transferred from a bilingual school; the bilingual school had not been closed.


Stadler Triumphs In Playoff
Craig Stadler ended a seven-year victory drought on the PGA Tour by sinking a clutch 8-foot birdie putt on the second hole of a sudden-death playoff this afternoon to defeat Russ Cochran and win the season-ending Tour Championship at Pinehurst No. 2.
The 38-year-old Stadler, who has been plagued by poor short putting in recent years, had holed a 5-foot par putt on the 72d hole to tie Cochran.
Then, after both players two-putted for birdies on the 531-yard 16th hole, Stadler hit a near-perfect 5-iron next to the pin on the 190-yard 17th and stroked the ball into the center of the hole.


Philadelphia's New Mayor to Face Tough Job
The 127th Mayor of Philadelphia, to be elected Tuesday, faces one of the most challenging jobs in America.
The new Mayor, most likely the Democratic front-runner, Edward G. Rendell, will take over the helm of a city that has been stumbling out of control for many years, racking up chronic deficits, and losing population, respect and political clout in Harrisburg and Washington.


In Zaire, Growing Despair Amid Economic Chaos
For an illustration of life in Zaire these days, consider Camp Kokolo.
For a token entry fee, shoppers can chose from a seemingly inexhaustible variety of goods: hundreds of television sets, video recorders, computers, telephones, stationary bicycles, rowing machines and even late-model Land Cruisers and Mercedes autos.
The prices are low because the goods are stolen.
All the vendors are soldiers.


Surprise! Garcia Takes First In Marathon
Coming off the Queensboro Bridge, looping into the megadecibel madness of First Avenue on Marathon Sunday, Salvador Garcia of Mexico broke away after 16 miles of communal racing.
It was the sort of move that would define yesterday's New York City Marathon, and it left two pack runners, Andres Espinoza of Mexico and Ibrahim Hussein of Kenya, with a very important question to answer very quickly: Was Garcia for real, or was he foolishly responding to the patriotic chants and exhortations of Mexican-Americans en route?
"There were so many people cheering on First Avenue," Hussein said, "I just thought he was responding to the crowd. I have run this race before, so I let him go. I was wrong. It was a very good move."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  WHEN A SHELTER BECOMES A HOME
With its sea of cots and air of menace, the Bedford Atlantic Shelter for men in Brooklyn is the kind of place that has frightened many homeless people into staying on the streets.
But this cavernous room harbors another kind of danger: Many of the 900 men who sleep there have grown increasingly comfortable with it, even calling it home and staying on for months or years.
Page A1.
DECISION TIME FOR DINKINS
Under fire on almost every front, Mayor David N. Dinkins is struggling to decide how and whether he can freeze property taxes, protect basic services and still win enough support for his four-year budget plan to salvage some of his political standing.
His plan, and at least some answers, should come this week.
Page B3.
ADAM CLAYTON POWELL REDUX
Fifty years ago today, a 33-year-old minister named Adam Clayton Powell Jr. melded protest and electoral politics to become the first black member of the New York City Council.
Tomorrow, his legacy will be rekindled when 29-year-old Adam Clayton Powell 4th is assured of election to the Council.
How much of a difference do five decades make?
Metro Matters, page B3.
BRONX DRIVER INJURES 5
A driver crashed her car into five women waiting to take a bus to work at Jacobi Hospital, injuring one critically.
Page B3.
WALL ST.
WEEKEND: DISKS AND DEALS
The convention at the World Trade Center was devoted to "the brave world of college radio," and it presented a curious scene: meticulously hip college kids and fuzzy-headed musicians milling about the epicenter of the capitalist world.
Page B3.
A ROBBERY ATTEMPT, A MURDER
Someone was apparently waiting to rob Nestor Lopez when he pulled into his Jamaica driveway early yesterday.
When it was all over, the retired longshoreman lay dying.
Page B3.
REGION  ANTI-INCUMBENCY ON THE BALLOT
In the final days before the election, White Plains politics is focusing on the local version of the nationwide throw-the-rascals-out drive: a move to restrict City Council members to two consecutive terms.
Page B5.
TEACHING THE LESSONS OF THE RAIN FOREST
Where to go for expert information on Amazon katydids, the venom-squirting Bufo-Marinus toad of Trinidad and other creatures of the rain forest?
Blairstown Journal, page B5.
Who's on the New Jersey ballot. Page B4.
SPECIAL SESSION ON THE INCOME TAX
Connecticut lawmakers will gather for a special session to consider repealing or amending the state's unpopular new income-tax law.
Page B5.
Woman raped and stabbed in Hamden. Page B5. THE ENVIRONMENT AND THE ECONOMY
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo will propose the establishment of a special fund to pay for tens of millions of dollars in environmental improvements on Long Island.
Page B5.
ASSESSING THE DAMAGE, SADLY
Summer is just a memory.
But this weekend, many of the summer people returned to Fire Island to assess the damage and try to salvage clothing, furniture and appliances from the wind-driven sea water that washed in relentlessly from the Great South Bay last week.
Page B5.
The Traffic Map B7
Chronicle B7


Louisiana Governor's Race Becomes Debate on the Past
While State Representative David Duke styled himself as the candidate of change and former Gov.
Edwin W. Edwards talked of being able to unify disparate interests, the main thing the two men running for Governor in Louisiana did Saturday night in their first televised debate was to exchange accusations about their pasts.
At the end of the hourlong confrontation, Mr.
Duke had a slight edge on the number of attacks.
He repeatedly accused Mr.
Edwards, who served three terms as Governor, of selling state jobs "three and four times over" to win support.


'Scarlett" Entices CBS Group Into an $8 Million TV Accord
CBS and a group of American and European investors today bought the American television rights to "Scarlett," the sequel to "Gone With the Wind," for a record $8 million.
News of the deal, which also includes television and film rights abroad, stunned Hollywood.
Several Hollywood executives and agents said the highest price previously paid for the rights to a book was about $2.5 million for Gay Talese's "Thy Neighbor's Wife," which was never made into a movie.


Bonuses Increase Payouts
It may or may not have spurred runners on to faster times yesterday, but if the purpose of the New York City Marathon's new bonus-heavy prize structure was to save the marathon money, it didn't work.
Last year the marathon paid out a total of about $280,000 in prizes ($277,000) and time bonuses ($3,000) to 27 elite runners (15 men and 12 women).


Fear and Dependency Jostle in Shelters
Close to midnight, about the time that Nelson Echevarria wanders onto the armory drill floor in a Brooklyn men's shelter to find his assigned cot, fear and uneasiness settle in among the homeless there who struggle to sleep amid the cacophony of hacking coughs, blaring radios and moans from violent dreams.
This dimly lighted, unheated cavernous shelter at Atlantic and Bedford Avenues, with its sea of cots, is the kind of city shelter that has frightened many homeless people into staying on the streets.


TV Marketing May Go From Screen to Sofa . . .
TV Answer Inc., an interactive television company, has faith that a nation of couch potatoes will finally embrace the chance to order a pizza, a bracelet or a brochure by pushing a button while lounging comfortably in front of the tube.
Interactive television has been tried before over the last decade with little success, but TV Answer contends it has come up with a technological breakthrough.
It has developed a way to use radio waves and satellites to enable viewers to place electronic orders for goods and services advertised on regular television programs.


No. 1 on the Tube, No. 5 in the East
In an audit released by the New York City Comptroller's office, the Yankees' total television revenue, from Madison Square Garden cable and WPIX (Channel 11), was more than $33 million in 1989.
That amount was only $5 million less than the Seattle Mariners' entire income for the year.
And the Yankees' figure does not include gate receipts.


Citicorp: Too Big for Public Dressing Down
As the nation's largest bank, Citibank is the clearest example of Washington's too-big-to-fail doctrine, which holds that some banks are so financially important -- and their collapse so potentially destructive -- that the Government will back them in a crisis.
While the need for a Government rescue has not emerged, and most doubt that it will, the problems of Citibank and its parent, Citicorp, are severe enough to raise the issue of whether too big to fail also means too big for regulators to criticize, at least publicly.


Get a Monument Ready: Washington Is 9-0
The Houston-Washington game was billed as Super Bowl XXV 1/2.
Well, let's make it Super Bowl XXV 3/4.
If these teams meet again in Super Bowl XXVI in Minneapolis and produce as many heart-thumping plays and thundering hits and such a roller-coaster ride in momentum and emotion as both did today, what football fan would not relish such a special encounter?
It required 130 plays over 64 minutes and one second for Washington to prevail, 16-13, before 55,096 joyous onlookers at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium.


Ernest Nathan Is Dead; Entrepreneur Was 86
Ernest Nathan, an entrepreneur and supporter of Jewish and Israeli causes, died on Saturday at Miriam Hospital in Providence, R.I.
He was 86 years old and lived in Providence.
He died as a result of a stroke, his family said.


Backers Say 'Core' Bank Plan Lives
Although it was ultimately defeated on the floor of the House of Representatives last week, the proposal by Representative Charles E. Schumer to set up a "core" banking system in the United States is not likely to disappear.
Core banking would split each of the nation's banks into two: a core bank that would take in Government-insured deposits and make only traditional loans to small business and homeowners and a "wholesale" bank that could use its uninsured deposits to lend pretty much as it pleased.
The notion is to reduce the amount of risky activities that are protected by Federal deposit insurance.


Bottom Trawling In the Fins Game
The one that got away could cost $70,000.
In a takeoff on golf's skins game, there is going to be a fins game for fishermen.
The event, which is sponsored by British Petroleum, will bring four bass anglers together at six different fishing holes at the Lake Guntersville Reservoir in Tennessee.
The first hole is worth $2,500, the last $30,000.
But with holdovers, the last catch could be worth the entire purse of $70,000. . . .
An all-Giants talent show, including GARY REASONS doing magic tricks, HOWARD CROSS singing, and RAUL ALLEGRE at the piano, is for fun and the Tomorrow's Children Fund.
It will be staged Nov. 15 at the John Harms Center in Englewood, N.J.
For information, call (201) 343-5905.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly
Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Ms. Older Weds Michael Waltzman
Elizabeth Ann Older, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Older of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Michael Neil Waltzman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stuart Waltzman of Weston, Conn.
Rabbi Beth Singer officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Waltzman, 28 years old, graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received a master's degree in art history from American University.
Her father, a former general counsel with the Bowery Savings Bank in New York, is a partner in the White Plains law firm of Kurzman &amp; Eisenberg.
Her mother, Sondra Older, is a former president of the Scarsdale Board of Education.


Missing From This Year's Halloween Fun
To the Editor:
Another Halloween has come and gone, filled with images I recall from my own childhood.
There were ballerinas and princesses; witches, ghosts and monsters; pirates, cowboys and space creatures; cartoon and fairy tale characters.
I never went trick-or-treating with a Ninja Turtle, but the Turtles are not so different from the Supermans who went from door to door with me on Halloween night.


Corrections
An article in some editions on Saturday about Anita Hill's appearance in New York City misidentified the award she received from the National Coalition of 100 Black Women.
It is the Ida B. Wells award.


A Brash McColgan Wins With Bold Debut
Told repeatedly over the last week that a woman is not a marathoner until she has run a marathon, Liz McColgan became a marathoner yesterday.
She ran the New York City Marathon in 2 hours 27 minutes 23 seconds, more than 3 minutes faster than any other woman had ever run a first marathon and almost a minute faster than any other woman ran the marathon in New York yesterday.
And when it was over, the 27-year-old world 10,000-meter champion from Scotland seemed hardly winded by the 26.2-mile course -- more than four times her usual distance.
She said she could have run it even faster.


Mr. Gates's Past, the C.I.A.'s Future
When the Senate votes tomorrow on the nomination of Robert Gates, it will be judging more than his fitness to lead the Central Intelligence Agency out of the past.
It will be judging its own fitness to oversee intelligence.
The confirmation hearings did little to dispel doubts that Mr.
Gates misled Congress during the Iran-contra scandal.
They reinforced suspicions that he tailored intelligence estimates to please his superiors.
And they raised questions about his role during the Iran-Iraq war.


'Running Dogs' Take to Great Wall
Invaders have stormed the Great Wall of China wearing armor, carrying spears, brandishing swords.
Now, they'll be doing it in short pants.


Nancy Friedman Wed in Stamford
Nancy Lynn Friedman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Royce H. Friedman of Easton, Conn., was married yesterday to David Seth Cohen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Felix Cohen of Newton, Mass.
Rabbi Alex J. Goldman officiated at Temple Beth El in Stamford, Conn.
Mrs.
Cohen, 30 years old, graduated from the Boston University School of Nursing and is an M.B.A. candidate at Simmons College.
Her father is the chairman of Standard Oil of Connecticut, an oil and gas distributor based in Bridgeport.


Patient Raped In Clinic Office; Janitor Is Held
A janitor posing as a physician lured a 49-year-old woman to a doctor's office Saturday evening and repeatedly raped and stabbed her, the police said today.
The janitor, Elbert Harris, 44, of New Haven, had taken the woman's name and telephone number from office files, called her and asked her to come in for medical tests, Capt.
Lawrence C. Peryer of the Hamden police said in a statement.


Who's No. 1? The Bowls May Settle It This Time
The bowl-game matchup season is at hand and the choosing, to be completed for the most part by midnight Nov. 16, may produce one popular national champion this time rather than the two of last season, Colorado and Georgia Tech, which split the votes in the polls.
The Fiesta Bowl, scheduled for New Year's afternoon at Tempe, Ariz., is in a position to match one of the two teams ranked first or second all season in most of the polls, Florida State (9-0) and Miami (7-0), against Notre Dame (8-1).


Revising Budget Plan, Mayor Scrambles to Balance Taxes and Services
Two days before Mayor David N. Dinkins must submit a four-year budget plan, a stiff warning from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo not to count on too much help from a state takeover of Medicaid costs has left the Mayor struggling to decide how and whether he can freeze property taxes, protect services and salvage his political standing.
Mr.
Dinkins is to present the plan Wednesday and much is riding on its reception, including a potential $1 billion aid package from the Municipal Assistance Corporation that could ease the pain of service cuts or reduce the need for new taxes.


Scientists Claim to Have Isolated Stem Cells
A CALIFORNIA researcher described yesterday how he and colleagues had isolated human stem cells, the cells that give rise to all cells of the human immune and blood system.
If the long-sought achievement can be confirmed, it could lead to ways to treat cancer, AIDS, sickle cell anemia and many other diseases, the scientists said.
It could also improve the chances of success for organ transplants.


After Mega-Losses, Mega-Alterations?
Flo Ziegfeld's Follies. Seward's Folly. Now, CBS's $604 Million Follies.
CBS wrote off $282 million on its major league baseball deal last year, anticipating future losses.
CBS underanticipated.
Badly.
Last Friday, the network wrote off $322 million more on its baseball
and
National Football League properties.
Quite a reality check after all that World Series euphoria.


Young Out Indefinitely
STEVE YOUNG, the National Football Conference's top-rated passer, is out indefinitely because of ligament damage to his left knee, making former third-stringer STEVE BONO the San Francisco 49ers' starting quarterback.


Review/Fashion; All the Prettiness Of Springtime
Spring arrived on Seventh Avenue this week in a flurry of pretty colors, cheerful prints and gentle shapes.
Bill Blass, as usual, staged the first big show of the season at the Hotel Pierre, attended by socialites as well as retailers and the press.
Carolina Herrera flanked the Blass noontime show with smaller presentations before and after in her showroom.
In the afternoon Arnold Scaasi was among the first to show at the Hotel Macklowe, where other designers will be introducing their collections later in the week.
The hotel is offering itself for the first time as a suitable place for fashion shows convenient to Seventh Avenue.


Deputy Trade Officer Confirmed by Senate
In the latest personnel change near the top of the Bush Administration's trade policy, the Senate confirmed Michael H. Moskow on Friday as one of the nation's two deputy United States trade representatives.
Mr.
Moskow, 53 years old, will oversee the nation's trade policy issues concerning Japan, China, the protection of American copyrights and patents, the environment, services, investment, technology and specific industries such as aircraft, semiconductors, steel and shipbuilding.


Accounts
*
Procter &amp; Gamble Co., Cincinnati, to Ayer Inc., New York, for its Ivory shampoo and conditioner line.
Billings were not disclosed.
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, had handled the account.
Both create advertising for other Procter &amp; Gamble products.


Recipients of Breast Implants Split on Need for U.S. Controls
Darcy Sixt lost a breast to cancer, replaced it with a silicone implant and has not had a moment's regret.
The reconstructive surgery allowed her to throw away a prosthesis that chafed her skin and floated out of her bathing suit.
And once she felt "normal," she felt less cheated by her illness.
Kali Korn also had implants, to enlarge small breasts, because she wanted to look "sexy." Now her hands are bent into claws, her skin is stretched as tight as plastic wrap and she cannot dress without help -- all symptoms that her doctor says are caused by the implants.


The Search Goes On for a Flier Lost at Sea
The search for an Air National Guard flier whose helicopter was forced to ditch in an Atlantic storm last week continued for a fifth day yesterday as six airplanes and a Coast Guard cutter scoured thousands of square miles of ocean off Long Island and New Jersey with no signs of the missing man.
"We're still hopeful," Lieut.
Col.
John L. Sullivan, a spokesman for the New York Air National Guard, said of the missing rescue specialist, a member of the 106th Air Rescue Group in Westhampton Beach, L.I., whose helicopter ran out of gas while returning from a rescue mission and ditched 60 miles south of Long Island last Wednesday night.


By Design; Something New Under the Sun
Coats, like everything else in fashion, have been caught up in the craze for changing fabrics, categories and uses.
Once satin, velvet, lace and lame were strictly for evening, but now clothes made of or trimmed in any of these voluptuous fabrics are considered appropriate for day as well as night.
Some of these fragile materials have also been treated to wear well in all weather.


Drug Retailer Picks Basso &amp; Associates
The Thrifty Corporation, a Los Angeles-based chain of drugstores, has awarded the creative portion of its $25 million-plus advertising account to a small agency in Newport Beach, Calif., Basso &amp; Associates Inc.
Advertising and Public Relations.
Advertising executives yesterday confirmed reports in trade publications that Basso, with 26 employees, had been an underdog in the review.
The other finalists, the executives said, were Kresser/Craig, Santa Monica, and Stein Robaire Helm, Wells Rich Greene BDDP West and Eisaman, Johns &amp; Law, all of Los Angeles.
In August, the Western International Media Service, Los Angeles, was named the media buyer.


Marianske Lazne Journal; Kafka's Spa: Can It Be Cured of Its Own History?
All agree that it will never again be like last year in Marienbad, but no one knows what the future will be like now that democracy and a market economy have arrived at this venerable spa.
Next year, the many opulent resorts here, which still belong to the state, are to be privatized.
But no one knows who can afford to buy them and put them to productive use.


Forward Is U.S. Citizen
ROY WEGERLE, a 27-year-old forward for the Queens Park Rangers soccer team in London, has acquired United States citizenship and is being projected as a possible starter on the United States National team for the 1994 World Cup.


Ravitch as Negotiator
Barring any last-minute contractual impediments, Major League Baseball is expected to soon name RICHARD RAVITCH as its new point man for labor negotiations, said persons close to the situation yesterday.


ENVOY FOR CARTER RECALLS '80 TALKS
As Israelis and Palestinians plan to hold negotiations soon on Palestinian autonomy, a prominent Washington negotiator noted today that what the parties will begin to talk about was almost achieved more than a decade ago.
Twelve years ago, Sol M. Linowitz served as mediator for the first talks on Palestinian autonomy.
Now as a result of the Madrid peace conference, American and Middle Eastern diplomats are starting all over, painstakingly renegotiating much the same issues.
"It's sad," Mr.
Linowitz, a former head of the Xerox Corporation said in an interview today.
"I feel sadness that what the parties are talking about today was something that could have been achieved 10, 12 years ago. If we had gotten this response from the Palestinians then, how much would have been avoided?" Agreement From Earlier Talks


Bridge
Bridge-players have a clear advantage over practitioners of almost all other sports and recreations: They can expect to play competitively up to the end of a long life.
One of those who did so was Cecil Friedman, of East Orange, N.J., a former president of the New Jersey Bridge League, who, like two more famous Presidents, died on July 4.
He was 82 years old and played regularly at the Essex Bridge Center in Livingston, N.J.
His favorite partner in his last year of life was Sam Baskinger, of Clifton, N.J., and they were highly successful, winning every time they competed.


Fujitsu Drops Offer On Computer
Responding to opposition from Washington, Fujitsu Ltd. has withdrawn an offer to donate a supercomputer to a Colorado-based international consortium of electric utility organizations.
Japanese entry into the United States supercomputer market has caused friction between the two countries in recent years.
Until recently American companies, notably the Cray Research Corporation, have dominated the world's supercomputer market.


William Olsten, 72, Founder of Job Agency, Dies
William Olsten, a pioneer in the temporary-employment business, died early Sunday at his home in Old Westbury, L.I.
He was 72 years old.
A company announcement said he died unexpectedly in his sleep of natural causes.


2 Democrats Seek Tough Trade Policy
Reviving a fiercely debated issue from the 1988 Presidential campaign, two Democratic members of the House introduced legislation this afternoon that calls for trade sanctions against countries that unfairly exclude American exports and run trade surpluses with the United States.
Democrats and Republicans agree that whether trade becomes a leading issue in next year's Presidential campaign will depend on whether the recession ends, whether the nation's trade deficit continues to narrow and whether negotiations for an international round of reductions in trade barriers prove successful.


Sports of The Times; Riley Joins Real World Of Coaching
THIS is all new to Pat Riley.
The only other time he took over a basketball team was 10 years ago, when he looked around the Los Angeles Lakers' locker room and spotted Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Magic Johnson, always a comforting sight.
"I knew I was an interim coach," Riley recalled the other day.
"We were looking for a head coach. I was told, 'You hold down the fort.' I told the players, 'I ain't gonna be here in three or four weeks. If you don't get better, they'll blame you.' "


Dollar Continues to Decline On Outlook for Lower Rates
The dollar fell yesterday amid pessimism about the United States economy and the expectation of lower interest rates.
Gold prices were mixed, rising in New York after falling overseas.
Analysts said the dollar continued where it left off last week -- declining as traders anticipated the Federal Reserve would have to lower interest rates after several negative economic reports, including an increase in the unemployment rate.
Lower interest rates are generally bearish for the dollar because they lessen the value of dollar-denominated securities.
Brief Rise Possible
Richard Levine, a foreign exchange broker with Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, said the dollar could briefly move higher because it had been heavily oversold.


INSIDE
Race and Jury Selection
The Supreme Court will decide whether criminal defendants should be able to use their peremptory challenges to eliminate prospective jurors on the basis of race.
Page A20.
Executives Sound Off
As the economy flounders, business leaders are becoming less reticent about speaking out on what they think needs to be done.
Page D1.


AFGHANS' EX-KING STABBED IN ROME
The former King of Afghanistan, Zahir Shah, was stabbed and wounded at his suburban villa in northern Rome today by an assailant masquerading as a journalist and wielding a knife, the police said.
The motives behind the attack were not immediately clear.
Hospital officials said Zahir Shah had been wounded, but not seriously, in the hand, mouth and stomach.


Books of The Times; In a Convent, Rapture And Questions of Reality
Mariette in Ecstasy By Ron Hansen 179 pages. Edward Burlingame/HarperCollins. $20.
The miraculous and the strange are hardly new to Ron Hansen's fictional world.
In his last book, a beautifully written collection of stories titled "Nebraska" (1989), ghosts, demons, witches and cannibals all put in unexpected appearances.
An evil spirit takes possession of an amusement park; a couple discover that their jealous feelings have taken the physical form of a monster; a woman inherits someone else's bad dreams.
Such events were not conjured up by Mr.
Hansen to shock or titillate, but to remind the reader that life is full of surprises, that the extraordinary dwells next door to the mundane.


Observer; Polls and Quacks
Among the many terrifying and shabby facts of modern life is the fact that our rulers never make a move without taking a public-opinion poll.
In Ronald Reagan's favor let it be noted that sometimes at least he preferred the astrologer's counsel to the guidance of the poll-taker.
In this he was attuned to the wisdom of the ancients who pondered chicken entrails as well as the flight patterns of birds and asked advice of the Cumaean Sibyl, the Delphic Oracle and other such frauds before undertaking new adventures in statecraft and war.


Imelda Marcos Draws Mixed Reviews in Manila
On her first day back in the country after nearly six years in exile, Imelda Marcos played to raucous, well-organized crowds of supporters today, telling them she had come in the role of "mother of the Philippines."
Although she seemed to be trying to imitate the successful drive for the presidency by Corazon C. Aquino, political analysts here said they thought that most of the attention she was drawing came from love of theater rather than broad political support.


Cars Are America's Main Form of Mass Transit; California Standards
To the Editor:
Public hearings have been held on whether or not New York State should adopt California's stringent emission standards for cars and light trucks.
The oil and automobile industries have stated that New York is not California, and New York State is not New York City.
California, and specifically Los Angeles, does indeed have the most polluted air.
But the second dirtiest city is not San Francisco or Sacramento, but New York, where the worst carbon monoxide levels anywhere have been recorded.
Moreover, 22 of New York State's 62 counties no longer meet Federal clean-air rules.
As the number of cars on the road and miles traveled burgeon, the quality of the air in many areas is deteriorating, despite the Clean Air Act.
This is why California developed its standards and New York must adopt them.


American Express's Rating Cut
The financial troubles at American Express widened yesterday, as Moody's downgraded the rating on about $7 billion in the company's long-term debt.
It was the first time in the American Express Company's history that any of its debt was downgraded by Moody's.
The rating service took the action because of problems in American Express's credit business and because the company faces growing competition.


For a Vienna Museum, Electricity and Other Updating
Since shortly after its opening 100 years ago by Emperor Franz Josef, Vienna's Kunsthistorische, or Fine Arts Museum, has been acclaimed as one of Europe's great art collections.
But despite the museum's prominent setting on the city's Ringstrasse near the Imperial Palace, neither the building (by Gottfried Semper and Carl Friedrich von Hasenauer) nor its important collections have succeeded in anchoring themselves in the Viennese consciousness.
But now, as part of a general program to overhaul the country's museums, the neglected building and its painting gallery are undergoing a $30 million renovation and reorganization that will be completed in 1994 or later.
The museum director, Wilfried Seipel, says he hopes the renovation will not only halt the accelerating deterioration of many paintings but also burnish the museum's dusty image.


Negative Ads May Pave Road to White House in '92
IF you liked the 1988 Presidential race, you may love '92.
If that campaign's aggressive attack advertisements left you dismayed, though, '92 could be even more disheartening.
A year to the day before the election, political experts predict that those slashing attacks will be back, and more so.


GUERRILLAS IN PERU KILL 16 IN CAPITAL
In this capital's worst massacre in five years of political violence, unidentified hooded gunmen invaded a downtown chicken barbecue here on Sunday night, shooting 16 highland Indians to death and wounding 4, the authorities said.
Today, several police officials blamed the massacre on the Shining Path, a radical movement which first launched its campaign of bombings and violent attacks a decade ago.


Election Day Choices
Here is a summary of our recommendations to New York voters in today's election.
Polls are open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
NEW YORK CITY Manhattan City Council
Fourth District (a swath of the mid-East Side, from 14th to 96th Streets): Carolyn Maloney (D);
Fifth District
(the East Side, from Second Avenue to the East River): Charles Millard (R-L).
Queens City Council
19th District
(northeast Queens, Little Neck to College Point): Michael Abel (R-C);
30th District
(Southwest Queens, from Ridgewood to Richmond Hill): Pamela Fisher (D).
Staten Island-Brooklyn City Council
50th District
(mid-Staten Island, including Willowbrook and South Beach, and a small section of Southwest Brooklyn): Jon Del Giorno (D).
Staten Island Civil Court
Joseph Maltese (R-C). Suffolk County Executive
Patrick Halpin (D) WESTCHESTER Yonkers MAYOR
Angelo Martinelli (Ind.) NEW YORK STATE PROPOSALS
1.
Yes
to expand the borrowing power of the Job Development Authority.
2.
Yes
to a land swap around the Piseco Airport in Hamilton County to make air operations safer.
3.
Yes
to tolls and new development and leasing along the Erie Canal.


Tour Industry's Busloads of Gold
Every year, thousands of tour buses crisscross North America.
With each busload of people spending about $4,300 a day on food, lodging and admissions, it is little wonder that thousands of tourist attractions, restaurants and hotels eagerly roll out the welcome mat.
Hoping to cash in on this rare bright spot in their industry, about 2,500 representatives of everything from the Civil War battlefield of Vicksburg, Miss., to the World's Only Corn Palace gathered in the Cleveland Convention Center recently to woo 575 operators of escorted bus tours.


Economic Memo; Wall St. Finds Silver Lining In Cloudy Economic Reports
Some curious things, it seems, are happening this fall to the Washington-Wall Street axis.
With few exceptions, each time one of the Government statistics mills issues a discouraging report on the economy, the stock market takes off toward a new high.
And when politicians talk about tax cuts -- which would reduce burdens on producers of wealth -- the market takes a dive.
Confusing? Sure. Illogical? Not necessarily.


4 Presidents Join Reagan in Dedicating His Library
In a convergence of modern American ideologies and politics, five Presidents of the United States gathered today on the same platform for the first time in history.
They came to honor and praise the 40th President at the dedication of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library under a searing autumn sun overlooking this valley 50 miles northwest of Los Angeles.


EXECUTIVES
*
American Building Maintenance Industries, San Francisco, a service contractor, announced that Sydney J. Rosenberg, chairman, had assumed the duties of chief executive.
William W. Steele has been named president and will contine as chief operating officer. *
Boston Co., Boston, a subsidiary of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., an American Express company, named Patricia P. Baillieul executive vice president.


Elmsford Wins A Deal to Cut Homeless Rolls
For years this village of blue-collar workers and professionals has believed that it carried an unfair share of Westchester County's homelessness problem.
It was partly a coincidence of geography.
Three highways through Elmsford spawned several roadside motels.
In the 1980's, when Westchester began using motels for emergency shelters, Elmsford became the county's unofficial homeless capital.


Defying Stereotype, Woman Runs for Salt Lake Mayor
If Deedee Corradini wins Tuesday's mayoral election and becomes the first woman to lead Salt Lake, another old stereotype about this city will crash with a thud.
Ms.
Corradini is not a Mormon.
She has been divorced.
And she vows to bring more members of ethnic and racial minorities into City Hall.


Truck Accident in Elizabeth Snarls Service on Railways
Rail service for some 30,000 N.J.
Transit commuters and intercity passengers on Amtrak's Northeast Corridor was shut down for more than two hours yesterday afternoon when a tractor-trailer truck carrying hazardous chemicals struck and became wedged under a low railroad bridge in Elizabeth, N.J.
Witnesses said the truck, with a mixed cargo of barbecue propane tanks and toxic pesticides and insecticides, slammed into the 10-foot, 7-inch underside of the steel-reinforced brick bridge at North Avenue at 3:30 P.M. with a roar heard all over the neighborhood just southwest of Newark International Airport.


Record Cold Reported From Midwest to Gulf
Temperatures plunged yesterday to record lows in 100 cities, ranging from below-zero readings on the northern Plains and Midwest to freezing levels along the Gulf of Mexico.
Northern Missouri had its earliest single-digit temperatures since record-keeping began about 120 years ago, the National Weather Service said.


Forest Decline in North Cited in Songbird Loss
THE steady disappearance of migratory songbirds from North America's woodlands has been widely ascribed to deforestation of their winter habitat in Central America and the Caribbean.
But a new study suggests that United States land development may be a much more potent factor in slashing songbird populations.
In a 23-year investigation of two species of warblers, Dr.
Richard T. Holmes of Dartmouth College, Hanover, N.H., and his colleague and former student, Dr.
Thomas W. Sherry of Tulane University in New Orleans, found that deforestation of the birds' winter refuges in Jamaica did not account for the decline.
Instead, they report, the warblers' worst losses, occurring in spring and summer, result from the steady encroachments of suburban development on the United States mainland.
The findings are reported in a paper to be published as a chapter in a book called "Ecology and Conservation of Neotropical Migrant Landbirds" (Smithsonian Institution Press).


Elderly Get New Protections on Health Insurance
State insurance commissioners announced today that people reaching the age of 65 would now be able to buy private health insurance to fill the gaps in Medicare without having to worry about being rejected because of illness, injury or existing medical problems.
The guarantee, which may lead to higher private insurance premiums, is one of several new consumer protections for elderly people buying health insurance to supplement Medicare.
The relaxed eligibility standards generally do not apply to people who turned 65 before May 1991, although there are some exceptions.


Q&amp;A
Dolphins
Q.
When dolphin is on the menu, am I eating a Flipper-type super-intelligent dolphin?
A.
No.
The true dolphin is a mammal, any one of about 33 species of cetacean mammals in the family Delphinidae, characterized by a pronounced beak-shaped mouth.
The dolphin on restaurant menus, Coryphaena hippurus, is a fish with gills, iridescent colors and firm flesh.
It is called mahi-mahi in Hawaii and dorado in South America.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  A PAUSE IN THE MIDEAST TALKS
American officials said there would have to be a pause before the next round of direct Middle East peace talks to allow the negotiators time to consider their positions and for the United States to find a meeting place.
Page A1
News analysis: A day after the talks recessed, Palestinian negotiators were far less euphoric than they first appeared and said they were facing an unyielding foe.
A12
An ex-diplomat finds a sad irony in the Israeli-Palestinian talks.
A12  NEW SETTLEMENT IN GOLAN HEIGHTS
Driving home its claim to the territory and its insistence that Syria will not get it back, Israel inaugurated a new settlement for Soviet immigrants in the Golan Heights.
A13
Despair and defiance in a southern Lebanese village.  A13
U.N. aide hopes for talks in Iraq on aid and security forces A14  GORBACHEV WARNS OF 'ABYSS'
Amid a report of a serious shortfall in the grain harvest, President Gorbachev warned that the Soviet Union was near an "abyss" and urged leaders of the republics to back an economic reform program.
A1  NATIONWIDE STRIKE IN SOUTH AFRICA
A strike paralyzed factories and businesses across South Africa and left people without the services provided by black employees.
A3
Zambia's peaceful transition A14  MARCOS STIRS PHILIPPINE CONFLICTS
On her first day back in the Philippines, Imelda Marcos played to well-organized crowds amid speculation that her presence would complicate next year's presidential vote.
A5
Secretary of State Baker's planned visit to China was criticized.
A11  ORDEAL OF SURVIVAL IN THE ARCTIC
The crash of a Canadian military supply plane near the North Pole began an ordeal of survival in the frozen darkness of the Arctic.
A8  EX-KING OF AFGHANISTAN STABBED
The former King of Afghanistan was stabbed and wounded at his villa in northern Rome by an assailant posing as a journalist.
A6
Marianske Lazne Journal: How will it be next year at Marienbad?  A4
Yugoslav and Croatian forces battle fiercely across a long front.  A3
Hooded gunmen killed 16 Peruvian Indians at a barbecue in Lima.
A10  National A16-23  BANKING BILL REJECTED
The House of Representatives overwhelmingly rejected legislation that would have made it more difficult for banks to expand into the securities and insurance businesses than the Bush Administration wants.
A1  DEBATE ON BREAST IMPLANTS
A Federal advisory panel will decide next week on further regulation of the devices, a question that has divided women as well as doctors and manufacturers.
A1  INSURANCE GATE OPENS
State insurance commissioners said people reaching the age of 65 would now be able to buy private health insurance without the chance of being rejected because of illness, injury of prior medical problems.
A1  A DAY FOR THE RECORD BOOK
For the first time in history, five Presidents of the United States gathered for the dedication the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library.
A16  DEBATE ON C.I.A.
CHOICE
The Senate began debating the nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence.
A vote is scheduled for this evening.
A16  YOUTH AND ALCOHOL
The Surgeon General said beer and wine makers were aiming their television commercials at children by including sports heroes, parties and other images that appeal to teen-agers.
A16  ON RIGHTS AND RACE
The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether criminal defendants can use their jury challenges in a racially discriminatory manner.
A20  ZEROING IN ON GUNS
Voters in Washington, D.C., are expected to approve an ordinance that makes assault-gun manufacturers liable for deaths and injuries whether they are negligent or not.
A23  NO PUSH YET FOR ECONOMIC FIX
President Bush's budget director said Republicans would delay any push that was designed to encourage economic growth because any such move attempted now would be counterproductive.
A22  EXECUTIVES SPEAK OUT
As the economy American continues to flounder, business leaders are becoming less reticent about expressing their opinions about what needs to be done.
D1
The Pennsylvania Senate race goes down to the wire.  A22
Justice Thomas's wife says she was sexually harassed at work.
A20  Metropolitan Digest, B1 FIGHTING DESPAIR IN THE BRONX
In Mott Haven in the South Bronx, where poverty cuts deeper than the lack of money, resources are strained as drugs, along with fear, plague the streets and homeless families are moved into shelters.
But there are signs of hope.
A1  LEGISLATIVE CONTROL AT STAKE
New Jersey voters have control of both houses of the Legislature in their hands as they go to the polls in one of the state's most expensive midterm elections.
And the vote's outcome is sure to change the way the state is governed.
A1  Business Digest, D1 Science Times  Demographers say some of the world's women are missing C1  Does a machine think?


Importance Of Being Multimedia
OF all the impressive technologies on display at the recent Comdex Fall computer trade show, the most exciting was also the hardest to define.
It is called multimedia, and it incorporates the best aspects of printed books, television, computers and the human imagination.
People have been talking about multimedia for years, but it has always seemed to be a solution in search of a problem.
The magic of multimedia became apparent for me during a demonstration of two software products developed by the International Business Machines Corporation, called Columbus: Encounter, Discovery and Beyond, and Illuminated Books and Manuscripts (I.B.M., get it?).
The two programs were loaded into a prototype of a new I.B.M. personal computer that was specifically designed for multimedia applications.


Winning Gets the Best of Wyche
Of the 11 National Football League games played on Sunday, five were decided on the game's final play; three others were decided in the last two minutes.
Who said coaching doesn't make a difference in this league?


Dinkins to Offer Freeze On Property Tax Rates
Mayor David N. Dinkins will propose a two-year freeze in New York City property tax rates when he issues his four-year budget plan tomorrow, his aides said yesterday.
In doing so, Mr.
Dinkins is abandoning plans that would have increased property taxes by $500 million a year in those two years.
Those plans had greatly upset the city's business and real estate communities.
The Mayor's aides said he would hold out the possibility of a longer freeze, depending on how much political support he is able to garner for a variety of revenue options.
Working With the Council
For example, they said, the Mayor will propose to work with the City Council to explore ways to raise money for bridge maintenance or garbage collection from a mix of new auto-use fees, or by seeking legislative approval to divert part of the 5-cent bottle deposit to pay for trash pickups.
For the moment, the aides said, the Mayor would not press the politically unpopular idea of placing tolls on the East River bridges that are now free.
How much aid the Mayor expects to receive from a state takeover of the city's Medicaid costs over the next four years is still "kind of an open issue," one senior aide said.
But City Hall officials suggested they would not seek the $1 billion in aid that last week they had said they intended to request.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who has proposed a takeover worth about $500 million to the city by 1995, sternly warned the Mayor not to press for more.
Mr.
Dinkins must submit the plan to the State Financial Control Board, showing how he would close projected budget gaps of more than $1 billion in each of the next three years.
He had originally proposed the annual property tax increases of $500 million to help close the gaps.
By deciding to freeze property taxes, the Mayor in one sense merely bowed to political realities.
The City Council, which reluctantly passed $400 million in property tax increases to balance the current budget -- about two-thirds of what the Mayor wanted -- had vowed to resist any further increases, and the New York City Partnership and the New York Chamber of Commerce have urged a four-year freeze on all taxes.
Making the decision was not easy for the Mayor, and even his own top aides split on the question, since it would mean forgoing property-tax increases for the rest of his term, and would not be without political risks.
Yesterday the City Project, a watchdog coalition of nonprofit social service groups that generally support Mr.
Dinkins, charged that the Mayor had been swayed by business interests, rather than by the interests of all city residents.
"Rather than both retreating from his earlier priorities and narrowing his options at this time, the Mayor should broaden his options and challenge the Chamber and its members, the Council and all New Yorkers to make specific contributions to the difficult job of restructuring their city's budget to help in building a city, in which we all can feel proud to work and live," the organization said in a statement.
But Mr.
Dinkins's advisers said he also hoped to send a strong signal of stability amid the fiscal turmoil, and to stem a possible exodus of businesses and taxpayers from the city.
In the fiscal crisis of the mid-70's, the city froze property taxes for four years.
Mayoral aides said Mr.
Dinkins would consider freezing taxes for four years, but not without greater assurances that he could win political support for new ways to finance programs like bridge maintenance.
There, too, he faces a difficult challenge, because the City Council has vowed to resist tolls, business groups have been cool to the idea of new auto-use fees, and the State Legislature has long resisted raising gasoline taxes, another possibility.
The city is also uncertain about how much money it will gain, and how quickly, from a state takeover of Medicaid costs.
For that reason, among others, Mr.
Dinkins will not pledge to freeze all taxes.
City officials have argued that an increase in the state personal income tax might help speed up a takeover of Medicaid costs.
While that possibility has been suggested by some fiscal monitors, legislative leaders have roundly scoffed at it.


L. A. Gear Said to Be In an Agency Review
To help turn around its declining share of the athletic footwear market, L. A. Gear is beginning an advertising review, advertising executives said yesterday, confirming reports in this week's issues of Advertising Age and the Delaney Report.
Mark Goldston, the new president of L. A. Gear, who had led marketing efforts at the company's rival, Reebok International, will supervise the review, said an advertising executive who insisted on anonymity.
The executive added that Mr.
Goldston had selected the agencies to participate in the review, including Dailey &amp; Associates, Los Angeles; BBDO, New York, and Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Boston, a former Reebok agency.


Quotation of the Day
"All of you have met another Democratic President. I've never had that opportunity yet." -- JIMMY CARTER, talking to the four other living Presidents.  [ A16:5 ]


For the Palestinians, Fading Euphoria
A day after direct talks between Palestinians and Israelis recessed, Palestinian negotiators are far less euphoric than they first appeared and say they are facing a tenacious and unyielding foe.
"Behind all the nice words, the hand-shaking and the smiles for the cameras," said Nabil Kassis, a member of the Palestinian delegation, "the truth is that the first direct talks showed that the Israelis are not inclined to treat us any better than they have over the past 24 years."


A.T.&amp; T. Plan To Expand Europe Cable
Anticipating a huge rise in business telephone traffic between the United States and Europe, A.T.&amp; T. said yesterday that it planned to lay two 4,500-mile undersea cables in the Atlantic Ocean that will more than double the number of possible trans-Atlantic conversations.
A.T.&amp; T. said the sharp expansion of telephone capacity was necessary because of the coming unification of Western European markets at the end of 1992 and the emerging market economies of Eastern Europe.


Researchers in Furor Over AIDS Say They Can't Reproduce Results
THE scientists who came up with one of the most shocking scientific findings about AIDS -- one that set off alarms concerning the safety of the blood supply and about the state of mind of people at risk -- now cannot reproduce their own results.
But they still have not said clearly that their finding was incorrect.
The disturbing episode concerns the so-called window of infection, the roughly six-month period between the time the AIDS virus first enters the body and the time antibodies to the virus first become detectable in the bloodstream.


Election Schedules
Local elections will be held in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
New York City: All 51 seats in the newly expanded City Council are at stake, as are many judicial posts.
Polls throughout the city will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Alternate-side parking regulations are suspended for Election Day.
Long Island: Major races include those for the County Executive in Suffolk County and five of the six seats on the Nassau County Board of Supervisors.
Polls will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Westchester County: Seventeen members of the County Legislature are being elected, and Yonkers is electing a mayor.
Polls will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
New Jersey: At stake are all 120 seats in the Legislature as well as a variety of county and local offices.
The polls will be open from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Connecticut: Polls will be open from 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. for local elections involving mayors, town councils and school boards.


U.S. Mail-Order Merchants Try Japanese Market
When its warehouses are bursting with expensive ostrich boots, fancy fringe jackets and stacks of twill fishing bags, where is a mail-order merchant to turn?
To Japan.


Group's Bid For Insurer Is Enhanced
A group backed by the insurance industry said today that it had strengthened its bid for the failed Executive Life Insurance Company to meet the concerns of California regulators, but it remained unclear whether the revised proposal would win regulatory approval.
The group, led by the National Organization of Life and Health Insurance Guaranty Associations, said it had established a $1 billion credit line through the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company.
The credit line is intended to back the group's pledge to pay for the rescue of Executive Life policyholders through assessments on virtually every life insurance company in the nation.


Isidor Seidler, Executive, 85
Isidor Seidler, an electronics industry executive who late in life became a sculptor, died on Monday at Northshore Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 85 years old and lived in Roslyn, L.I.
The cause of death was liver cancer, his nephew, Lee J. Seidler, said.


HOUSE TURNS DOWN BANKING OVERHAUL BY 324-TO-89 VOTE
Acceding to the White House and the nation's largest banks, the House of Representatives today overwhelmingly rejected legislation to overhaul the nation's banking laws.
The measure, defeated on a 324-to-89 vote, would have made it more difficult than the Bush Administration wanted for banks to expand into the securities and insurance businesses.
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said after the vote that the House "must now craft new comprehensive legislation to address the real problems of the banking system." The Senate is expected to take up its version of the legislation this week, perhaps as early as Wednesday.
Chances Dim for Legislation
Although the defeat of the legislation was widely viewed as a victory for the Administration, both Democrats and Republicans said the lopsided vote indicated a clear lack of consensus and therefore further limited the political chances of broad banking legislation this year.
Today's action thus makes it less likely that many of the White House's banking proposals will be enacted.
The bill was hammered out as a compromise agreement reached last week by two key Democrats who asserted that the Administration's proposal would have unwisely deregulated the banking industry.
Disagreements between the two Democratic committee chairmen, Henry B. Gonzalez of Texas and John D. Dingell of Michigan, had blocked legislation for years.
The defeat came after intense lobbying against the legislation by senior Administration officials, including Mr.
Brady, who joined forces with representatives of the nation's largest financial institutions, including American Express, Citicorp and J. P. Morgan.
A grass-roots campaign against the measure had also been waged by the American Bankers Association, whose members hold more than 90 percent of the industry's assets. 'A Giant Step Backward'
"Congress wisely put this version of the banking bill out of its misery today," the association said.
The defeated measure, it said, was "laden with massive restrictions on banks' ability to diversify their earnings" and "threatened to force banks to take a giant step backward."
Voting for the measure were 83 Democrats and 6 Republicans, while 170 Democrats, 153 Republicans and the House's one Independent, Representative Bernard Sanders of Vermont, voted against it.
Earlier today, as the House prepared for its fourth day of debate on the measure, Mr.
Brady met with about a dozen Democrats, many of them members of the House Banking Committee.
They have been unhappy since their chairman, Mr.
Gonzalez, agreed with Mr.
Dingell, the chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee, to seek restraints on bank expansion that would be tougher than those the Banking Committee had originally approved.
After meeting with the Treasury Secretary, the Banking Committee Democrats marshaled an opposition flank to their own leadership, which was working hard to find supporters for the legislation.
The margin was expected to be considerably closer, but about 20 seconds after the voting began the electronic tally boards showed more than 140 "no" votes.
Democrats who had reluctantly lined up for the measure switched sides, deciding it was not worth supporting a lost cause.
Mr.
Gonzalez said in an interview this evening that he would soon introduce a measure that would provide more money for the rapidly depleting fund that insures bank deposits.
The fund is expected to run out of money next year.
This new legislation would require regulators to close down ailing banks sooner and tighten accounting standards by requiring accountants to tell regulators of wrongdoing at banks.
It would not address interstate banking or the ability of banks to enter new businesses.
The Administration has said it will veto any measure that does not ease restrictions on interstate banking.
Plight of Insurance Fund
The Bush Administration proposed a comprehensive banking bill in February, and Congress began considering it this summer as the deteriorating condition of the bank insurance fund became apparent.
The fund insures more than $2 trillion in deposits and has been battered by the increasing number of large and small bank failures over the last few years.
Its plight has put intense political pressure on the lawmakers to complete banking legislation before they go into recess in the next few weeks.
Like the House bill, the Senate Banking Committee measure would eliminate many existing restrictions on interstate banking.
It would repeal outright the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933, which prohibits mergers between banks and securities firms.
But the barriers it would erect to those mergers, and to affiliations between banks and insurance companies, are not as high as those in the House bill.
In his statement tonight, Secretary Brady said, "We will also continue to work for genuine comprehensive reform in the Senate," adding, "Narrow recapitalization of the bank insurance fund will only delay the day of reckoning."
The Administration's response to the banking crisis has been to propose the elimination of decades of restrictions on the theory that the industry would become more profitable if it were permitted to expand more easily -- both across state lines and also into the insurance and securities businesses.
It has also sought to attract new investors to the industry by its proposal to permit banks to be owned by industrial enterprises, like General Motors and I.B.M.
The legislation the House rejected today would have permitted banks to open new branches and banks in other states, as the Administration had wanted.
But the Gonzalez-Dingell agreement, like the Depression-era laws on the books, would have imposed barriers to new businesses.
The banks argued that these barriers would have made it unrealistically expensive for them to expand into other areas.
Like the Senate measure, the House legislation also rejected the proposal on industrial ownership of banks.
Again today, lobbyists from banking, insurance, securities and real estate interests swarmed over the Capitol.
The most visible lobbyists have been those for the insurance industry, which has fared the best in the debate so far.
Banks have been prevented from making significant inroads into the insurance industry, and the regulation of insurance has been left to the states.
"At this door alone, we've got eight lobbyists," said Paul Equale of the Independent Insurance Agents of America, standing near one of the entrances to the House chamber.
"We've also got all our state associations writing letters and making phone calls. We do anything we have to. We are here to talk to the members of Congress. It's like selling insurance. We have to be where our customers are."
Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn, said he was visited this morning by six representatives from Citibank, who had taken the 6:30 A.M. shuttle from New York.
But they appeared not to have succeeded in persuading him, as he voted for the legislation.
Action on Expansion
Before it voted down the entire package, the House overwhelmingly rejected an effort to delete from the legislation the provision that would have made it easier for banks to expand across state lines.
By a vote of 264 to 153, the House rejected an amendment that would have imposed modest limits on the coverage of deposit insurance.
The proposal was for insurance to be limited to $100,000 an individual, plus another $100,000 for retirement accounts, per bank.
Under current law, individuals may hold multiple accounts insured up to $100,000.
Although the vote appears to make it considerably less likely that a broad banking overhaul bill will pass during this session of Congress, the Administration pointed to the defeat of the House bill as a sign that its original plan could still be enacted.
The Adminstration strategy is now to push hard in the Senate for a more palatable bill, which would then have to be reconciled with whatever emerges from the House.
Representative Joe Moakley, the Massachusetts Democrat who is chairman of the House Rules Committee, and other senior Democrats predicted that the House was likely to consider new banking legislation soon that would include all of the pieces of today's legislation except the provision allowing banks to enter new businesses.
Democrats and Republicans attributed the measure's overwhelming defeat to a coalition motivated by a variety of reasons.
One is the fact that the lawmakers will have to vote shortly on a financing measure, in addition to the $80 billion that Congress has already appropriated for the savings-and-loan debacle.
"It was an unholy alliance formed by those who believe the bill is the legislative equivalent of giving blood thinner to a hemophiliac and those members uncomfortable with voting for any kind of a bank bill at all," said Representative Thomas R. Carper, Democrat of Delaware, who voted against on the measure.
Mr.
Moakley said, "People just don't want to vote for the funding." Representative Chalmers P. Wylie of Ohio, the ranking Republican on the House Banking Committee and one of the Administration's point men on the legislation, said, "There is much good in this bill," adding, "The bill has been dragged down by what I regard as an ill-conceived agreement by two powerful chairmen."
At a news conference after the final vote, Mr.
Gonzalez and Mr.
Dingell attributed the defeat to the intensive lobbying of bankers and to the campaign waged by the nation's largest financial institutions.
They contended that misinformation was deliberately spread.
Shortly before the final vote, the House majority leader, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, Democrat of Missouri, agreed.
"We hear a lot about what this lobby wants and what that lobby wants," he said.
"Let's forget the lobbies and start worrying about the American people and the American taxpayers for a change."


Darman Sees Deadlock On Plan to Spur Growth
Republicans have decided to delay any push aimed at spurring economic growth, because such an effort now would lead to "political skirmishing" and nervous bond markets, Richard G. Darman, the budget director, said today.
No legislation could be passed now, he told reporters.
Mr.
Darman said that the Republican Congressional leaders who emerged from the White House on Oct. 17 promising legislation by the next week had later concluded that the only certain and immediate consequence of such a proposal would be "an unproductive fight of the class-warfare type."


Agassi Again Skips Cup
ANDRE AGASSI, who was at the center of a controversy over the first Grand Slam Cup last year, has turned down an invitation to play in this year's event, to be held in Munich next month, organizers said yesterday.


Thomas's Wife Says She Was Harassed And Told Her Bosses
The wife of Justice Clarence Thomas of the Supreme Court has said in a magazine article that she was sexually harassed at work before she met her future husband in 1986 but did nothing about it until he persuaded her to go to management, which handled the problem "discreetly and directly."
In an article in the Nov. 11 People magazine, Virginia Thomas, a 34-year-old Labor Department lawyer and lobbyist, also described as "hell" last month's Senate confirmation hearings, in which Prof.
Anita F. Hill accused Justice Thomas of sexually harassing her when he was her boss at the Education Department and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission from 1981 to 1983.


New York State Considers 5-Day Closing
Seeking ways to close the state's $700 million budget gap, Cuomo administration officials are considering a plan to shut down most state government offices on five weekdays before Jan. 6.
Under the plan, most state employees would be told to stay home -- and to forfeit their pay -- on the day after Thanksgiving as well as the Thursdays and Fridays after Christmas and New Year's Day.


A Prince's Storybook Is Adapted To Television
One might expect a cartoon based on a story by the Prince of Wales to feature a villainous, village-devouring monster disguised as a modern architect.
But "The Legend of Lochnagar," a half-hour animated film adapted from a children's book written by the Prince, stars instead a cave-dwelling Scot and a kingdom of impish creatures called Gorms.
Produced by Scottish Television and the Welsh Fourth Channel, "The Legend of Lochnagar" is being adapted from "The Old Man of Lochnagar," first published by Hamish Hamilton Children's Books in 1980.
The book was based on a tale spun by Prince Charles years before to entertain his younger brothers, the Princes Andrew and Edward, during a journey aboard the royal yacht Britannia.
The cartoon is being created by the Dave Edwards Studio, a Cardiff-based animation company.
It is to be televised in Britain in 1993 and, its producers hope, in the United States.


METRO DIGEST
INCUMBENTS ON THE ROPES
Incumbents throughout the New York region -- including some who are not even up for election -- find themselves on the defensive today in off-year elections that could have profound consequences in 1992 if challengers can capitalize on voter dissatisfaction.
Page B4.
NEW YORK CITY LIFE AT THE BOTTOM OF THE SOUTH BRONX
Mott Haven, at the southern tip of the Bronx, is a world apart, where poverty cuts deeper than the lack of money, the lack of health care, the abundance of drugs.
This gray place is largely bereft of many of the threads that knit many other very poor neighborhoods together: strong tenant organizations, powerful community groups, charismatic leadership, even a safe playground.
Now, the arrival of hundreds of homeless families is bringing new strains to an already strained neighborhood.
Page A1.
BACKING FOR CLEAN NEEDLE PLAN
Mayor David N. Dinkins said he would support a private pilot program to give clean needles to intravenous drug addicts as long as the city could monitor it closely.
Page B3.
HASIDIM LOSING POLICE ESCORT
The police will no longer provide an escort for Hasidim rushing to get home after lighting a huge Hanukkah menorah.
Accusations of preferential treatment by the police were a main issue in the racial trouble in Crown Heights.
Page B3.
DINKINS TO SEEK PROPERTY TAX FREEZE
Mayor David N. Dinkins has decided to propose a two-year freeze in New York City property tax rates when he issues his four-year budget plan tomorrow, his aides said.
Page B3.
Trial opens in Kahane killing.
Page B3.
Juror questioned on sexual orientation. Page B3. REGION AN AGREEMENT ON THE HOMELESS
After years of protests, the village of Elmsford and Westchester County have reached agreement on reducing the number of homeless people housed in local motels.
Page B5.
MURDER RATE ON THEIR MINDS
A record number of slayings in Rochester has become a major issue in the campaign for county executive.
Page B4.
A REFERENDUM ON THE FUTURE
With control of both houses of the New Jersey Legislature at stake, about 1.7 million voters will have the chance today to set the direction of their state, the legislators and their Governor, Jim Florio.
Page A1.
ELECTION DAY, INDEPENDENTS' DAY?
New Jersey's elections have brought out an unusual number of independents.
They have at least one thing in common: a sense that the major parties have missed the point.
Page B4.
NORTHEAST RAIL SERVICE DISRUPTED
Rail service along Amtrak's Northeast Corridor was stopped for nearly three hours after a truck carrying chemicals became wedged under an overpass in Elizabeth, N.J.
Page B5.
TAKING ON THE ZONING BOARD
A Connecticut law intended to spur the construction of affordable housing is putting on trial one of suburbia's most powerful institutions, the planning and zoning commission.
Page B5.
Our Towns B5
Obituaries B8


Perpetual Practice Is Riley's Remedy
Nearly three and one half hours after it began, practice ended here today with Coach Pat Riley suggesting the Knicks players should get used to extended workouts.
"It'll be a normal day until we get it together," he said.
Riley, unshaven, began with a long film session, a double horror feature, shot in Orlando and Miami over the weekend.
"There were some highlights, believe it or not," Riley said.
The best of which came, no doubt, when the tape came out of the VCR and the Knicks turned their attention from the depressing season-opening weekend they spent in Florida to their 1991-92 Madison Square Garden debut Tuesday night, against the Milwaukee Bucks.


Newsweek Publishes Disney World Project
For its first contract-publishing project, Newsweek Inc. has produced more than five million copies of a magazine heralding the 20th anniversary of Walt Disney World.
The 64-page magazine will be sent to all Newsweek subscribers; it is also being included as a Sunday supplement in The Washington Post and is being sold at newsstands nationally.
It includes 16 pages of ads from A.T.&amp; T., Delta Air Lines, General Motors and others.


Simms Mops Up Game but Might Get Clean Start
Minutes after the most embarrassing loss in his brief career as the Giants coach, Ray Handley was asked if, without blaming Jeff Hostetler for tonight's 30-7 loss to the Eagles, he might make a change for change's sake and install Phil Simms at quarterback when the Giants oppose the Phoenix Cardinals on Sunday.
"I don't know," Handley said. "I'll think about it."


TRANSACTIONS
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
DENVER NUGGETS -- Announced the resignation of Don Johnson, vice president of sales and marketing, in order to become director of marketing for the San Diego Padres.
FOOTBALL National Football League
HOUSTON OILERS -- Released Ian Howfield, placekicker.


W.B.C. Denies Sanction
The World Boxing Council said yesterday it would not sanction the Nov. 23 fight between the champion, EVANDER HOLYFIELD, and FRANCESCO DAMIANI as a heavyweight title bout.


Stark Data On Women: 100 Million Are Missing
LITTLE girls in China no longer have their feet crushed by foot-binding, and widows in India are no longer supposed to be roasted alive on the funeral pyres of their husbands.
But a stark statistic testifies to women's continuing unequal status: at least 60 million females in Asia are missing and feared dead, victims of nothing more than their sex.
Worldwide, research suggests, the number of missing females may top 100 million.
If sex discrimination in the West means office harassment or fewer good jobs for women, in the third world it often means death.
A traditional preference for boys translates quickly -- in China, India and many other developing countries -- into neglect and death for girls.
While the discrimination is widely seen as a relic of outdated attitudes, in fact the problem appears to be getting worse in Asia.
Recently released census data in China and India show that in both countries the sex ratio of the population became more skewed over the course of the last decade.


Review/Music; An Adventurous Guildhall
The Guildhall String Ensemble deserves commendation for declining to play safe on Saturday evening at Carnegie Hall.
The group recently recorded Vivaldi's "Four Seasons" with the Danish recorder virtuoso Michala Petri, who was the guest artist here.
Following typical practice, it could easily have tickled the audience's ears with yet another inane romp through those endlessly abused works.
Instead, the 10-year-old London-based ensemble chose to edify listeners, drawing on one of its earlier BMG recordings, with works of Stravinsky: the Concerto in D and "Apollo." Ms.
Petri, meanwhile, was employed in more appropriate fare: Sammartini's Descant Recorder Concerto in F and Vivaldi's Sopranino Recorder Concerto in C (RV 443).


Police End Annual Escort Of Hasidim for Hanukkah
It is a tradition that has that only-in-New York-quality.
Each year on the Friday night of Hanukkah, Hasidic officials light a giant menorah in front of the Plaza Hotel and then are whisked by police escort to a heliport for a private helicopter ride to Crown Heights in time for the beginning of the Jewish Sabbath.
The police department said yesterday that it was ending the 13-year-old tradition.
This year on Friday, Dec. 6, the sixth night of the eight-day holiday, there will be no police escort.


A Big Finish in New York, but Let's Start Over
A day after the 22d New York City Marathon, race officials said yesterday that more people had started and finished the race than ever before and that some of them had not run the 26.2-mile course as fast as originally recorded.
The women's contingent received a mistaken starting signal and began running before the official starting cannon went off.


The Refreshing Breeze? It's a Trade Win
Ten days ago, the Islanders changed about one-third of their regular skaters in two multiplayer deals, with Buffalo and Chicago.
Tonight, for the first time since the trades, the new players engineered a victory over an established, respected team by propelling the Islanders to a 6-4 triumph over the Boston Bruins before 7,110 at Nassau Coliseum.
The six newcomers combined for all of the team's goals and five assists.
Steve Thomas, obtained from the Blackhawks in the trade of Brent Sutter, contributed two goals and two assists.
Pierre Turgeon, obtained in the trade that sent Pat LaFontaine to the Sabres, scored twice and assisted on a third goal.
Derek King, an Islander veteran, had three assists.


Housing Law Challenges Power of Zoning Boards
A Connecticut law intended to spur the construction of affordable housing is putting on trial one of suburbia's most powerful institutions, the planning and zoning commission.
The law allows a special housing judge to overturn the decisions of town zoning officials if they cannot prove that health and safety concerns "clearly outweigh the need for affordable housing." In doing so, it strikes at more than half a century of freedom that suburban zoning boards have had in shaping and protecting their communities, often by excluding cheaper housing and the people who live in it.


Richard Thomas, 54; U.S. Election Official
Richard Clark Thomas, an official with the Federal Election Commission and a former Secretary of State in Vermont, died Saturday.
He was 54 years old and lived in Woodbridge, Va.
The cause of death was throat cancer, said Kent Cooper, an assistant staff director of the commission.


Consolation for Cubbage: He Stays as Coach
After managing the Mets for the last eight days of the season and interviewing for managing jobs with two other teams, Mike Cubbage returned to the Mets yesterday in his previous job as third-base coach.
Cubbage's decision enabled the Mets to complete their coaching staff under their new manager, Jeff Torborg, who will bring two coaches and a bullpen catcher from his staff with the Chicago White Sox.


U.S. NOW EXPECTS THE MIDEAST TALKS TO TAKE TIME OUT
American officials said today that there would have to be a pause before reconvening the next round of direct Middle East peace talks to allow the negotiators time to consider their positions and enable the United States to find a new meeting place.
And, because of the failure of Syria and Israel to make any headway in their direct talks, which ended about 3 a.m. today, officials who were part of Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's contingent said they would probably have to come up with ideas of their own to break the impasse.


College Chief Calls Jeffries 'Racist,' but Defends Keeping Him
The president of City College said yesterday that he considered Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr.'s conduct "racist" and "anti-Semitic," but had decided not to dismiss him as chairman of the black studies department because it would "deepen the sense of crisis on campus."
The president, Dr.
Bernard W. Harleston, said Dr.
Jeffries's dismissal would have produced "conflict," both within the college, where the faculty senate is insistent upon the principle of academic freedom, and in the Harlem community around the college where Dr.
Jeffries has supporters.


Anti-Gun Forces Want To Hold Sellers Liable
In courts, legislatures and voting booths, gun-control advocates are pressing a nationwide campaign to hold gun manufacturers and dealers legally responsible for the deaths and injuries their products cause.
In a referendum on Tuesday, the voters in the District of Columbia are expected to approve a measure that is the most visible symbol of that campaign: a law allowing people injured by certain assault weapons to collect damages from the manufacturer or dealer without proving that the company or seller was negligent.


Warning of 'Abyss,' Gorbachev Demands Republics Cooperate
Facing a serious shortfall in this year's grain harvest, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev warned today that the Soviet Union had reached the edge of an "abyss," and urged leaders of the republics to get behind a comprehensive program of economic reform or risk losing the last shred of popular trust earned with the defeat of the hard-line coup in August.
"We have irresponsibly managed the capital we gained after the putsch," Mr.
Gorbachev said at a meeting of the republic-dominated State Council, according to the independent news agency Interfax.
"The people believed in us, but we have not yet justified their hopes."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Saturday about R. H. Macy &amp; Company's quarterly loss described part of the com-pany's results incorrectly.
Macy's reported $555 million in earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.
It was not an expense.


U.N. Official Hoping to Visit Iraq To Seek Accord on Security Force
A senior United Nations official hopes to visit Baghdad around the middle of this month to try to renew the agreement that allows a 500-member security force to remain in the country and permits the distribution of food and medicine in Iraq by humanitarian agencies.
The official, Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, will also seek to persuade the Iraqi Government to start selling oil under a Security Council plan to pay for normal imports of food and other humanitarian supplies.


Zambia Retires Its Liberator
For Africa no less than Zambia, the electoral defeat of President Kenneth Kaunda is a significant and hopeful surprise.
Ever since Zambia achieved independence from Britain in 1964, it has been led by a single ruler and party.
Mr.
Kaunda is the first senior leader in post-colonial Africa to be defeated in a truly free and contested election.
That's a dubious distinction for him but a triumph for the people of Zambia.
The landslide victor in last Thursday's vote, Frederick Chiluba, is an experienced trade unionist who assailed the policies that have brought Zambia close to bankruptcy.
Though Zambia has the highest per capita foreign debt in Africa, its regime has been squandering $500,000 a day on subsidies to assure cheap food and placate urban voters.
This blatant politicking misfired at the polls.


Lockheed to Buy Back Up to 6.3% of Its Stock
The Lockheed Corporation said today that it would repurchase as many as four million of its shares, or 6.3 percent of its outstanding common stock.
At current prices, the buyback would cost Lockheed $180 million.


Cold Weather Helps to Lift Heating Oil and Orange Juice
Bitterly cold weather helped lift orange juice and heating oil futures prices yesterday, although there was little chance of frost in the Florida Citrus Belt.
Frozen concentrated orange juice for November delivery settled at $1.6825 a pound on the New York Cotton Exchange, up 1.25 cents from Friday.
The more heavily traded January contract rose 1.85 cents, to $1.7305.


Homeless Plan for New York City Must Include Medical Help; Military-Style Evictions
To the Editor:
In the forced evictions of New York City's homeless from Tompkins Square Park and now from the shantytowns on three city-owned lots of the Lower East Side called "Dinkinsville" (news article, Oct. 16), the city is pushing people from their homes, instead of providing homes for the poorest of our people.
There are enough empty city-owned housing units to house every homeless person in the city.
Let us provide people with homes, instead of wasting money on military-style evictions.
When I was in South Africa last year, I saw much the same tactics used against squatters in Soweto and other townships.
To close Tompkins Square Park and squatter camps without providing adequate homes for those who have none is immoral.
The leadership of the city's churches has over and over asked Mayor David N. Dinkins and his predecessor, Edward I. Koch, to provide our homeless with real homes, instead of shelters, jail and forced evictions.
It is bad enough that city budget cuts favor the rich and slash social services and self-empowerment programs.
Now the Mayor is driving the poorest of the poor into the streets, with no plan for permanent housing.  (Rev.) MICHAEL S. KENDALL  Archdeacon of New York City N.Y.
Diocese of the Episcopal Church New York, Oct. 21, 1991


Five Presidents Gather for the First Time


GE Capital Unit
GE Capital Retailer Financial Services, a unit of the General Electric Company, said it had created a group to provide specialized and expanded private-label credit card services to department stores.
The company said the unit would use its accounts receivable resources and focus on financial engineering, security, systems, operations, marketing and risk management.
GE Capital Retailer is a third-party issuer of private-label credit cards, managing 55 million individual credit card accounts for 200 retail businesses in the United States.


For Author, 85, a Triple Celebration
Joseph Machlis, author of the country's best-selling music-appreciation textbook, writer of novels under two names and chosen escort of several socialites, celebrated three events last month: the sixth edition of "The Enjoyment of Music," publication of his fifth novel and his 85th birthday.
A millionaire from royalties on the textbook, Mr.
Machlis has come a long way since his piano-teaching days in Brighton Beach, and the biggest names in the music world flock to the cocktail parties and musical soirees he gives at his lavish East 57th Street apartment.
But he still goes home to bed in the minuscule East Side studio he has rented for 50 years, because the spaciousness and traffic noises in the larger place disturb his equilibrium.


New York State's $225.6 Million Sale
New York State plans to sell $225.6 million worth of general obligation bonds through competitive bidding on Nov. 13, State Comptroller Edward V. Regan, said yesterday.


Alcohol Ads Criticized as Appealing to Children
Surgeon General Antonia Novello said today that beer and wine companies were aiming their television advertising at children and asked the companies to stop broadcasting such commercials.
Dr.
Novello said in a press conference here that she planned to meet with some of the biggest alcoholic-beverage companies so she could ask them to stop using advertising that contained music or language popular among teen-agers, or sports heroes, cartoon figures, beach parties or other images that appeal to youths.


Cars Are America's Main Form of Mass Transit
To the Editor:
In "Right Road for Transportation" (editorial, Oct. 26), you understate when you observe that the Federal transportation bill shows less appreciation for the country's changing needs than for traditional practices like building more highways and passing out more pork to individual members.
The House and Senate bills fail to address the real problems except to provide funds for maintenance of highways and bridges.
The attempts by Congress to improve "mass transit" address less than .5 percent of the problem, while virtually ignoring 98 percent.
According to Department of Transportation statistics for passenger-miles traveled by Americans, cars account for 86 percent; airlines 12 percent, and the remaining 2 percent takes in all forms of "mass transit," of which rail (including commuter) represents .44 percent.


Yugoslav Battles Rage on Eve of Talks
The Serbian-led Yugoslav Army battled Croatian forces fiercely today across a long front from the Adriatic coast to the Danube valley in some of the most severe fighting in Croatia since the Yugoslav war began in June.
Today's clashes came on the eve of a session of the European Community-sponsored peace talks at which Serbia is expected to answer an ultimatum that it accept a plan calling for the formation of a more loosely bound Yugoslav federation or face sanctions.


The Top Three of a Season's Mixed Bag
One way or the other, the Tour Championship puts the final stamp on how a season on the PGA Tour is remembered, and this year's edition validated the tour's best player, best newcomer and best course.
None of those categories apply to winner Craig Stadler, whose ninth career victory after a seven-year drought was a return to prominence for a former major-championship winner with an exciting power game and entertainingly emotive style.


No Victory Seems Ugly To Jets
Beauty is in the eye of the beholder, or is that the eye of the victor?
That's why Jets free safety Lonnie Young can't understand all the questions about how "ugly" the Jets' 19-16 overtime victory over the Green Bay Packers was on Sunday.
"The way I look at it I'd much rather win 'em ugly than lose 'em pretty," said Young, who came to the Jets in a trade from the Phoenix Cardinals in June and proceeded to knock two-time Pro Bowl player Erik McMillan out of the starting job.


Pedals Give M.I.T. Boat A Claim To a Record
A TEAM of engineers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has claimed a new speed record for a human-powered boat: a sizzling 21.27 miles an hour.
The speed run, which took place on Boston's Charles River on Oct. 27, broke the record of 17.64 miles an hour set by a California team.
The M.I.T. hydrofoil, called the Decavitator, was pedaled by Prof.
Mark Drela, who also directed the student team that built it.
The boat consists of two slim pontoons, a pilot's seat and a system of pulleys that transmit power from pedals to a 10-foot airplane-type propeller behind the pilot.
As the air boat gains speed, its submerged hydrofoil planes lift it above the water, so it meets relatively little water resistance.


NEW JERSEY VOTES, AND FLORIO IS ISSUE
With control of both houses of the New Jersey Legislature at stake on Tuesday, about 1.7 million voters who have been lobbied for months in one of the state's most expensive midterm elections will choose their legislators and, perhaps, determine the fortunes of Gov.
Jim Florio.
Though Mr.
Florio's name will not be on the ballot for the election, which will fill all 120 seats in the State Senate and the Assembly, his $2.8 billion tax increase has been the pivotal issue in the campaign, and the vote's outcome is sure to change the way New Jersey is governed. 'The Real Question'


Independent Candidates Say Major Parties Are Missing the Point
Some have done little more than put their names on the ballot.
Others have made avocations, if not careers, of offering themselves as alternatives to candidates of mainstream political parties.
What the dozens of independent candidates on the New Jersey ballot Tuesday have in common is a sense that the major parties are missing the point and political agendas that are as direct as their labels: Unbossed, Unbiased, Unbought Party; Citizens Not Politicians and Politicians Are Crooks.


Senate Expected to Approve Gates by a Sizeable Margin
The Senate opened debate today on the nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence, as the endorsement of two leading Democrats helped assure him of a comfortable margin of approval when the Senate votes on Tuesday.
Supporters of the 48-year-old nominee, who is the deputy national security adviser, made opening statements that praised him as a man of competence, remorse and experience who had learned from his mistakes and would ably reorganize the Central Intelligence Agency and its sister intelligence agencies.


Dinkins Endorses Privately Financed Needle-Swap Plan
Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he would support a privately financed pilot program to give clean needles to intravenous drug addicts to help curb the spread of AIDS as long as the city can closely monitor the effort.
Although the Mayor did not specify the details of the program he would endorse, he said that results of a needle exchange program in New Haven had convinced top officials in his administration that such programs can reduce transmission of the HIV virus, which causes AIDS, without increasing drug use.


Pennsylvania Senate Race Ends Without a Big Bang
One of the state's shortest and sharpest campaigns for the United States Senate concluded today without the kind of 11th-hour advertising assaults that both sides had been anticipating.
"The much feared and ballyhooed 'atom bomb' that both sides were holding back on dropping appears not to be necessary," said Michelle Davis, campaign manager for the Republican candidate, Dick Thornburgh.
She declined to discuss the television commercial that her campaign had been prepared to use as a counterattack, saying that the issue was now moot.


Zambia's Democratic Shock to Africa
The peaceful and speedy transition in Zambia from Kenneth D. Kaunda's authoritarian leadership to the democratically elected Government of Frederick Chiluba is likely to send shock waves into Africa's long-entrenched regimes and embolden opposition groups, international election observers here say.
They say the victory of Mr.
Chiluba, leader of this country's labor union congress, and his new-born opposition party against Mr.
Kaunda, one of Africa's "big men," should hasten Africa's "second independence" -- the end of the end of the post-colonial autocrats who rule their countries as personal kingdoms.


Sloppy Ethics at the White House
Within weeks of leaving a sensitive White House political post during the summer, Edward Rogers was in Cairo attending to his client, Sheik Kamal Adham, an object of intense Government interest in the investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
When a Justice Department prosecutor arrived to interview the sheik, Mr.
Rogers, most recently a deputy to the White House chief of staff, John Sununu, was among those who shook his hand.
Both the White House and the Justice Department's criminal division have now given assurances that Mr.
Rogers broke no law when he so swiftly shifted loyalties.
They said he neither dealt with B.C.C.I. matters at the White House before leaving nor dealt with former White House colleagues afterward, thus obeying the Ethics in Government Act -- to the letter.


In Overtime, Scales Tip Toward Canadiens
The four-player deal between the Canadiens and the Devils just before the start of the season has paid handsome dividends for both clubs, but the Canadiens got the better of it tonight in the teams' first clash of the season.
Kirk Muller, who was traded by the Devils to the Canadiens with Roland Melanson for Stephane Richer and Tom Chorske, opened the scoring tonight and helped paved the way for Montreal's 3-2 overtime triumph at the Forum.
Mike Keane scored the winner, 38 seconds into the overtime, by collecting Stephan Lebeau's rebound and beating Chris Terreri, who found himself on his stomach after the initial save on Lebeau.
The play that brought Keane's winner was one of the few times the Devils allowed the Canadiens, who got their other goal from Mike McPhee, any second chances in front of Terreri, who faced 20 shots.
McVie Unhappy
"The guy should never have walked to the front of the net like that," Coach Tom McVie of the Devils said about Keane's fifth goal, which gave the Canadiens their eighth consecutive triumph.
Kevin Todd and Peter Stastny had the goals for the Devils, who completed a four-game trip with two victories and two losses.
Tonight's game was the first going to overtime this season for the Devils, whose record is 9-6-0.
Montreal moved to 12-3-1 and leads the league in points.
Tonight's game aside, the trade has worked wonders for both teams.
The flamboyant Richer, despite a slight groin injury, is doing what he does best, which is scoring goals, while Muller, the captain of the Devils for four years, is scoring in addition to maintaining his reputation as an indefatigable worker.
Muller opened the scoring with his ninth goal this season, beating Terreri from close range in a crowd in front, with 1:18 left before the first intermission.
With his nine goals this season and his hard work, Muller is quickly earning the affection of the Canadiens and their supporters.
Richer Has 6 Goals
Richer had two goals on the trip to increase his total to six after going scoreless for six games, primarily because of a groin injury that he has aggravated at least once.
Richer, twice a 50-goal scorer for the Canadiens, had a marvelous opportunity to win it tonight with 4:20 left in regulation, but his shot from low in the slot sailed wide to the right of Patrick Roy, who faced 27 shots.
Melanson and Chorske, who were considered throw-ins in the trade, have made tremendous contributions to their new teams.
"I'm not surprised that I'm doing so well," said Chorske, who has six goals.
"I knew that if I had a chance I would exploit my talent. The fact that I had a clean, fresh start helped me a great deal."
Melanson has been the talk of the league the last two weeks after posting two shutouts and winning all four of his starts.
On Friday night, he barely missed his third consecutive shutout as Montreal beat Buffalo, 5-1.
"I'm concerned with winning games, not getting shutouts," Melanson said.
"You have to be fortunate and lucky to get a shutout. I'm lucky to be here. I thought I was going to be in the minors." SLAP SHOTS
SHAYNE CORSON of the Canadiens was suspended for 10 games by the league for leaving the players' bench for the purpose of starting an altercation against Buffalo here Saturday night.
The suspension started against the Devils, ending Corson's scoring streak at six games. ...
JON MORRIS developed the flu and missed the game for the Devils. . . .
CLAUDE VILGRAIN missed his third straight game because of a groin injury he suffered in the Vancouver game, which opened the Devils' road trip . . .
WALT PODDUBNY and SCOTT NIEDERMAYER were the other scratches for the Devils, who return home to meet the United States national team Wednesday.


Strike by Blacks Paralyzes South Africa
A nationwide strike, described by its organizers as the biggest in the country's history, paralyzed factories and businesses across South Africa today and left people without the basic services normally provided by black employees.
Several million black workers stayed home as part of a work stoppage to protest the Government's recent imposition of a revised new sales tax.
The strike is to continue Tuesday for another day.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page yesterday about the advertising account for the American Heritage Dictionary misstated the budget for advertising and other publicity.
It is $2 million, not $5 million.


Review/Dance; Enigmatic Movements
Nancy Zendora tried to evoke enigmatic states of mind and feeling in "Chapters," the dance program she presented on Sunday night at St.
Mark's Church.
But her works resembled haunted houses from which the ghosts had moved out.
Although her choreography was visually striking, it rarely conveyed a sense of mystery.
Rolling across the floor in "Opening the Mouth," Ms.
Zendora gradually loosened the mummylike wrappings enshrouding her.
When she rose to her feet, she took fidgety steps.
Then she opened her mouth and tried to nibble her right hand.
One wondered why.


Business Scene; The Last Vestiges Of the 80's Boom
THE United States is glutted with newly built, unoccupied office space, and that makes the once-common sight of a skyscraper under construction a rare one today.
So it is a pleasant surprise to drive into downtown Peoria and come upon just such a scene: three luxury office buildings in various stages of completion, with sidewalks blocked off to make room for steel beams and slabs of marble facing.
Peoria is not an anomaly.
Office towers are also going up along the downtown streets of Cleveland, Columbus and Milwaukee, among other Midwestern cities.
But if Peoria's builders are any guide, then the construction so visible in these heartland cities is hardly a leading indicator of a construction revival elsewhere in the land.
Rather it signals that the nation's free-wheeling office-building of the 1980's is in its last throes.


Our Diplomats Need Lessons in Diplomacy
To the Editor:
Your account of the behavior in Japan of David C. Mulford, Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs, who harshly criticized the Japanese on financial regulation (Business Day, Oct. 18), raises questions about the training that American diplomats and officials receive.
Presumably, Mr.
Mulford was in Japan at the invitation of the Japanese Government.
His performance was a remarkable example of cultural insensitivity.
I have no doubt that Mr.
Mulford, and others of his kind, have been well schooled in the traditional disciplines of economics, political science and history.
The students of their generation functioned in a much more homogenous world, dominated by Anglo-European concepts of diplomacy and international relations.
The world has changed and, like it or not, the balance has tilted.
The players now adhere to a variety of cultural concepts and norms.
If the United States is to remain a respected and central player, it will have to come to terms with the new internationalized workplace.
Likewise, the training its players receive will need to reflect these changes.
International studies programs in many colleges recognize this trend.
Their curriculum goes beyond the traditional political and economic base to provide training in crosscultural communication and an appreciation of the diverse value systems at play in the world.
It is time our political decision makers caught up with the younger generation.
MARINA W. FERNANDO  Pelham Manor, N.Y., Oct. 20, 1991 The writer directs the international studies program at City College.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
ANR Pipeline Co., Detroit, offered $300 million in 9 5/8 percent debentures due in 2021 through Lehman Brothers.
ANR, is a subsidiary of Coastal Corp.
PREFERRED STOCK *
Carolco Pictures Inc., Los Angeles, placed $30 million of convertible exchangeable preferred stock with private investors.
In addition, $35 million of convertible subordinated debentures were placed.
COMMON STOCK *
McDermott International Inc., New Orleans, filed for six million common shares to be offered through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. *
Tetra Tech Inc., Pasadena, Calif., filed a registration statement on Friday covering 14 million common shares through Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.
RATINGS *Alliance Airport Authority's $125.7 million in series 1991 special facility revenue bonds were rated BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
The debt will be serviced by payments from a facilites agreement with American Airlines and guaranteed by American's parent, AMR Corp.
The authority is based in Fort Worth. *
Genzyme Corp.'s privately placed $100 million 6 3/4 percent convertible subordinated notes due in 2001 were rated B+ by S.&amp; P. The company is based in Cambridge, Mass. *
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Co.-Conn., New York, a subsidiary of W. R. Grace &amp; Co., received a BBB- rating from S.&amp; P. for its $300 million shelf registration of senior unsecured debt.


Restrict Veterans' Hospitals to Veterans
To the Editor:
Veterans Administration hospitals across the country since their inception after World War I have been only for the medical treatment of veterans.
This is a most important part of the veteran entitlement program made by the Government over the years in grateful appreciation to the men and women who have borne the battle for their country and sacrificed so much in so many ways.
Unfortunately, to insure that the promise of these entitlements continues to be kept, veterans and their organizations, such as the Veterans of Foreign Wars, must monitor and lobby endlessly.
Periodically we have found in Congress or among the Federal agencies proposals to admit nonveterans into veterans' hospitals.
A new attempt is being advanced by the Department of Health and Human Services, along with the Department of Veterans Affairs.
It involves a test program to treat nonveterans in rural areas at V.A. medical facilities.
As New York State commander of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, I maintain that this proposal is a tragic error and a shameful display of unconcern for the American veterans and their continued need for medical assistance.
Today, thousands of sick veterans across the country are being turned away from V.A. facilities because of tighter eligibility requirements.
Yet Health and Human Services is trying, like the proverbial camel, to get its head inside the V.A. hospital tent.
The department tells of indigent people in need of medical aid (and I am most sympathetic), but veterans hospitals are close to capacity, and when and if beds are available, they should surely go to veterans.
Once veterans hospitals were opened to medically underserved rural areas, there would be a systematic exploitation of the V.A. health-care system and an attempt to extend it into a national health program for the medically indigent.
I shudder to think how fast some members of Congress and even the Administration would leap on this bandwagon.
But it is not going to happen.
The V.F.W. and other veterans groups across the country are going to fight this as they have fought similar proposals.
We will make sure Washington hears us -- and it had better listen.
MARIO M. RAIMONDI  Commander, New York State Veterans of Foreign Wars Albany, Oct. 18, 1991


Critic's Notebook; How Bad Is War? It Depends on the TV Pictures
Television, as Karl von Clausewitz neglected to mention, is war and politics by other means.
But what means exactly?
Its use in the war in the Persian Gulf and the politicking before and since reveal the sort of weapon it is.
While it was storming the desert, the Pentagon kept news cameras at bay and transmitted its own high-up high-tech photographs of pinpoint strikes.
On the Iraqi side, the looting of Kuwait was closed even to Peter Arnett, but cameras were invited to record the Iraqi ruler patting children's heads, and Western correspondents were encouraged to take pictures of what was apparently a bombed air raid shelter in Baghdad. ("We never quite got ahead of the story about the bomb shelter," concedes Richard N. Haass, a special assistant to the President.)


Jefferies Cuts Link to Firm
Boyd L. Jefferies, a central figure in Wall Street's insider trading scandals, has sold his stake in the brokerage firm he founded in 1962, the company said yesterday.
The $11 million buyback by the firm severs all ties between the Los Angeles-based Jefferies &amp; Company and Mr.
Jefferies, who left in 1987 after pleading guilty to two felony counts involving securities laws.


Corrections
A table published on Sunday listing candidates in the New York City elections today omitted the name of the candidate for Bronx District Attorney.
He is Robert T. Johnson, who is running unopposed.


The Speed of the Eye
Scientists at the University of California at Berkeley say they are able to trigger, record and accurately time the minute twisting action of a protein in the retina of the eye as it catches colors and begins translating them into chemical messages for optic nerves.
The timing of the transformation, said Dr.
Richard Mathies, a chemist who worked on the project, is possible through the development of ultrafast pulses of the blue-green laser beams, which are able to illuminate and capture the changes in the molecule at short intervals, almost like a microscopic movie camera.


Griffey the Elder Decides to Retire
KEN GRIFFEY Sr., who made major league history by appearing in the same lineup with his son for Seattle, has announced his retirement.


Dow Off 10.73, to 3,045.62, in Light Trading
Stocks closed lower yesterday in light trading as investors worried that the Fed would not cut its discount rate soon with the Government's quarterly refunding beginning today.
Easier credit would buoy economic and corporate growth, many traders believe.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell by 10.73 points to finish at 3,045.62.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 155.7 million, down from 206.5 million shares traded on Friday, as declining issues outpaced gainers by 974 to 658.


New Golan Heights Settlement
Driving home its insistence that Syria will not get the Golan Heights back, Israel opened a settlement for Soviet immigrants there.
Page A13.


In an Unlikely Romance, Biologists Take the Zebra Fish Into Their Labs
IN pet store parlance, it is called a beginner fish: even a fumbling neophyte hobbyist has trouble killing it.
But for a burgeoning group of basic biologists, the zebra fish is an elegant sophisticate, a grand alternative to the flies, worms, mice and frogs they have been studying for decades.


John C. Stewart, Geologist, 61
John C. Stewart, the former chairman of the geology department at Brooklyn College of the City University of New York, died on Oct. 31 at his daughter's home in Ober-Ramstadt, Germany.
He was 61 years old and had homes in Minerva, N.Y., and Barbados.
The cause of death was cancer of the palate, his cousin, Julie Day, said.


Worries About Compliance Arise Over Plans by Amex
A reorganization announced by the American Stock Exchange last week has some Wall Street executives concerned that the changes will make the exchange less inclined to police the companies whose securities are traded on its floor.
Last week, the exchange announced a sweeping reorganization aimed at making it more responsive to its customers, which a spokeswoman defined as the roughly 900 companies that list their securities with its specialists.


CHRONICLE
MARIO M. CUOMO refused again yesterday to carve any Presidential decisions in stone.
But that did not keep one of his supporters, the Rev.
JAMES PARKS MORTON, Dean of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, from issuing a stone-etched entreaty.
After leading Governor Cuomo on a tour of a stonecutter's shop at the cathedral, Dean Morton presented his guest with a flat river stone that had been chiseled with a single word in Italic typeface: RUN.


Northwest Air Profit Up 15%
Northwest Airlines Inc. reported yesterday that third- quarter profits rose 15 percent, to $105 million, from $91 million in last year's third quarter.
Revenues rose to $2.15 billion, from $2 billion.
The effect of the earnings rise on NWA Inc., the airline's parent company, was unclear.
NWA, which was taken over by a group of investors in 1989 and is now a private company, reported a third-quarter profit of $23 million, but did not disclose its results for the third quarter of last year.


Tom Clancy Memorial
A memorial concert for the folk singer and actor Tom Clancy is to be held at 8 P.M. on Thursday at Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street.
The concert, which is to benefit the cancer-care unit of Mercy Hospital in Cork, Ireland, is to feature the Clancy Brothers and Robbie O'Connell.
Others who are to participate include Oscar Brand, the Makem Brothers and Brian Sullivan, Tom Paxton and Carmel Quinn.
Tickets are $25.
Information: (212) 864-5400.
The memorial is to be preceded by a Mass at St.
Patrick's Cathedral at 3:30 P.M., which is open to the public.
Mr.
Clancy died of stomach cancer on Nov. 7, 1990, at the age of 67.


In Eye of Storm, Jury Selection Begins in Kahane Killing
Jury selection began yesterday in the trial of El Sayyid A. Nosair, charged with murder in the slaying of Rabbi Meir Kahane, in a tightly secured and emotionally charged State Supreme Court in Manhattan as angry demonstrators clashed outside.
Outside the courthouse, supporters of Mr.
Nosair and followers of Rabbi Kahane cursed and hurled death threats at one another.
Court officials considered the threats severe enough to require Mr.
Nosair to wear a bulletproof vest in court yesterday.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Decide on Defendants' Use of Race to Exclude Jurors
The Supreme Court set the stage today for an important ruling on the use of race in jury selection.
The Justices agreed to decide whether defendants in criminal cases should retain the freedom to use their peremptory challenges to eliminate prospective jurors on the basis of race.
Five years ago, the Court removed this traditional freedom from prosecutors, declaring in Batson v.
Kentucky that the constitutional guarantee of equal protection prohibited the state from using the jury selection process in a racially discriminatory manner.


Murder Rate Is an Issue in the Race for Monroe County Executive
A record number of slayings here this year has become a major issue in the campaign for county executive.
The record of 52 homicides set in 1977 was broken early Friday when a 20-year-old woman was stabbed to death.
That killing, in which the woman's boyfriend has been charged, culminated a grisly countdown that has been conducted for several weeks by newspapers, radio stations and television stations as each new murder was reported.
Three more slayings over the weekend, for a total of eight in eight days, pushed the total number of 1991 homicides to 56.
No Slayings Downtown
Capt.
Lynde Johnston, commander of the Rochester Police Department's Central Investigation Division, said domestic disputes or drugs contributed to 30 of the slayings.
Others involved the deaths of prostitutes and fatal disputes between neighbors and friends.


For Giants and Hostetler, Complete Breakdown
The Eagles, who had lost their last four games and were floundering, could do nothing wrong tonight.
In the Giants' worst performance of the season, they did almost everything wrong, their coach said they were outplayed physically and they took a 30-7 drubbing.
The Eagles' renowned defense pummeled and harassed Jeff Hostetler, the Giants' quarterback, and eventually drove him out of the game.
The Eagles' offense, plagued in previous games by injured quarterbacks and overmatched offensive linemen, moved the ball almost at will.
One net result was a severe dent in the Giants' hopes for a wild-card berth in the National Football League playoffs.


S.&amp; P. Seminars
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said yesterday that some of its top analysts would hold banking seminars this month in London, Paris and Zurich.
The seminars will focus on changes affecting banks worldwide, including the declining quality of assets, weakening capital positions, growing regulatory reform and the trend toward consolidation.
The London meeting will be next Monday, followed by meetings in Paris on Nov. 13 and in Zurich on Nov. 15.


Patterns
Whereas, and So Forth
The model in black lace waltzed down the runway at the Hotel Pierre, made a turn and posed, like Camille in your high school play.
"
That
is a very pretty dress," said a woman.


Reviews/Music; Premiere Is the Easy Part; 2d Hearing Is the Real Test
As hard as it may be for composers to get their works performed once, it can be even harder a second time, once commissioning agreements have been fulfilled and even the sheer titillation of newness has faded.
So it was appropriate for the New Music Orchestral Project of the National Orchestral Association, which specializes in presenting premieres, to shift to an evening of second performances on Friday at Carnegie Hall.
Jorge Mester, the project's artistic director, led the fine young musicians of this training orchestra in flattering accounts of works by Kamran Ince, Stephen Hartke, Lawrence Rapchak and Peter Lieuwen.


Miscellany
*
McDonald's Corp. has agreed to discontinue a campaign in the Netherlands that was to depict the Dutch Prime Minister, Ruud Lubbers, an occasional customer, having a "Big Mac attack" during a session of Parliament, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
A spokesman for Mr.
Lubbers said the campaign, which was to have included posters and place mats, ran counter to policies against the Prime Minister's use for commercial purposes.


Discovery of Tumor Antigen May Point to Cancer Vaccine
SCIENTISTS have long been seeking to design a cancer vaccine, a magic inoculation that would galvanize the immune system either to destroy a tumor or to prevent the recurrence of cancer once the initial malignancy had been removed.
But they have been hampered by their ignorance about which proteins of a tumor cell, the so-called antigens, would be most likely to provoke a potent immune response and would therefore be useful if inserted into a cancer vaccine.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.94
5.00
7.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.73
4.76
7.07
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.78
4.78
7.05
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.15
7.13
8.33
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.95
7.92
8.61
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.92
8.92
9.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.82
6.81
7.63
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Homeless Plan for New York City Must Include Medical Help
To the Editor:
"Getting a Handle on the Homeless" (editorial, Oct. 19), on Mayor David N. Dinkins's new homeless plan for New York City, misrepresents my statements and feelings about the homeless.
Of course, homelessness itself is not a disease.
But many homeless people are ill.
By some estimates, at least two-thirds suffer from serious mental problems or addiction to drugs and alcohol.
They need structured medical help, treatment over a period of time until they are stabilized.
The Mayor's plan does not offer that.
It offers walk-in sites, where people may come and go as they please.
This does not help those who need help.
And it does not help the residents of this city who have compassion for those in need, but also a concern about the quality of life in their neighborhoods.


Japanese Collaborate With Indians of Taos
A landscape of dry sand and brush and golden light opens out across the stage of the Lepercq Space at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Flat and horizonless, it resembles a relief map as well as a yellowing old foolscap guide to a new world.
A rehearsal is in progress, and from out of the dark beyond that territory comes the steady beat of a deep-voiced drum and the softly ululating cry of a wooden flute.
Two figures dressed in skins are suddenly visible, newborn infants crawling very slowly out of the earth's womb.
The lights begin to dim poetically when a sound comes up from the sand.
"Fade out, fade out," one of the creatures hisses at a light technician.
Eiko and Koma, hard-nosed professionals and acclaimed spinners of primordial dreams, are back with a new dance-theater production called "Land," which opens tonight for a six-performance engagement in the Next Wave festival.


Careers; Boston Is Site Of European Study Forum
THE European M.B.A.
Consortium has bypassed New York and has chosen Boston as the site for its annual forum this year.
The forum, which begins Friday, offers interested students the chance to interview with professors and graduates of eight European schools.
A spokesman for the consortium said yesterday that Boston was chosen this year because there are many students at colleges and universities in the New England area, as well as graduates working in the Boston area, who might be interested in graduate study abroad, possibly at one of the eight schools that participate in the program.


Miller Play Divides The Critics In London
The Sunday Times here quoted the playwright Arthur Miller over the weekend as saying that he expected his latest play, "The Ride Down Mount Morgan," which had its premiere at Wyndham's Theater on Thursday, to be received with "bewilderment, enthusiasm and condemnation." He was right: London's critics are divided over the play.
In The Daily Mail, Shaun Usher called it "a remarkably diverse, lively play," Andrew St.
George of The Financial Times found it "an immensely satisfying evening's theater," and in The Sunday Times, John Peter maintained that in "Mount Morgan," Mr.
Miller writes "with all the vigor and agility of the commercial theater at its most irresistible."


On My Mind; Saving Louisiana
Less than two weeks are left before Election Day in Louisiana, not much, but time enough for the voters to understand what they will be doing to their state if they elect David Duke as governor, and what they will be doing to themselves.
Up to now, there have been nicey-nicey modifiers used to describe David Duke.
But if he wins this man will be seen by the world not as a neo-Nazi, not as a former Nazi, but right out plain as the first Nazi governor elected in the United States.


For a Second Party
To the Editor:
Although in spirit I am glad Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is thinking about considering next year's Presidential race (front page, Oct. 22), I caution him on his approach to the campaign.
He has decried the policies of the Reagan-Bush Administrations by pointing out that their greatest accomplishment has been to invade Grenada and beat up 40 men wearing sneakers, but he should be reminded that his own party stalwarts were standing and voting with the President.
They played the same me-too role when Panama became a victim of our military might and who knows how many Panamanian civilians were killed, and when we waged Operation Desert Storm and destroyed 150,000 Iraquis for Pax Americana.
America needs an opposition party. I hope Mario Cuomo understands the size of the task.
DON SLOAN  New York, Oct. 24, 1991


Agency Faulted on List To Show AIDS Risks
The Centers for Disease Control stood virtually alone as it came under a barrage of criticism here today for trying to develop a list of procedures that doctors and dentists infected with the AIDS virus should not perform.
More than 30 speakers representing health-care and civil rights organizations said that developing a list of "exposure prone" procedures had no scientific validity.
The speakers also said that such a list would not achieve its desired purpose of reducing transmission of the AIDS virus from infected health-care workers to patients and would be too costly.


Democrats Wary on Baker's Planned Trip to China
Congressional Democrats today offered muted criticism of Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's planned visit to China, saying the trip would be a pointless exercise unless Beijing agrees to improve its record on human rights and arms proliferation.
In China, the Foreign Ministry praised the visit as "an important event in U.S.-China relations." The White House has not sent a senior official on a public visit to Beijing since Chinese troops massacred pro-democracy student protesters in Tiananmen Square in June 1989.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about New Jerseyans discussing today's election misidentified the woman with Rich Hoffman, a store owner in New Brunswick.
She was his mother, Clara, not his wife.


Iranians Rally Against U.S.
Fifteen thousand Iranians shouting, "Down with America!" and "Down with Israel!" turned out today to mark the 12th anniversary of the seizure of the United States Embassy here and denounce the Arab-Israeli peace talks.
Shopkeepers closed their businesses in the city's bazaar to join high school and university students who waved banners and burned an American flag outside the former embassy building.


It's No Longer 'The Arabs'
Outwardly the big achievement in Madrid was that, for all the angry words, nobody stormed away in anger as Arabs and Israelis confronted each other as negotiators for the first time.
But something else made this peace conference still more remarkable.
It shows there is no longer a single "Arab nation." There are, instead, distinct peoples and states whose leaders are finally free to pursue different paths.
The weekend handshakes are ephemeral; there's as yet no cause for euphoria.
Bitter differences on where to meet next may provide pretexts for stalling or even scuttling serious face-to-face talks.
Yet Madrid has already yielded a glimpse of a transformed Middle East in which Arab peoples engage in the normal give-and-take of political argument among themselves.


Economic Trend for 90's: Fear; Grappling With Tough Times on Long Island
It is hard to pinpoint, but sometime in the last year economic fear took deep root in New York's suburbs.
William Butler, head of the state unemployment office in Hempstead, saw it by March.
"We had so many white collar professionals coming in," he says, "we didn't know what to do with them." He started job-search seminars, but couldn't keep up.
The waiting list is now a month.
Last week's seminar included a lawyer, an accountant, three teachers, four engineers and a company vice president.
In the suburban malls -- where there is no weather -- everyone talks about the economy.
"It's the main thing I discuss with friends," Seth Rosenthal, a Macy's manager, was saying at the Roosevelt Field mall in Carle Place, L.I.
"We were talking about this before Judge Thomas, and we're talking about it now."


From No Scrutiny to Federal Regulation
Breast implants came on the market almost 30 years ago, when there was no regulation of medical devices.
In 1976, Congress gave the Food and Drug Administration the authority to regulate such devices, but exempted from scrutiny those already on the market.
In the intervening years, products that were exempted but were thought to cause problems have been reviewed, with those considered the most risky, like heart valves, taking priority.


Our Towns; Secrets of an Elusive Lady Bountiful
IT all started with a gallbladder problem, which was so painful that Misha thought it was food poisoning from the salad bar, which he had suspected all along, though he was wrong.
This was down in North Carolina where Lillian's limo had stopped for the night.
Before the ambulance left for New Jersey.
Keeping up with Lillian Booth is hard at times, especially on the telephone, which she doesn't like, although she doesn't want to meet in person either.
Not before the column is published, anyway.
She usually prefers to have Misha Dabich speak for her on the phone, although then she interrupts him from across the room to get her opinion in anyway, along with some details as they occur to her in her substantial house here.


After a Plane Crash, 30 Deadly Hours in the Arctic
A giant C-130 Hercules of the Canadian military crashed last Wednesday on a routine supply run, beginning an ordeal of survival in the forbidding frozen darkness of the high Arctic.
The full story, which has been coming out in recent days from survivors and rescuers, has gripped the Canadian public -- most of whom live within an east-west band about 150 miles from the American border -- and served as a grim reminder of the country's vast northern reaches.
South to north, Canada stretches almost 3,000 miles -- farther than from New York City to Los Angeles.


Danes Link Sunspot Intensity to Global Temperature Rise
ARE changes in the intensity of the Sun's radiation partly responsible for the rise in global temperature that has been observed over the last century and especially over the last few years?
If so, it would mean that heat-trapping atmospheric gases like carbon dioxide played a smaller role in the warming than some scientists have believed likely.
The possibility has been raised anew by Danish geophysicists.
They report in the current issue of the journal Science that they have established a close statistical correlation between variations in the length of the sunspot cycle -- which they say are an indicator of changes in the intensity of solar radiation -- and fluctuations in the world's surface temperature over the last 130 years.


Rangers' Victory Streak Reaches 6
John Vanbiesbrouck . . . Mike Richter . . . Vanbiesbrouck . . . Richter . . .
It was Vanbiesbrouck's turn again last night in the goaltender rotation that Ranger Coach Roger Neilson still insists does not exist.
Considering the supposed randomness of this lineup move, Vanbiesbrouck played with patterned perfection in a 4-0 victory over the Calgary Flames at Madison Square Garden.
It was the Rangers' sixth victory in a row.


ISRAELIS OPENING GOLAN SETTLEMENT
Driving home its claim to the territory and its insistence that Syria will not get it back, Israel inaugurated a new settlement for Soviet immigrants today on a rainswept stretch of the Golan Heights.
The new community, called Qela and built on the abandoned site of a failed kibbutz, is starting out with 25 families and was planned well before the Middle East peace conference in Madrid.
In fact, Israeli leaders had asked the settlers to postpone the ceremony from last week to today to avoid accusations that they were trying to undermine the peace process.


Morris and Twins Near the Point of No Return
The perfect match that Jack Morris and the Minnesota Twins developed this season may turn out to be only a passionate but brief fling.
Morris, who pitched a dramatic 1-0 shutout in the seventh game of the World Series, did not file for free agency yesterday, the first day he could have done so.
But barring an unexpected contract agreement in the next week, he will become a free agent by the filing deadline next Monday, and even the Twins acknowledged that anything could happen after that.
Minnesota's efforts to negotiate a new contract have gone nowhere.


Conductor And Bass Quit Opera
The conductor Rafael Fruhbeck de Burgos and the bass Nicolai Ghiaurov have withdrawn from the Washington Opera's production of Verdi's "Don Carlo," scheduled to open the company's season at the Kennedy Center on Saturday.
Martin Feinstein, the company's general director, said the two musicians left the production because they were unwilling to participate in performances with piano accompaniment.


Giants Have Landed, Flat on Their Faces
It might not have been the worst offensive performance by the Giants since they became a power in the 1980's.
But it sure seemed that way tonight -- especially to the players.
The Giants were throttled, 30-7, by the Eagles, whose defense held them to a total of 180 yards, who sacked Jeff Hostetler four times, who held Dave Meggett to minus-4 yards on 3 carries.


Transcending the Past to Master, Through Words, the Present
"From prostitute to professor to playwright": that's how Dr.
Endesha Ida Mae Holland is described in the publicity for her new play.
But Dr.
Holland, a tenured associate professor of American studies at the State University at Buffalo, says she isn't embarrassed by the intrusion of her raunchy past into her current life as a respectable scholar.
"After all, I've had an extraordinary life," she said on a recent afternoon at the Circle in the Square (Downtown) in Manhattan, where her play "From the Mississippi Delta," now in previews, will open on Monday.
"I'm not ashamed of my life, and I'm proud to say that I've changed. I think that others can learn from my experience. Young people need to know that they can do wrong things and yet still change and grow."


People
*
Jon Baker, 39 years old, has been promoted to chairman of the southeast division of Earle Palmer Brown, Bethesda, Md., from executive vice president-corporate development.
He succeeds Mike Turner, who is retiring.


Treasuries Slip in Light Trading
Prices of Treasury securities edged lower in thin trading yesterday, as dealers prepared for the start of the Government's fall refunding auctions today.
Traders said the impetus to lighten positions was provided in part by the director of the White House Office of Management and Budget, Richard G. Darman.
In an interview yesterday in The Wall Street Journal, Mr.
Darman said the Administration would revive the idea of tax cuts at some point in 1992 if the economy remained weak.


CHRONICLE
The designer DIANE VON FURSTENBERG will offer her 18th-century apartment on the Left Bank of the Seine, ARTHUR MILLER will give away a page from his new play and HENRY A. KISSINGER will talk about dolls.
Celebrities who live in Connecticut are donating all manner of things for a benefit auction by the Housatonic Valley Association, to be held Sunday at 2 P.M. at the Litchfield Inn on Route 22.


Judge in Queens Murder Trial Admits Asking Juror Whether She Is Homosexual
A Queens judge admitted yesterday that he had departed from an earlier promise and asked a prospective juror her sexual orientation in a trial of two men charged with killing a gay man.
Justice Ralph Sherman of State Supreme Court said he had asked this question of one of 52 prospective jurors that he and defense lawyers questioned last week because he thought it was appropriate and legally necessary after the juror reported having gay friends.


MILITARY SHIELDED FROM INJURY SUITS
The Supreme Court refused today to consider any exception to its 41-year-old rule that insulates the military against essentially any liability for injuries to service members, even those that occur through the negligence of superior officers.
Without comment, the Court turned down an appeal by the family of a Navy recruit who drowned three years ago in a highly publicized incident for which a Navy court-martial later convicted an officer of negligent homicide.


Incumbents Hunker Down As Discontent Flies Over
In tiny Neptune Township, N.J., local Monmouth County Republican candidates bought time on cable television to denigrate their opponents as "Florio-type Democrats." In Harlem, a Democrat was nominated for the City Council last week after declaring that Mayor David N. Dinkins had "neglected his base." And in Bridgeport, the mayoral election has been turned into a referendum on Mayor Mary C. Moran's budgetary strategy that led Connecticut's largest city to file for bankruptcy.
"It's good to be the king," Mel Brooks said smugly, playing Louis XVI in his film "History of the World, Part 1." But in tough times, as Louis later learned, incumbency can become a fatal liability.


J. Ellen Gainor Weds D. A. Faulkner
J.
Ellen Gainor, an assistant professor of theater arts at Cornell University, and David A. Faulkner, a doctoral candidate in English and an instructor at Princeton University, were married yesterday.
Richard Woodbridge, the Mayor of Princeton, performed the ceremony in his office.
Professor Gainor, 33 years old, is a National Endowment for the Humanities Fellow and a visiting fellow at Princeton while on leave from Cornell.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a master's degree from the Yale School of Drama and a Ph.D. from Princeton.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
She is the daughter of Charles and Mary E. Gainor of Cohasset, Mass.
Her father is a professor emeritus of microbiology at Northeastern University and her mother is a professor emeritus of English at the University of Massachusetts at Boston.


Many Dreams, Fewer Dollars In Lotteries
In some ways, New York would like to be more like Connecticut; in other ways, more like New Jersey.
New Jersey wouldn't mind being a little more like Connecticut.
In certain respects, New Jersey and Connecticut would like to be more like New York.
And everybody would love to be a lot more like Massachusetts.
This envy has nothing to do with violent-crime rates, yearly rainfall or the percentage of houses without aluminum siding.
Rather, it concerns that fascinating obsession of the not-yet-rich: state lotteries.


Chess
If a Model-T Ford were to roll up to the starting line side by fender with today's technologically complex racing machines, it would be greeted by querulous looks.
Someone would surely suggest that it was nothing more than a publicity prank.
And if anyone hoped to win a chess game by trotting out the Exchange Variation of the French Defense, just as many eyebrows would be raised.
Yet in the second round of the Interpolis International Tournament in Tilburg, the Netherlands, this very same obsolete array was put on the board by none other than the world champion himself, Gary Kasparov of the Soviet Union.
It's anybody's guess what the most hard-driving attacking player of our time had in mind in choosing such a sterile, symmetrical method.


Prescribing a Dose of Confidence
America's business leaders are usually more comfortable talking about their companies' bottom lines than the mood of the country's body politic.
But as the economy continues to flounder, they are becoming less reticent about sounding off about what needs to be done.
The problem, as many executives see it, has more to do with sagging spirits than with dollars and cents.
And their antidote to the nation's economic anxiety depends less on the mechanics of monetary or fiscal policy than on clear signs of some leadership from Washington.


Tapping A Pipeline Of Factoid And Fact
HAPPY Guy Fawkes Day.
Roy Rogers was born on Nov. 5.
So was Art Garfunkel.
George M. Cohan died on Nov. 5, and it was also the day the first Colonial post office was set up, in Boston.
How do you like them apples?
Those dates, and the bit of 1930's slang, come from two of the five HyperCard stacks, or collections of data, that make up Writer's Dreamtools, by Slippery Disks of Los Angeles.
Anybody who cranks out copy on a Macintosh, either professionally or as a student, should find the set a source of inspiration and amusement.
It is also a treasury of factoids, those gems of information that make a piece of writing seem more authoritative and better researched than it really is.


Hansen for Hopson
In an exchange of guards, the Sacramento Kings yesterday acquired DENNIS HOPSON from the Chicago Bulls in exchange for BOBBY HANSEN and the Kings' 1992 second-round pick.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
The House overwhelmingly rejected legislation that made it more difficult for banks to expand into the securities and insurance businesses than the Bush Administration wants.
The 324-to-89 vote was the product of intense lobbying by senior Administration officials, including Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, who combined forces with representatives of the nation's largest financial institutions, like American Express, Citicorp and J. P. Morgan.  [ Page A1. ]
People reaching the age of 65 will now be able to buy private health insurance to fill the gaps in Medicare without having to worry about being rejected because of illness, injury or prior medical problems.  [ A1. ]


LTV Must Pay Pension Funds
A Federal judge directed the bankrupt LTV Corporation yesterday to inject at least $39 million in emergency payments to the company's pension plans for another six months.
United States Bankruptcy Judge Burton R. Lifland said he would decide in three months whether the company should pay another $39 million to the pension plans.


No Headline
IT has been 41 years since Alan M. Turing, the British mathematician, formulated a simple test to answer the question, "Can machines think?" In the intervening years scientists and philosophers have engaged in a sometimes bitter debate over Mr.
Turing's puzzle.
In one camp are those who believe that the brain is simply a biological machine, and that despite its immense complexity there is no reason in principle why a suitably programmed computer should not be able to mimic it.
Their opponents respond that the human mind is inherently different from a machine and can never be reduced to a set of computations.


Chaus Profits Are Doubled
Bernard Chaus Inc., which makes women's sportswear, reported yesterday that because of lower manufacturing costs and extraordinary tax benefits, its earnings more than doubled in its first quarter ended Sept. 30.
The company, based in New York, said profits grew to $656,000, or 4 cents a share, from $295,000, or 2 cents a share, in its first quarter last year.
Sales increased 5 percent, to $60.2 million, from $57.3 million in the comparable period a year ago.


BRIEFS
*
Aerodyne Products Corp., North Billerica, Mass., acquired the assets and name of Amdex Industrial Computers.
Terms were not disclosed. *
American Biodyne Inc., South San Francisco, Calif., signed a letter of intent to acquire Achievement and Guidance Centers of America Inc., Newtown, Pa., in an exchange of common stock.


A Neighborhood Struggle With Despair
Six days a week, from midmorning until nightfall, Shirley Flowers sits alone in the lobby of her South Bronx apartment building, greeting neighbors with cheerful banter while doing her best to banish the nervous strangers who wander in after buying crack in a nearby basement.
The 48-year-old grandmother is all that remains of the tenant patrol she started two years ago to rout the crackheads who lolled in the building's hallways and stairways.
Coaxed into being out of apathy and fear, the 340 Beekman Avenue patrol could never overcome its dubious birth.


Subway Tunnel Fans Are Rebuilt but All Wrong
The Transit Authority, whose repeated attempts to replace hundreds of aging exhaust fans in its subway tunnels have been riddled with problems, said yesterday that it spent about $1 million last year rebuilding eight large fans that, it later realized, were too powerful to be turned on.
Four of the fans, designed to pump smoke out of tunnels in emergencies, were supposed to be installed near the Clark Street station on the IRT line in Brooklyn Heights, where an electrical fire in December 1990 killed two subway riders, injured 149, and left 1,000 others groping for air.
The other four fans were to be installed near the Bedford Avenue station on the BMT L Line in Brooklyn.


Europeans Threaten to End Yugoslav Peace Effort
After hearing Yugoslav leaders reiterate positions hardened by months of fighting and turmoil, the European Community threatened today to suspend its ineffective peace conference as it announced a 12th cease-fire.
After today's one-hour session, Lord Carrington, chairman of the conference, issued a stern warning, directed primarily at Serbia.


The Law That Ate the Future
The Budget Agreement.
It was the Holy Grail of 1990, the painful compromise between a Republican President and a Democratic Congress.
It was holy because both sides solemnly pledged to abide by the deal for five years, and grail because the quest for honest deficit reduction took so many elusive turns.
"Read my hips," President Bush gibed -- before finally accepting new taxes after all.
The same agreement has, in a different world, become the hair shirt of 1991, scratching at members of Congress who think the deal has gone sour yet feel a duty to stick with it.
The truth is, however, that to preserve the 1990 budget agreement, it must be scrapped.


New Series of Church Fires Sets Florida on Edge
With 3,000 members, the First Baptist Church of Ocala is the largest Protestant congregation here, housed since 1926 in a gracious red-brick building with white columns that is regarded as a local landmark.
But on Oct. 24 it burned to the ground, destroyed in a $4 million blaze that the authorities suspect was arson.
For the second time this year, central Florida has been thrown into a state of alarm by a wave of church fires.
The conflagration at the First Baptist Church in this town of 45,000 people was one of six to break out in the region in a single week in late October, leaving churchgoers and clergy members to worry that they may be the next target of an arsonist whose objective and methods cannot be fathomed.


An Enormous Empire With Debts to Match
Robert Maxwell died just as his grip on his global publishing empire seemed to be slipping.
His empire -- and investor confidence -- had been shaken by turnovers in management, the burden of billions of dollars in debts incurred from acquisitions made in the 1980's, and depressed business conditions in the United States and Britain.
It also has had to absorb losses from The Daily News in New York, which Mr.
Maxwell acquired last spring, and from The European, an English-language pan-European weekly newspaper he introduced in May.


The Mario Myth
Democrats who think that Mario Cuomo is the candidate they have been waiting for to take back the White House are in for a real surprise.
Mario Cuomo offers voters the same thing George McGovern, Walter Mondale and Michael Dukakis offered them: warmed-over New Deal liberalism, albeit in a more attractive package.
In fact, Mr.
Cuomo may be the weakest Democrat the party could field.
Granted, the New York Governor is probably the most oratorically gifted politician in either party today.
He is talented, cunning, fearless and has stature.
Add to this his combativeness, refreshing for the Democrats after Michael Dukakis's feckless performance, and it's easy to see why many Democrats think a Cuomo candidacy would be a godsend.


Secret Radio Adds Voice to Hungarian Debate
Every Monday, Wednesday and Friday afternoon, two young renegades head into clandestine Budapest apartments, discreetly parked cars or the woods to broadcast four hours of alternative music and interviews over the radio.
The name they have chosen for their pirate station, Tilos Radio, or Forbidden Radio, recalls a dark time in Hungary's Communist history when conformity reigned and anything offbeat was prohibited.


Howe Reaches Accord On 1-Year Yank Pact
Steve Howe, who became a welcome addition after virtually forcing himself on the Yankees last spring, reached agreement with the club yesterday on a new one-year contract that could pay him as much as $2.3 million.
The agreement came on the day the Yankees had to decide whether or not to exercise the option in his old contract.
Howe, a 33-year-old relief pitcher, was one of the few positive developments in the Yankees' season, and only an elbow problem that developed in August prevented him from gaining a totally guaranteed lucrative contract.


United Front on Pollution Dissolved by Squabbling
New York thought it had lined up all the states in the Northeast for a coordinated assault on air pollution, but now, amid recriminations, Connecticut may be bailing out.
Connecticut officials say New York is trying to railroad all of its neighbors into adopting tough antipollution rules for new cars, already approved in California, that may or may not be cost-effective.
Connecticut, New York says, is not pulling its weight in the region's quest for clean air.


SENATE APPROVES GATES, BY 64 TO 31, TO HEAD THE C.I.A.
Robert M. Gates became the 15th Director of Central Intelligence today, winning Senate confirmation by more than a 2-to-1 ratio and achieving a goal to which he has aspired for most of his professional life.
Although the cold war that gave birth to the Central Intelligence Agency has ended, the 48-year-old deputy national security adviser said in exhaustive confirmation hearings that he planned no fundamental refashioning of America's intelligence agencies.
Rather, he is expected to move swiftly, with President Bush's help, to strengthen his mandate as the director, not only of the C.I.A., but also of the other agencies and bureaus that nominally come under his command.
A Wide Margin of Victory
After two days of Senate debate and nearly six months after President Bush nominated him, the Senate voted 64 to 31 in favor of Mr.
Gates, concluding the most difficult confirmation process in the agency's 50-year history.


Extra!! 'Liar for Hire' Evicted!!
The 12 floors of the Longacre Building are empty these days except for the security guards and Richard R. Falk.
He is the same age as the building, 79, and has been known for decades as the mayor of 42d Street.
He opposes the $2.5-billion redevelopment of Times Square, which is supposed to begin with the demolition of his building, and he has refused to move out of his one-room office on the third floor.
What Mr.
Falk has done so far during his solitary entrenchment against the New York State Urban Development Corporation's project makes for a moderately unusual story.
But what he has not done so far is truly extraordinary.


Theater in Review
The Dropper  One Dream Theater 234 West Broadway, at North Moore Street Manhattan Written and directed by Ron McLarty; set by Stephan Olsen; lighting by Michael Stiller; costumes by Traci di Gesu; music by Wayne Jones; production stage manager, Scott Peg.
Presented by Prima Artists New York.
WITH: John Dawson Beard, Nick Giangiulio, Bob Horen, Richard Long and Wendy Scharfman.
When a young plumber decides to emigrate from rural England to the United States in the early part of this century, he is filled with trepidation, principally because it means leaving his mentally handicapped brother, who is his closest friend and ward.
The loving fraternal bond is at the emotional center of "The Dropper," a fragile but evocative new play by Ron McLarty at the One Dream Theater.


More Suspicious Deaths Cited at Brooklyn Hospital
At least four suspicious deaths have occurred at Kings County Hospital since the death of Yankel Rosenbaum, the Hasidic scholar who died after doctors failed to notice a stab wound that proved fatal, hospital and city officials said yesterday.
One of those deaths occurred after two doctors in training, one a resident, overruled the orders of a staff doctor who ordered tests on a woman complaining of chest pains, the officials said.
All four deaths are being investigated by the New York State Department of Health.
Results are expected to be released by the end of this week.


Smith Asserts Woman Consented To Sex Before the Two Quarreled
Lawyers for William K. Smith have asserted for the first time that Mr.
Smith's accuser willingly had sex with him and then, after the two had a quarrel, asserted that she was raped.
That glimpse of Mr.
Smith's defense was included in court papers filed Monday after a third day of questioning prospective jurors for his trial.


3-Year Note Auction Goes Badly
The first Treasury debt sale under new auction guidelines imposed in the wake of the Salomon Brothers bidding scandal went extremely poorly yesterday, as the Government struggled to sell $14 billion worth of new three-year notes.
Traders and analysts cited a number of reasons for the poor auction.
But all agreed that it would cost the Treasury -- and the taxpayer -- well over $120 million in higher interest over the life of the securities sold yesterday.


Review/Music; Symphony Of Grace And Grit: The Detroit
One has to admire the tenacity of the Detroit Symphony Orchestra, which has struggled to stay alive in the face of a sharply deteriorating Michigan economy.
Determination, of course, is not sufficient reason to keep an orchestra with a $17 million budget afloat.
But at its Carnegie Hall concert on Monday evening, the musicians showed that what is at stake is a first-class ensemble with a sound that is impressively polished and warm.
Its lower strings, in particular, provided a rich, glowing foundation in Arvo Part's ruminative "Cantus in Memory of Benjamin Britten." And the transparency of the wind and brass playing gave the last two movements of the Ives First Symphony an alluringly springy, Romantic sound.
The orchestra was conducted by Neeme Jarvi, who is now in his second season as its music director.
Mr.
Jarvi is not a flashy conductor, but his gestures are clear and expressive, and sweeping when they need to be.


CHRONICLE
"It was something of a tease," said RICHARD QUAINTANCE, associate professor of English at Rutgers University, referring to the title of his lecture, "Political Correctness in 18th-Century English Gardens and Landscaping Lore."


Calumet Expiring in a Sea of Shocking Figures
There is no "For Sale" sign on the miles of white board fence encircling the 800 acres of Calumet Farm.
There doesn't have to be.
These are the last days of the world's most renowned breeding and racing farm, which owes $150 million, and everybody knows it.
"We live with lawyers," Ron Sladon, the secretary-treasurer of the farm, said today.
"You're looking at January as the deadline for us to sell it. Then, it's ultimately the courthouse steps."


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
North Stars Triumph Dave Gagner's second goal of the game last night broke a tie with 5 minutes 32 seconds to play to give Minnesota a 3-2 victory over the Red Wings in Detroit.
Gagner was standing in front of the Detroit net when Mike Craig's shot deflected off his skate and past Tim Cheveldae.
Gagner's first goal, on the power play, gave the North Stars a 2-1 lead in the second period.
The victory left the North Stars unbeaten in three games (2-0-1).(AP) Bruins 5, Penguins 5: Vladimir Ruzicka's third goal of the game completed visiting Boston's comeback from a three-goal deficit as the Bruins continued the early-season slump by the Stanley Cup champion, Pittsburgh, by tying the Penguins.
Andy Brickley had an assist on each of Ruzicka's goals. (AP) Flyers 4, Blues 3: Rick Tocchet scored twice in the first period as Philadelphia grabbed a three-goal lead and hung on for the victory in St.
Louis.
The loss snapped an eight-game unbeaten streak for the Blues (3-0-5) and was St.
Louis' first at home this season.
St.
Louis trailed, 4-1, at 13:01 of the first period and made a bid for its eighth comeback to either tie or win but couldn't get enough chances on Ron Hextall.
The Flyers outshot the Blues, 45-25, including a 15-7 margin in a scoreless third period. (AP) HORSE RACING 3 Jockeys Suspended Three jockeys, including the one who rode the winner, were suspended for rough riding yesterday after Let's Elope won the Melbourne Cup, Australia's richest horse race.
Stewards said Steven King, Shane Dye and Malcolm Johnston engaged in 400 to 600 meters of mayhem just before the finish line, endangering other horses and riders in the field.
Although King was her rider, Let's Elope's 2 1/2-length victory was allowed to stand.
King was suspended until Dec. 19, Dye until Dec. 5 and Johnston until Dec. 7.
Dye rode Shiva's Revenge to second.
Magnolia Hall, a 50-1 outsider, was third. (AP)


Theater in Review
The Dressing Room  Pan Asian Repertory Theater Playhouse 46 at St.
Clement's Church 423 West 46th Street Manhattan Through Nov. 30  By Kunio Shimizu; directed by Kati Kuroda; original translation by John K. Gillespie; adapted and with dramaturgy by Chiori Miyagawa; lighting by Tina Charney; composer, Bert Moon; set by Atsushi Moriyasu; sound by Ty Sanders; costumes by Eiko Yamaguchi; stage manager, Sue Jane Stoker; set execution, Red Dot Scenic.
Presented by Pan Asian Repertory, Tisa Chang, artistic/producing director.
WITH: Constance Boardman, Carol A. Honda, Shizuko Hoshi and Mary Lee.
"The Dressing Room," a rarefied backstage play by Kunio Shimizu, opens the 15th-anniversary season at the Pan Asian Repertory Theater.
Mr.
Shimizu, a prolific contemporary Japanese writer, is also the author of "Tango at the End of Winter," which was recently presented on the West End in London in a production directed by the playwright's frequent collaborator, Yukio Ninagawa.


Robert Maxwell Found Dead Off Canary Islands
Robert Maxwell, the flamboyant and combative British publisher whose global empire includes The Daily News in New York, vanished suddenly from his yacht today while cruising off the Canary Islands.
His body was discovered hours later, floating in the sea.
The sole passenger on his vast, 180-foot, white-carpeted yacht, the 68-year-old Mr.
Maxwell had last been seen alive by members of the 13-member crew in the dim pre-dawn light, pacing the decks alone.


Fred MacMurray Is Dead at 83; Versatile Film and Television Star
Fred MacMurray, the personable, unassuming actor who starred in some of the best film comedies of the 1930's and 40's and was later the protagonist in popular Walt Disney fantasies and the television situation comedy "My Three Sons," died yesterday at St.
John's Hospital and Health Center in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 83 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of pneumonia after being admitted to the hospital on Monday afternoon, said Sarah O'Meara, a family friend.


Compucom Systems Puts Stores on Block
Compucom Systems Inc., a nationwide computer seller, said yesterday that it had decided to leave the consumer retail market by consolidating and selling its 14 Computer Factory stores.
Compucom acquired the stores last April for $38 million, but most of the Dallas-based company's business now comes from direct sales to larger corporate customers.


Microwave Cooking
In thinking about what I would write this month, I realized with a start that I had never written about cranberries in this column.
That's particularly surprising because one of the things the microwave does supremely well is make cranberry molds. (See Micro Tips for quantities and timing.) One of the nicest molds uses cassis syrup and turns a rich garnet color.
It is only in the last century or so that people have come to think of ketchups as made with tomatoes.
Ketchups used to be made with a wide variety of fruits and vegetables, even mushrooms.
The recipe below is made with cranberries and makes a sophisticated change.
It's particularly good on turkey sandwiches; but you will be surprised how often you use it once you have it.
Consider it for a side dish with a curry.


O.M. La Beet, Bank Officer, 66; Vice President for Urban Affairs
Octave M. La Beet, who retired in 1989 as the urban affairs officer of the Bank of New York, died on Friday after collapsing at his home in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He was 66 years old.
Mr.
La Beet died shortly after an ambulance took him from his home, his wife, Olga Jarvis La Beet, said.
She said the cause of his death was not immediately known.
A Tuskegee Airman
Mr.
La Beet was also a vice president of the Bank of New York.
As its urban affairs officer, he was an adviser to the bank's offices and departments and was "involved in resolving socio-economic problems in the communities served by the bank and in determining that all communities were informed of our products and services," a spokeswoman for the Bank of New York, Margaret Southerland, said.


New York Utility's Bonds Yield 9%
The New York State Electric and Gas Corporation, which is based in Ithaca and serves upstate New York, sold $150 million of 8.875 percent first-mortgage bonds through Merrill Lynch yesterday.


Burkett Is Quietly Emerging As the Jets' Mr. Excitement
By design or through initiative, Chris Burkett always seems to be in the right place at the right time this year.
A standout receiver and special-teams player, Burkett has come up with the two biggest plays of the season in both those areas for the Jets.
On Sunday, Burkett, one of the two outside receivers on a play called Geronimo, caught a 50-yard desperation pass that bounced off two players before landing in Burkett's hands.


Maxco to Issue Preferred Stock
Maxco Inc. of Lansing, Mich., filed a registration statement yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission for 50,000 shares of $60 preferred stock, series 3, with a 10 percent cumulative dividend.
Stockholders of record on Nov. 4 can exchange up to one million common shares at the rate of 20 common shares for one preferred share.
There are 4.5 million shares outstanding.


Amid Criticism, Bush Drops Plans for 2-Week Asia Trip
President Bush tonight canceled plans for a two-week tour of the Far East as he faced mounting economic pressure to speed the end of the recession and political pressure to demonstrate his concern about domestic issues.
Marlin Fitzwater, the President's spokesman, issued a written statement that expressed the President's regrets and cited "uncertainty over the Congressional calendar" as the official reason for the cancellation.
The trip was to have started on Thanksgiving or the day before and ended on Dec. 7 in Honolulu for the 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
Mr.
Fitzwater said the President had not decided whether to attend the commemoration and held open the possibility that another Far East trip could be scheduled soon.


Bush Seems to Oppose Tax Cut This Year
Apparently ending any chance that the Administration would offer a plan this year to spur economic recovery through tax cuts, President Bush warned today that such action could prove counterproductive by driving interest rates "through the roof."
While insisting that he had not yet made up his mind, the President was seen as now firmly in the camp of advisers, including Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady and the White House budget director, Richard G. Darman, who oppose tax cuts on the ground that a Congress controlled by Democrats could turn any fiscal initiative to their political advantage by simply increasing any benefits that Mr.
Bush proposes.
Mr.
Darman said Monday that the Administration had decided to postpone any action until next year.


Moscow's Mayor Begins Rationing of Basic Food
With panic shopping sweeping the city in anticipation of a switch to free-market prices, the Mayor of Moscow announced a coupon rationing system today on the most basic foods: bread, meat, butter and eggs.
"The coupons will create some stability in regard to prices," Mayor Gavriil K. Popov said, revealing the latest consumer surprise to a capital already deeply anxious over the traumatic state of the economy.


Dillon, Read Appoints Leader for a New Unit
Wayne D. Thornbrough has made something of a name for himself in managing money on Wall Street.
As chief investment officer of the State Street Research and Management Company and in subsequent jobs, Mr.
Thornbrough chalked up a record of good investment with strong returns.
Yesterday, Dillon, Read &amp; Company announced that it was turning to Mr.
Thornbrough to develop a new investment management subsidiary for the firm.
The subsidiary, Dillon, Read Investment Management Inc., is an effort by the Wall Street investment house to capitalize on the booming business of managing the money of wealthy people and mid-sized institutions.


Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct Honored at Conference
Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct, New York, garnered two plums this week at the Direct Marketing Association's 74th annual conference and exhibition in Boston.
Jerome Pickholz, chairman and chief executive of Ogilvy Direct, was named the 1992 chairman of the association yesterday, succeeding John A. Cleary, president at Donnelley Marketing Inc., Stamford, Conn.
And Ogilvy Direct won the association's highest award, the Diamond Echo, for a direct-response campaign for Ryder Trucks.


Review/Fashion; Calvin Klein Teases With Longer Skirts
WHY did it seem as if Calvin Klein was taking up the cudgels for longer skirts?
Other designers had presented calf-length styles for spring and split them up the front or sides to make them look more seductive.
Other designers had introduced longer skirts in sheer fabrics that allow the legs to show.
Most of those designers offered disclaimers like "we think women should have options: we're showing short skirts, too." So did Mr.
Klein.
Still, it seemed he paid more than cursory attention to the long skirt at his show yesterday in New York.


FIRST-CLASS MAIL STAYS AT 29 CENTS
The United States Postal Service refused today to raise the price of mailing a first-class letter by a penny, with opponents of an increase contending that the timing was poor because of the shaky economy.
Six of the service's nine governors favored the increase, to 30 cents, but the motion was defeated because a unanimous vote was required.
The increase was intended to insure sufficient funds until 1995.


Physics of Crack: What Goes Up, Comes Down
"I WAS the big guy," Gary G. said.
At age 13, this prince of the streets says, he was transporting large quantities of drugs and had so much money he couldn't spend that he once buried some in Central Park.
He carried guns and once watched as a policeman was shot to death in front of him.
He claims he was making $25,000 a month at the peak.
He favored lobster dinners, had all the friends money can buy.
His BMW was confiscated by the police because he was too young to get plates but brazenly drove it anyway.
Though no one can corroborate his story, he tells it with a directness that is persuasive.


The Hunt for Sweet, Low-Fat Chocolate
O.
K.
I can be healthy.
I can eat broccoli and kale and bulgar and rice.
I can make meat a condiment and eat bread without butter.
But don't take away chocolate.
Maybe a well-balanced person would eat just a bit once in a while, calmly going to the cupboard and slicing off a miserly little sliver and carefully wrapping the remainder to be eaten at some future time.
But well-balanced people probably don't need chocolate in the first place.
I need chocolate often, and I need it in quantity.
The consequence of that is far too clear: too much fat outside and too much fat inside, threatening to cause cancer and heart disease and who knows what else.


Unrest in Nicaragua as Sugar Harvest Nears
A new wave of labor violence is sweeping Nicaragua as the important sugar harvest is about to begin, and the Government of Violeta Barrios de Chamorro has accused the opposition Sandinista Front of inciting it with a call for armed insurrection.
Both sides characterized the situation as grave and worrisome, and Mrs.
Chamorro's chief minister, Antonio Lacayo, summoned the nine-member Sandinista leadership to a series of meetings with key ministers that began Friday and continued this week.


Market Place; Managing Care For Mental Health
A GROWING number of large employers are hiring specialty companies like Value Health Inc. and Preferred Health Care Ltd. to try to slow the steep rise in costs for employees with mental health, alcohol and drug problems.
Value Health, based in Avon, Conn., was started by former Cigna Corporation executives in 1987 and went public in April at $14.75 a share.
The company excited investors last week when it announced $25 million in new managed-care contracts for mental health services and its shares climbed $6.625, to $25.50.


U.S. Students Memorize, but Don't Understand
To the Editor:
As a student who attended a high school that offered a European education and now attends an American university, I can see the difference between the knowledge acquired by American and by European students.


Vehicle Sales End October Even Lower
Sales of cars and light trucks built in North America declined 8 percent in late October from a year earlier, the 11 domestic auto makers reported today.
Analysts said the figures suggested that underlying demand remained weak, largely because of consumers' concerns about the economy and anemic growth in real wages.
"It appears we're beating a dead horse," said Tom Webb, chief economist of the National Automobile Dealers Association, who added that many special financing deals were having little effect.
"No matter how low the interest rate, it's difficult to get a financially strapped and psychologically skittish consumer to sign a five-year contract to buy a new car."


Minorities Still Receive Preferential Aid Grants
Even as the legality of scholarships expressly for minority students is under review in Washington, some of the nation's largest and most prestigious universities continue to give preferential treatment to students from certain minority groups when making decisions about financial aid.
Of the 32 colleges that are members of the Consortium on Financing Higher Education, 11 reported that for the current academic year they provided larger outright grants in their financial aid packages to students who are black, Hispanic or American Indian than they provided to other students with similar financial need.
The consortium, based in Cambridge, Mass., conducts research and policy analysis for its members.


Drug Company Is to Move Out Of Manhattan
New Jersey, already home to a number of major drug companies, is getting one more.
The American Home Products Corporation, one of the nation's largest manufacturers of pharmaceuticals and medical equipment, has decided to move its headquarters from Manhattan to Madison, N.J., the company said.
About 1,000 employees now in New York were told on Thursday that they would be asked to transfer by the end of 1993, a company spokesman, John Skule, said.
The move will leave only the Bristol-Myers Squibb Corporation and Pfizer Inc. as the major drug manufacturers with headquarters in New York City.


BRIEFS
*
Barr Laboratories Inc., Northvale, N.J., a pharmaceutical company, said the F.D.A. had raised issues about its manufacturing practices during recent inspections. *
CBS Inc., New York, said it would try to sell KLOU-FM in St.
Louis.


METRO DIGEST
THE ELECTIONS REPUBLICANS TAKE NEW JERSEY
Riding a tide of anger over a record increase in taxes enacted by the Democratic Governor, Jim Florio, Republicans seized control of both houses of the New Jersey Legislature for the first time in 20 years.
Page A1.


Review/Television; On MTV, Talking About the MTV Generation
They are the twentysomethings and, between the ages of 21 and 25, there are some 22 million of them.
Sometimes they are called the MTV generation.
Now MTV is devoting an hourlong special report to these young adults struggling to establish a cultural niche for themselves, something that will distinguish them from the hippies and baby boomers and yuppies of times past.
Skittishly provocative, the program, "MTV Generation," can be seen at 10 tonight.
Produced and directed by Lauren Lazin, who also co-wrote the program with Kurt Loder, "MTV Generation" makes a broad sweep of the country and finds a youthful landscape of enormous diversity and troubling doubts.
These are the young men and women, we are told, who "grew up with a feel-good President and a Wall Street boom that's now bottomed out."


Nissan-French Budapest Venture
The Nissan Motor Company said it and Magyar PGA S.A., a unit of the French car maker Pierre Guenant Automobile Motors S.A., would open a car sales company in Budapest on Wednesday.
It said Magyar owned 74 percent of the new company, Nissan Hungaria R.T., and the British-based Nissan Trading Ltd. held the remainder.
The company will have a French president and a Hungarian chairman; a Nissan executive is expected to be appointed vice president.


Notre Dame vs. Penn State May Be Offered for a Fee
In a step that could lead to a redefinition of the relationship between television and big-time college sports, officials of ABC Sports are working to arrange a pay-per-view cable telecast of the Notre Dame-Penn State game Nov. 16 for areas of the country that won't receive it over the air.
The game is one of the three that ABC will broadcast on a regional basis that Saturday, but it will be available in that manner to only about half the country.


Pushing Video in the Film Capital
The technological revolution they once hoped to bring to Hollywood has not yet arrived, but the Japanese companies with stakes in the entertainment industry are starting to attract attention with advanced video systems that might soon change the way movies and television shows are made.
The new high-definition video systems, which can record and display images in much sharper detail than current video technology, are perhaps best known to consumers as the basis for the next generation of television sets.
But the Japanese companies with the greatest involvement in Hollywood, including Sony and Matsushita, are also promoting high-definition video as a breakthrough for film editing and special effects and ultimately as a new movie-making medium.


U.S. Aims to Make It Possible to Judge A Food by Its Label
On Wednesday, the Food and Drug Administration and the Department of Agriculture will announce the broadest, most comprehensive set of food labeling regulations they have ever issued.
The agency will be trying to make sense of the supermarket babel of claims and descriptions like "reduced fat" and "lite."
The regulations will affect virtually all foods sold in grocery stores -- more than 80,000 types of food, and almost 300,000 food labels -- all of which will be put under one set of regulations.
Among the most important new rules will be strict definitions of many terms now used with widely varying meanings, including "fresh," "low-calorie," "fat-free," "low in cholesterol" and the relative terms "light," "reduced," "less" and "more." Uniform Serving Sizes
For example: "Fresh" will mean what it does now in common English -- raw food, not frozen, processed or preserved food.
"Low fat" will mean less than 3 grams of fat per serving.
"Reduced fat" will mean a reduction of at least 50 percent from the company's or industry's similar products.


Democrat Halpin Is Defeated in Suffolk
The Republican party regained control of Suffolk County government yesterday, as the one-term Democratic incumbent, Patrick G. Halpin, his popularity frayed by a deep recession and dissatisfaction over high taxes, was swept from office by a little-known Republican Assemblyman, Robert J. Gaffney.
Mr.
Gaffney declared victory at 10:40 P.M. before hundreds of supporters in the Sheraton Smithtown Hotel and called for unity to deal with soaring unemployment and economic problems in Suffolk County.


OTHER HIGHLIGHTS
Zaleski Wins in Yonkers
After vowing to follow a Federal housing order, Assemblyman Terence M. Zaleski won a tight three-way race for mayor of Yonkers.
Page B4.
Halpin Defeated in Suffolk
The G.O.P. regained control of Suffolk County government as a little-known Assemblyman defeated the incumbent, Patrick G. Halpin, in the contest for county executive.
Page B6.
Bridgeport Mayor Loses
Mayor Mary C. Moran of Bridgeport, who filed for municipal bankruptcy, was defeated by Joseph P. Ganim, a 32-year-old Democrat who has never held elective office.
Page B6.
New York's New Council
New York City voters elected an expanded City Council that includes more minority-group members, more would-be reformers, and even a handful of Republicans.
Page B1.
Mississippi Governor Loses
Gov.
Ray Mabus, a Democrat, was beaten by his Republican challenger, Kirk Fordice.
The contest was one of several in which the incumbents fared poorly.
Page A22.


CHRONICLE
The second anniversary of the fall of the Berlin wall is being celebrated in Washington, with a two-and-a-half-ton chunk of the wall on display.


Wine Talk
WITH the publication of the second edition of his authoritative "Bordeaux" (Simon &amp; Schuster, $35), Robert M. Parker Jr. has further solidified his position as America's pre-eminent wine critic.
Much of the book is updated material that appeared in the first edition, published in 1985, and in Mr.
Parker's newsletter, The Wine Advocate.
Even so, the result is a big achievement.
For sheer wordage, it puts Mr.
Parker in the company of such major-league sentence manufacturers as Diderot, Carlyle and Robert Caro.
As the sports writers would say, the stats are impressive.
There are some 2,700 tastings notes on the wines of 677 Bordeaux chateaus.
For each chateau, every good year from 1961 to 1989 and usually 22 to 24 vintages are covered in detail.
For many properties, Mr.
Parker has added even older ratings, going back in some cases to the 1920's or earlier.


Agreement on Foreign Aid
The United States and 23 other industrialized nations have agreed to restrict the use of foreign aid to subsidize exports, an American official announced today.
Administration and Congressional officials have contended that Japan, France, Spain and Italy in particular have been taking export markets from American companies by providing aid to help pay for purchases from their companies.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SECURITY COUNCIL -- Meets at 11 A.M.
PLEDGING CONFERENCE FOR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES -- 10 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Endowment Gives Grants to 2 Artists Rejected Last Year
The National Endowment for the Arts has awarded grants to two sexually explicit performance artists who are currently suing the agency over the cancellation of grants awarded them last year.
The two $8,000 grants for the current year, to Tim Miller and Holly Hughes, were announced today by John E. Frohnmayer, the endowment's chairman.
Mr.
Miller and Ms.
Hughes are among four solo performance artists who have filed suit for reinstatement of grants that Mr.
Frohnmayer himself withdrew last year.


Gonaives Journal; A City With Grit Keeps Aristide's Banner Flying
Although only 90 miles away by heavily cratered road, judging by its temperament this rugged port town can seem very distant from Haiti's capital, Port-au-Prince, where debates rage over the merits and misdeeds of the country's deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
From downtown streets to the dusty neighborhoods of Gonaives, the simple mention of Father Aristide's name can set crowds to chanting for the exiled President's return.
The month since he was overthrown by soldiers has only served to brighten the reverence in which he is held here.


Review/Ballet; Movements of Puerto Rico On a Stage in New York
It was not the easiest way for a company to undertake its first engagement in a Manhattan theater.
But Ballet Concierto de Puerto Rico rose to the occasion, looking not at all the worse for wear when its two lead ballerinas were injured shortly before a performance on Saturday night at the Triplex Theater.
The fine impression the troupe made in its debut last summer at the Lincoln Center Out-of-Doors festival was confirmed.
Ballet Concierto, founded in 1978 in San Juan by Lolita San Miguel, a former Metropolitan Opera and Joffrey Ballet dancer, is imbued with classical elegance and simplicity as well as a strong, polished technique and an infectious joy in dancing, from gracious veteran performers to company members who look to be in their early teens.
The company's only major flaw is its apparent predilection for too-brief New York engagements, this one only three performances over the weekend.


Public &amp; Private; The War on Drinks
When she was in fourth grade the girl wrote, "What do you think it does to somebody to live with a lot of pressure?" Starting at age 8 she had been cashing the public assistance check each month, buying money orders, paying the bills and doing the grocery shopping.
One little brother she walked to school; the other she dressed and fed before leaving him at home.
Their mother drank.


HANOI'S OFFICIALS ARRIVE IN BEIJING
Top Vietnamese leaders arrived in Beijing today for five days of talks that both sides said mark the normalization of relations between the former enemies and that pave the way for greater economic cooperation.
The visit by the Vietnamese Communist Party leader, Do Muoi, and Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet ends a rift of more than a dozen years between the two neighbors, who fought a brief border war in 1979.


Daily News to Continue, Its New Publisher Says
One of the sons of Robert Maxwell pledged yesterday that his family was "completely committed" to the continued operation of The Daily News, despite continuing doubts within the industry about the newspaper's future.
"My father was tremendously excited by The News and its prospects," said the son, Kevin Maxwell, who was named publisher yesterday.
"We are completely committed to continuing the marvelous comeback of the newspaper by providing the support it needs to prosper in the years ahead."


Hope vs. Time in Hunt at Sea for a Lost Flier
The whirring propellers of the rising airplanes were the sounds of hope.
Four more of the camouflaged planes rose into the brittle dawn today, joined later by a pair of helicopters.
When they came back 10 grueling hours later, it was the familiar dismal story: They carried the same number of men they had set off with.


Banking Bill Is Delayed In the Senate
A day after the House of Representatives overwhelmingly rejected comprehensive banking legislation, the leadership of the Senate was unable to muster the votes even to begin debate on a similar measure.
Senators said that the House action had tainted the issue.
Heavy lobbying by Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady, Vice President Dan Quayle and the head of the Banking Committee at separate Democratic and Republican luncheons on Capitol Hill was not enough to produce the 60 votes needed to take up the Senate Banking Committee's version of broad bank overhaul.


Dinkins May Appoint Health-Welfare Deputy
Mayor David N. Dinkins, who has been courting the state's welfare commissioner, Cesar A. Perales, to be New York City's deputy mayor for social and health services, hopes to get an answer from Mr.
Perales and announce the appointment by week's end, mayoral aides said yesterday.
The approach to Mr.
Perales reflects the Mayor's eagerness to smooth relations with Hispanic groups and to be seen as addressing New York City's social problems, particularly the crisis in the city's public hospitals.


Smith Asserts Woman Consented To Sex Before the Two Quarreled
Lawyers for William K. Smith have asserted for the first time that Mr.
Smith's accuser willingly had sex with him and then, after the two had a quarrel, asserted that she was raped.
That glimpse of Mr.
Smith's defense was included in court papers filed Monday after a third day of questioning prospective jurors for his trial.


Serbia's Spiteful War
No side is without fault in the Yugoslav civil war that is mindlessly destroying Croatia.
But Serbia and its strongman, Slobodan Milosevic, now bear the heaviest blame.
By shelling the old walled city of Dubrovnik, a Serbian-led national army, motivated by spite, threatens not only lives but an undefended cultural treasure.
And if it persists in rejecting a European Community peace plan, Serbia deserves the economic sanctions Europe has threatened, including an oil embargo.
The plight of Dubrovnik captures the malevolence of this conflict.
The city has no military significance, and yet for a month its 60,000 inhabitants have been without adequate food or fuel, their lives protected only by thick limestone walls dating to the 13th century.
In the dismayed words of Lord Carrington, the European Community mediator: "There are no Serbs in Dubrovnik. It has never been part of Serbia, it's always been Croatia, and the attack is absolutely unwarranted."


State Officials Not Fully Shielded From Some Lawsuits, Court Rules
The Supreme Court ruled today that state officials can be sued and found personally liable for damages for violating an individual's civil rights.
The 8-to-0 opinion was a restatement of a principle that most legal scholars and lower court judges had already assumed to be correct: that a state's immunity from lawsuits of this type does not shield state officeholders who are sued in their personal capacity.


Banking Overhaul's Fate; Bush Never Pulled All the Political Stops And a Top Domestic Priority Unraveled
The competing interests of powerful lobbies could not be reconciled.
Many lawmakers, without really addressing the merits, smelled a rerun of the savings-and-loan disaster.
And President Bush never pulled out all the stops politically.
So legislation to revamp the nation's anachronistic banking system, which at the beginning of the year the President called his top domestic priority, has come unraveled.


Robert Maxwell, 68: From Refugee to the Ruthless Builder of a Publishing Empire
Robert Maxwell, who died today after going overboard from his yacht off the Canary Islands, fled the collapse of Czechoslovakia in 1939 to become one of the most powerful publishers in Britain and the world, presiding over a multibillion-dollar empire he assembled with brass and bravura over 40 years.
An avowed socialist whose newspapers here supported the Labor Party, the 68-year-old publisher ran his businesses with legendary ruthlessness and attention to earnings, paring by the hundreds the staffs of the companies he acquired and instantly dismissing editors of his newspapers when they disagreed with him.


Fire Damages Two Houses in New Jersey


Keating Trial To Continue
The judge in the securities-fraud trial of Charles H. Keating Jr. denied a request by the lawyer of the former savings and loan owner to dismiss the case today, saying the prosecution had presented enough evidence for the trial to continue.
Mr.
Keating's lawyer, Stephen C. Neal, argued in court that prosecutors had failed to link Mr.
Keating, who owned the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association until it was seized by regulators in 1989, to any wrongdoing.


Gaza Voting Favors Arab Moderates
Results from a local election in the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip suggested today that Palestinians have begun to swing away from hard-line Islamic fundamentalists to favor relative moderates who support the Middle East peace process.
Voting on Monday for the regional Chamber of Commerce, the first election of its kind in Gaza since 1964, ended with mainstream supporters of the Palestine Liberation Organization winning a surprising 13 of the 16 seats at stake.
The fundamentalist Islamic Resistance Movement, or Hamas, captured only two seats, while an independent candidate won the remaining one.


Cacophony of Lobbying Overwhelms Bank Bill
Just before Monday evening's House vote to scuttle an overhaul of the banking system, Paul Equale, chief lobbyist for the Independent Insurance Agents of America, and seven other lobbyists from the association worked an ornate hallway outside the House chambers, buttonholing lawmakers as they scurried on and off the floor.
"They have to look me in the eye," he said.
Mr.
Equale wanted lawmakers to know that they should support the bill because it would roll back advances that bankers had made into his group's business.


Income Tax Is Subject To the Business Cycle
To the Editor:
Advocates of an income tax often argue it is superior to a sales tax because it provides greater stability of revenue over the business cycle.
This has led to an erroneous impression that replacing reliance on the sales tax with an income tax will leave states relatively immune from cyclical revenue fluctuations.


Productivity Rose at 2.4% Rate Last Quarter
Caution and cost-cutting may be slowing down the economy, but they are having the opposite effect on the country's efficiency.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported yesterday that productivity in the United States economy, outside of farming, rose at a healthy 2.4 percent clip last summer, the first gain in a year and the fastest pace since the summer of 1988.
Economists, who cautioned that the gain could later be revised away, greeted the report as a hopeful sign.
"The economic environment is tough," said Stephen S. Roach of Morgan Stanley, "but the silver lining is productivity."


Grains and Soybeans Drop On Doubts Over Soviet Aid
Grain and soybean futures prices fell yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade amid flagging hopes for an announcement soon on new United States food aid to the Soviet Union.
Wheat for delivery in December dropped 1/2 cent to settle at $3.62 1/2 a bushel; December corn fell 2 1/2 cents, to $2.49 1/4 a bushel; December oats fell 1 1/2 cents, to $1.30 1/4 a bushel, and November soybeans slipped 3/4 cent, to $5.63 a bushel.


Cultural Links With Chinese Are Eroding
Throughout the 1980's, Chinese-American relations flourished across the cultural bridges built by scholars, artists and business executives who established exchange programs and advisory councils to help bring the two nations closer.
Now, these bridges are slowly deteriorating, not so much because China is closing its doors, but rather because American bitterness over human rights abuses in China has dried up interest.
Many of these programs are fighting for survival, and their struggle underscores the difficulties that the Chinese-American relationship is likely to face in the future.


INSIDE
Criticized for His Travel, Bush Drops Trip to Asia
President Bush canceled plans for a trip to the Far East as he faced mounting pressure to speed the end of the recession and to demonstrate his concern about domestic issues.
The trip was to start on Thanksgiving or the day before and end in Honolulu on Dec. 7, the 50th anniversary of the Pearl Harbor attack.
Page A22.
Rationing in Moscow
Panic over once-plentiful bread and anticipation of higher prices have led Moscow's Mayor to announce a plan to limit staples, including the butter for the bread.
Page A10.
Pipeline Inquiry Broadened
An investigation begun by the owner of the Trans Alaska Pipeline escalated last year into a nationwide inquiry of oil industry critics.
Page A18.


Two Years of Trouble; With Legislature Going Republican, Florio Faces Confrontations Into '93
Irate about taxes, New Jersey voters set the stage today for what promises to be two years of confrontational politics between Gov.
Jim Florio and a new a Republican legislative majority.
The voters, who turned out in numbers far larger than expected, wrested control of the Senate and the Assembly from Mr.
Florio's Democratic Party and for the first time in 20 years made the Republicans dominant in both houses.


The Great Thomaston Tree Rescue
Who could help being touched by the tale of the rare quince tree saved from destruction by this tiny Great Neck village?
Not the Nassau County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta.
"It's nice when we live in a computerized society to stand back and appreciate our nature and our blessing," he said last week, taking time out from his county's fiscal crisis to visit the quince tree.


New York City Tougher On Grocers Than L.I.
To the Editor:
In your report on the adoption by Long Island's Nassau County of an item-pricing law that you describe as strict (news article, Oct. 8) you quote Richard Kessel, New York State Consumer Protection Board executive director, as asserting that Nassau County's item pricing law is "better" than New York City's.


President At Analog Devices
Analog Devices Inc. yesterday promoted Jerald G. Fishman, currently the company's executive vice president, to president and chief operating officer.
Analog Devices, based in Norwood, Mass., is a leading maker of microchips that process analog, rather than digital, signals and are commonly used in sound, graphics and sensor applications.
Analog technology converts sound and lightwaves into analogous electrical patterns, whereas digital devices translate the same information into the 0's and 1's recognized by computers.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about independent candidates for the New Jersey Senate reversed the identities of the men shown.
At left, with a beard, was Herbert H. Shaw.
Newton E. Miller was at the right.


New York City Council Results Show Ripples of Change
In a contest that generated few surprises, voters yesterday elected 51 members to an expanded, newly empowered City Council that will include not only more minorities but more would-be reformers, and even a handful of Republicans.
The elections capped a legal and political struggle that began in the United States Supreme Court two years ago and ended on the streets this fall with scores of relatively unknown candidates vying for recognition and votes.
Even with the far-reaching importance of the election, voter turnout was light to moderate in most places, ranging from 11 percent in districts without serious contests to 33 percent in some districts where Republicans won.


Islanders Looking for Bond on the Road
East Coast teams sometimes seem to fall off the edge of the Earth when they head west, especially when they spend the weekend playing night games on the other side of the continent.
It's hard enough for fans to stay awake for the results, and sometimes harder to find them the next morning.
Consider the coming schedule for the Islanders, who begin their three-game Western journey tonight in Edmonton.


Food Notes
Pizza With a Twist, or Two
Only a Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtle would be unmoved by a sales pitch like this:


Times Wins in Arbitration Of Drivers' Union Dispute
An arbitrator has awarded The New York Times changes in staffing and working conditions for truck drivers that the company says could permit the opening of a $450 million printing plant in Edison, N.J., early next year.
The decision by the arbitrator, Richard Adelman, came after an unsuccessful round of negotiations between The Times and the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers' Union of New York and Vicinity.


Economic Scene; Capital Crunch: Capitol Quandary
IS the credit crunch real?
Are banks denying creditworthy businesses the loans they need to invest the economy out of the recession?
The idea certainly appeals to the White House, which is in hot pursuit of a villain or three to explain why the stalled recovery is not the President's fault.
But many economists remain skeptical.
The fall in the volume of bank loans, they point out, could be explained equally well by a recession-induced decline in the demand for credit.


Accounts
*
Starter, New Haven, to Damian Bisch &amp; Partners Inc., New York, for a line of professional and college sports team-licensed apparel.
The budget is $10 million.
The print and broadcast campaign, which begins this month, carries the theme "Look for the Stars" and features a bevy of celebrities, including the former baseball star Reggie Jackson and the actress Brooke Shields.


The Pop Life
A Slap That Sings
It started on Saturday at noon when Hot 97 (WQHT 97.1 FM) in New York and Power 106 (KTWR 1065.9 FM) in Los Angeles, sister radio stations, began playing Michael Jackson's new single, "Black or White," a plea for racial understanding that says color isn't important.
Other stations had been playing the single, but these two began playing "Word to the Badd," a single by Michael's brother Jermaine, right after "Black or White." "Word to the Badd" has lines like "You changed your shade/Was your color wrong?" and "Reconstruct ed/Been abducted/Don't know who you are" that seem openly critical of Michael Jackson.


Agassi and Sampras?
ANDRE AGASSI, the hero of the United States' semifinal victory over Germany, and PETE SAMPRAS will play singles for the Americans in the Davis Cup final against France, The Los Angeles Times reported today.


How Undergraduates Can Succeed: Study Together, and in Small Classes
College students who study together, meet frequently with advisers and enroll in at least one small class every semester are most likely to excel, according to a report being made public today by Harvard University.
The report, which is expected to influence the way many courses are taught at other colleges and universities, also found that contrary to popular notions about college top students prefer courses that require substantial amounts of writing.
They also consider foreign language courses, where classes are small and there is frequent interaction between teacher and students, close to being an academic ideal, the report found.


Changed Handley Won't Change Giant Quarterbacks
In the wake of Monday night's 30-7 horror-show rout by the Philadelphia Eagles, there was a major change in the Giants' hierarchy today.
No, not at quarterback.
Coach Ray Handley said Jeff Hostetler was still his starter.
The change was with Handley himself.


Mississippi's Governor Beaten by a Newcomer
An apparent casualty of voters' antipathy toward incumbents, Gov.
Ray Mabus of Mississippi lost yesterday to a political newcomer, Kirk Fordice, a conservative Republican who stressed his opposition to racial quotas.
Mr.
Fordice will be the state's first Republican governor since Reconstruction.
Mr.
Mabus, a Democrat, was attempting to become the state's first governor to win back-to-back terms.
The state dropped a prohibition against successive terms four years ago.


Ah, Smell the Gifts! Will Pizza and Buns Be Under the Tree?
WHEN gingham dogs and calico cats replace frills and furbelows in the nation's decorative psyche, it must be time for retrofood.
Handmade brownies and wood-smoked barbecues now have more cachet than architectural desserts rising out of spun sugar and a crown roast of lamb.
Cost has something to do with it: $50 will buy you a lot more brownies than fancy sugar creations, more barbecue than crown roasts.
For anyone who must cut costs on holiday gift giving but doesn't want the recipients to notice, experts recommend food.


Voters Approve 3 Propositions
New York voters decided yesterday that the state should charge tolls on the historic Erie Canal, increase the bonding authority of the Job Development Authority and authorize a swap of state Forest Preserve land to improve safety at a small airport in the Adirondacks.
All three propositions were offered to voters on yesterday's statewide ballot.
With 83 percent of the vote counted shortly after midnight this morning, the canal proposal was assured approval with 57 percent, or 924,684 votes, in favor of the measure.


Last Shall Be Last, Officially
What a difference a day and a digit can make.
Andrea DeMello may have been listed on Monday as the last recorded finisher of the 1991 New York City Marathon, but Zoe Koplowitz wants you to know that Zoe Koplowitz was the last to finish.


Chandler Is Released
Quarterback CHRIS CHANDLER, who may wind up costing Tampa Bay the top pick in next year's draft, and cornerback WAYNE HADDIX, the Buccaneers' only Pro Bowl selection last season, were waived yesterday.


Review/Television; Paul Taylor's Work On Rural America
A masterwork in the Paul Taylor repertory has been powerfully transferred to television as a "Dance in America" presentation on "Great Performances." The program, "Speaking in Tongues," can be seen at 10 tonight on Channel 13.
The scene is a town in rural America, where the constant battle between sin and virtue is overseen by a fundamentalist preacher (Elie Chaib), described in the cast listing simply as a Man of the Cloth.
Wandering ominously through his community, he drifts from the present into the past, watching himself as a once romantic young man (Jeff Wad lington) and keeping a stern eye on those who would trespass rigid sexual borders.
One incident involves an outsider, the Odd Man Out (Thomas Patrick), whose explosive passions are quickly smothered by the agitated town folk.
This is an America in which joy demands repentance.


Bridgeport Mayor Falls, but No Wide Anti-Incumbent Trend Is Seen
Mayor Mary C. Moran of Bridgeport, whose decision to file for municipal bankruptcy earlier this year made Connecticut's largest city a symbol of the nation's urban struggles, was defeated in her bid for re-election tonight after one fiery term.
She conceded about an hour after the polls closed to Joseph P. Ganim, a 32-year-old Democrat who has never served in public office.
"This is not our loss -- it's Bridgeport's loss," she told supporters.
"They said that filing for bankruptcy was against the odds, but I knew it was the right thing to do."


Bush Seeks to Clarify Position On Abortion Counseling Rule
President Bush sent Congress a letter late today that he said clarified his position on limiting abortion counseling in federally financed clinics.
But Senator John H. Chafee, the Rhode Island Republican who has urged Mr.
Bush to compromise on the counseling rule, said the letter was "regrettably unacceptable" as a way to resolve the issue.


Book Notes
From Page to Screen
When CBS paid a record $8 million this week for the American television rights to "Scarlett," people both inside and outside the movie and publishing industries gasped.
But it was only the price that shocked them.
Hollywood and the television producers have been on a mad shopping spree through bookstores and publishing houses lately, elbowing each other to pick up titles like shoppers at a holiday sale.


EXECUTIVES
*
Bulova Corp., New York, a subsidiary of Loews Corp., named Paul S. Sayegh chief operating officer of its watch, clock and jewelry division.
He had previously been executive vice president of Bulova. *
First Interstate Bank of California, Los Angeles, a subsidiary of First Interstate Bancorp, named William E. Swords senior vice president in its checks-processing division.


In Africa, Tide Turns Against Despotism
To the Editor:
A bitter disappointment in the postcolonial history of many African countries is failure to create such institutions of democratic government as an accountable executive branch, an uncoerced judiciary and armed forces that protect rather than harm citizens.


Rate Uncertainty Leaves The Dollar Little Changed
The dollar was little changed yesterday as the expectation of lower interest rates in the United States cast a pall over the foreign exchange markets.
Gold prices were lower, slipping $2.70 on the Commodity Exchange in New York, to $354.10 an ounce.
The Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $354.10, down $2.30.


Blue-Chip Issues Fall, With Dow Off 14.31
Blue-chip stocks fell in choppy trading yesterday, but the broad market was stronger.
The Dow Jones industrial average was off by 14.31 points, to 3,031.31, with a decline for Walt Disney accounting for more than half the loss.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was a moderate 172.1 million shares, up from 155.7 million on Monday.
Declining issues had a small lead on gainers by 869 to 763.
Trading on the Big Board pulled the composite down 0.75, to 214.68.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.94
4.94
7.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.76
4.73
7.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.81
4.78
7.08
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.19
7.15
8.35
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.02
7.95
8.63
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
8.92
9.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.83
6.82
7.62
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
A chart yesterday about unemployment on Long Island carried an incorrect scale: its top line should have been 8 percent and its bottom line 2 percent.
The correct unemployment rate for September 1991 in Nassau County was 5.9 percent, and in Suffolk County 7.8 percent.


Fred MacMurray Dies


Here, Poorest Are Resented By the Poor
Jose Colon Jr. grew up in Mott Haven, at the southern tip of the Bronx.
He has watched resentfully as the city moved homeless people into his building, giving them freshly renovated apartments with new kitchens and baths while his family made do with aging fixtures and a caved-in living room ceiling.
He has seen some of the formerly homeless tenants throw garbage out their windows, nourishing the kitten-sized rats that now prowl his family's home of 22 years.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 1
Oct. 25
Nov. 2
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
6.9
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
204.2
205.7
221.2
Distillate stocks
135.6
134.8
138.2
Crude imports, daily
4.8
6.2
5.9
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.5
1.6
Crude stocks
342.9
347.8
344.5
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
82.2
81.5
84.5
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


The Gospel Of a Master Chef: A Simple Purity
IN 1982 and 1983, David Bouley, the chef and owner of Bouley in New York, spent about two months working for Joel Robuchon, the Michelin three-star chef, at Jamin, his restaurant in Paris.
Last week, Mr.
Robuchon (pronounced ROE-boo-shown), the chef that Mr.
Bouley (pronounced boo-LAY) calls the greatest in France, returned the favor for about two hours.
The occasion was a brief trip to New York, Mr.
Robuchon's first visit to the city in 20 years, coinciding with the publication of "Simply French: Patricia Wells Presents the Cuisine of Joel Robuchon" (Morrow, $35) .


Compaq Computer Outlines New Lower-Cost Approach
Struggling to regain lost market share, the Compaq Computer Corporation outlined a new business strategy today based on lower operating costs and a new line of inexpensive personal computers.
The announcement came 12 days after the company ousted its president and chief executive, Joseph (Rod) Canion, replacing him with Eckhard Pfeiffer, formerly the head of Compaq's foreign operations.
In a presentation to securities analysts at its Houston headquarters, Compaq also introduced a new senior management team and a new distribution strategy that places less emphasis on traditional computer dealers.
On Monday, Compaq had announced price cuts of up to 25 percent on certain notebook computers.


U.S. Students Memorize, but Don't Understand; Three-Year System
To the Editor:
I am an exchange student at Bridgewater State University and will graduate in June 1993, having spent my time at college concentrating on English and cultural studies.
As a product of a three-year system in Britain, I read with great interest "Tuition Relief for the Middle Class" (Op-Ed, Oct. 6), which suggests a three-year bachelor's degree for the United States.


For Lost Explorers, Help From Above
Columbus might have given the Pinta for this.
A type of computerized compass known as a global-positioning system is becoming the rage among boaters, recreational aviators, backpackers and other wayfarers.
The technology had seen growing use since the mid-1980's for such industrial applications as establishing positions for offshore oil rigs or helping trucking companies to track their vehicles.
But the Persian Gulf war brought wider attention to the portable satellite-based systems, as tens of thousands of the units were used to help American troops find their way in the desert.


X Man Hits the Spot In Garden Spectacular
Long before there was this masterpiece of a third quarter, the best 12 minutes of basketball the home team had put together since the screamer in front of the bench was named Pitino, there was still the issue of a season to which the Knicks had not yet signed on.
Having overheated and stalled out in Florida last weekend, the Knicks came home last night to the dancing girls, a light show with disco music and puffs of smoke that couldn't camouflage healthy portions of empty seats.
The corporate owners can turn Madison Square Garden into the Shubert Theater or the Fillmore East, if they must, but not until New York recognizes the signature of a serious game will it buy in.


BUSINESS DIGEST
MAXWELL'S DEATH
Robert Maxwell's body was found floating off the coast of Africa.
The British publisher whose global empire includes The Daily News in New York, vanished suddenly from his yacht while cruising off the Canary Islands.  [ Page A1. ]
Maxwell fled the collapse of Czechoslovakia in 1939 to become one of the world's most powerful publishers, presiding over a multi-billion dollar empire he assembled with brass and bravura over forty years.  [ Obituary, D23. ]


Bank Funds and C.D.'s Fall
Yields on deposit accounts fell sharply again this week in anticipation of further easing of interest rates by the Federal Reserve, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, a trade publication that covers interest rates.
"Deposit yields on savings accounts will be directly affected by whether the banks lower their prime rate by one-half point or by one-quarter point of 1 percent if the Federal Reserve cuts its discount rate a half-point," said Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Bank Rate Monitor.
"If the banks do not match the Federal Reserve reduction, in essence they would be pocketing the difference at the consumer-borrower's expense."


Angels Hire Carew
Another Twins second baseman who was voted rookie of the year (in 1967), ROD CAREW, was hired yesterday as batting instructor by the California Angels, the team that played .500 ball (81-81), but finished last in the American League West.


Knoblauch Chosen As a Rookie of Year
He made the jump from Class AA to the majors with a solid exhibition season, then helped spark Minnesota to a first-place finish in the regular season and a World Series victory in the post-season.
No wonder CHUCK KNOBLAUCH was chosen American League Rookie of the Year yesterday.


The Mixed Blessing of Empty Bins
A quiet yet radical change in American agricultural policy has largely eliminated the mountainous food stockpiles of the mid-1980's.
But the new policies, of reducing price supports and subsidizing exports, have devastated the grain storage industry and angered other grain-exporting countries.
By encouraging farmers to grow less food and send more of what they do produce overseas, the Federal Government has mostly quit the expensive business of storing huge supplies of grain.
Poor harvests in the last two years also contributed to clearing out stockpiles.
Reserves are now so low that the Agriculture Department may soon start giving cash subsidies to exporters instead of free grain and dairy products.


Theater in Review
The Marriage Contract  The Folksbiene Playhouse 123 East 55th Street Manhattan By Ephraim Kishon; directed by Howard Rossen; translated into English by Israel Becker; set by Harry Lines; costumes by Susan Sigrist; lighting by Alan Baron; music by Ed Linderman; arrangements by Barry Levitt; translator, Simcha Kruger; stage manager, Judith Scher.
Presented by the Folksbiene Playhouse of the Workmen's Circle, Ben Schechter, managing director; Morris Adler, Chairman.
WITH: Zypora Spaisman, David Rogow, Diane Cypkin, Sandy Levitt, Richard Carlow and Shira Flam.
In the Tel Aviv home of the Borozovsky family, peace is as illusory as it is in the Middle East.
There is a tacit truce.
The Napoleonic husband, Elimelech, supports a clockwork household with his work as a plumber, insisting upon such rights as a bottle of soda water with his supper.
His long-suffering wife, Shifra, respectfully obliges, but maintains her dignity with an occasional sarcastic spritz at him.


Learning What to Do About Domestic Violence
To the Editor:
You report that Dr.
Antonia C. Novello, the Surgeon General, is calling for changes in the health care system's response to domestic violence (some editions, Oct. 17).
New York State developed the first comprehensive domestic-violence program for health care providers in the country in 1986.
Since then protocols have been developed for hospital emergency departments, diagnostic and treatment centers, and maternal and infant care settings.
More than 6,500 health care professionals have received training and education in our programs.


With Anti-Florio Voting Wave, Republicans Win the Legislature
Riding a tide of anger over a record tax increase enacted by Gov.
Jim Florio and the Democrats 16 months ago, New Jersey Republicans seized control of both houses of the Legislature last night for the first time in 20 years, possibly with veto-proof majorities.
Some races remained in doubt early today, but decisive returns gave the Republicans at least 26 seats in the 40-member Senate, just one short of the 27 needed to override any veto by Governor Florio, a Democrat.
The Republicans also appeared to have won 56 seats in the 80-seat Assembly, enough to override a veto, and possibly as many as 59 once close races are decided.


Moscow Agrees to Aerial Inspection Treaty
The Soviet Union agreed today to open its entire territory to aerial inspections, clearing the way for the completion of a treaty that would allow all European countries, the United States and Canada to overfly one another's territory.
Until today's agreement, which was announced at the 22-nation conference considering the so-called Open Skies treaty, the Soviet Union had been the lone holdout, refusing to open large parts of its territory to overflights because of security concerns.


Bankruptcies On Auto Loans
Bankruptcy filings on auto loans that originate at dealerships instead of at banks increased by 23.9 percent in 1990 and are expected to rise another 21.2 percent this year, according to a survey by the Consumer Bankers Association.
The main reason for the surge was individuals' taking on too much debt, the association said.
The next most common reasons were unemployment, divorce or separation, and reduced income.


Baker Criticizes New Settlement By Israelis in the Golan Heights
Secretary of State James A. Baker rebuked Israel today for opening a new settlement for Soviet immigrants in the Golan Heights, saying such actions are unlikely "to build the kind of climate that would serve the cause of peace."
Israel has annexed the Golan Heights, which it seized from Syria in the June 1967 war, but Syria has never recognized the loss and has long vowed to retake the territory.


Personal Health
THE first thing I noticed was an occasional blurriness when I perused medical journals, especially when the print was small and light.
Then the New York City street map became increasingly difficult to decipher while driving in less than bright daylight.
But it was not until I had trouble reading my own cookbooks and had misread and therefore misdialed several numbers from the phone book that I finally decided to have my eyes checked.
Though I feared the worst -- cataracts or maybe retinal damage from the sun -- the diagnosis was "normal" presbyopia, the natural and unavoidable effects of aging on the lens of the eye.
The solution was simple, too: reading glasses to help bring close objects into better focus.
A Universal Fate
I was 49 years old when I sought help for my vision problem, and the ophthalmologist who examined me said I was lucky, since most people are for 40 to 45 when they first come in with the same complaint.
He also emphasized that nothing I had done had caused it, nor was there anything I might have done to prevent it.


Despite Fatal Crash, Playoff Game Will Go On
Despite a fatal car crash that has shattered the junior class and the football team here, school officials have announced that the team will compete in the postseason playoffs.
Two students died and four were hurt in a car crash Saturday night, a day after a 14-10 victory over Shenendehowa High that put the Blue Streaks team in the playoffs.
Ray Waldron, the Saratoga Springs athletic director, said the decision whether to continue the season was left up to the players.


Paralyzing South African Strike Ends
A crippling two-day national strike called by opponents of the white minority Government concluded today after demonstrating that black workers could bring South Africa's economy to a near standstill.
The African National Congress and its industrial ally, the Congress of South African Trade Unions, which led the strike, pronounced the stoppage a success, saying that 3.5 million workers stayed home in this country of 39 million.
They warned that further strikes would follow unless the Government included them in economic and political decisions.


Bargain Justice in Brooklyn
When Brooklyn district attorneys conducted a frenzy of plea bargaining to reduce court backlogs, some people called it a fire sale.
But complaints about lenient justice miss the point.
The episode offers jurisdictions everywhere an illustration of the potential for savings from better court management.
The bargaining began in September when the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles Hynes, expanded an experimental program in which judges and prosecutors focus on all crimes occurring in a part of the borough, rather than on types of crimes.
The geographical focus makes it easier to identify crime patterns and repeat offenders.


Review/Theater; Brecht's Chicago Antagonists In a Tale of Chaos and Horror
Black-and-purple banners of mourning hang from the facade of the Public Theater these nights.
Do not expect "In the Jungle of Cities," the first presentation of the New York Shakespeare Festival's post-Joseph Papp regime, to lighten the mood.
In this bleak 1923 play, the 25-year-old Bertolt Brecht let loose with a young man's nihilistic howl of rage.
Two men in a mythical Chicago -- a mysterious Malayan entrepreneur named Shlink and an idealistic young library worker named Garga -- conduct a "war of annihilation" that levels philosophies and people alike.
For these bitter antagonists, even death leaves something to be desired.
The revival at the Public -- only the third major staging the play has received in New York -- is a co-production with Mabou Mines, the troupe that introduced Papp to his successor, JoAnne Akalaitis.
As directed by Anne Bogart in a cerebral, fussy and static style, this tame "Jungle" seems less like the dawning of a new era than a throwback to the quaint bohemianism attending New York's Brecht craze of the late 1950's.


NORIEGA IS CALLED DRUG 'GODFATHER'
Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega promised to act as "a godfather" who would protect the Medellin ring's cocaine-manufacturing and money-laundering operations in Panama, a former business associate of the deposed Panamanian dictator testified today.
Ending three days of testimony here, the witness, Enrique Pretelt, a Panamanian jewelry store owner and pilot who was General Noriega's favorite drinking and partying companion for nearly 20 years, also said he and the general went into business with an American drug smuggler who asked their permission to use Panama as a transshipment point for a 400,000 pound load of marijuana bound for the United States.


Foreign Affairs; Foreign Aid Follies
Representative Dante Fascell is an old lion, gruff and friendly, and much liked by his House colleagues.
Many of them wanted to vote for the new foreign aid authorization bill mainly out of respect for the long-serving chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee.
The Democratic leadership did a private head count before the vote and said all was O.K.
But last week after dozens had risen to orate and fulminate on the House floor, the bill was defeated by 262 to 159.
There's nothing terribly unusual about not passing the bill to authorize foreign aid.
Congress has not approved any such bill since 1985, while it went on to pass less conspicuous resolutions and appropriations bills to spend the aid money anyway.
This quaint arrangement allows many legislators to say they opposed "foreign giveaways" even as the aid continues to flow.
Most likely the story will heed that same script this year.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17 ROBERT MAXWELL FOUND DEAD
The body of Robert Maxwell, the flamboyant publisher whose worldwide holdings include The Daily News, was discovered floating in the ocean off the Canary Islands.
An autopsy will be performed to determine the cause of his death.
Page A1


Report Faults Reservoir Police Over Helping to Chase Speeders
As New York City tries to crack down on pollution of its upstate reservoirs, a study by its Department of Investigation has found that the 25-member police force that watches over the area is mismanaged, drawing hundreds of thousands of dollars in unnecessary overtime while working too closely with the local police.
The report, issued this week, describes how officers of the Bureau of Water Supply police help catch speeding motorists in counties in the Catskills instead of trying to prevent illegal dumping and trespassing in the area surrounding the reservoirs.


Sports of The Times; Is Handley Digging His Own Grave?
IN the gloom of the Giants' 30-7 embarrassment by the Philadelphia Eagles on Monday night, Ray Handley was asked if, without blaming Jeff Hostetler, he would consider starting Phil Simms at quarterback Sunday against the Phoenix Cardinals -- if only to change the oil in the engine.
"I don't know," he said. "I'll think about it."
After thinking about it, the Giants' coach yesterday proclaimed "no change" at quarterback because he didn't think that Hostetler is the reason the reign of the Super Bowl XXV champions is over.
The coach is correct.
Hostetler is not the reason the Giants are 4-5 and falling.
Ray Handley is the reason.


Japan's New Cabinet Has an Old Taint
Kiichi Miyazawa became Prime Minister of Japan today and immediately set off a furor by swearing in a Cabinet packed with veteran politicians long frozen from power because of links to past bribery and sex scandals.
As expected, Mr.
Miyazawa also named a longtime rival, Michio Watanabe, as Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, putting in power an outspoken conservative who has had to apologize for past comments that denigrated blacks and other groups.


Dr. DeWitt Goodman Dies at 61; An Educator and Heart Specialist
Dr.
DeWitt S. Goodman, a professor of medicine at Columbia University and president of the New York chapter of the American Heart Association, died on Monday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old and lived in Tenafly, N.J.
Dr.
Goodman died of a pulmonary embolism and had been recovering from abdominal surgery, said officials at the College of Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia University.


WOFFORD WINS SENATE RACE, TURNING BACK THORNBURGH; G.O.P. GAINS EDGE IN TRENTON
In a stunning upset that will raise the hopes of Democrats and the fears of Republicans facing elections next year, Harris Wofford, a little-known Democrat with an anti-Bush message, today trounced former Attorney General Dick Thornburgh.
Mr.
Wofford, who was appointed to the Senate in May, was initially given almost no hope of winning the election.
But in a trial run for themes that are certain to be important next year, he concentrated on the need for national health insurance and the problems with the economy and offered general pledges to help the middle class.
In the last month he climbed in the polls by an average of almost a percentage point a day, and today he leapt ahead.


Fiber Optics: New Eyes of Industry
Optical fibers, the slender strands of specially treated glass that are rapidly replacing copper wires as the medium for transmitting voices and data, are finding important new applications in the sensing devices used to monitor manufacturing and other industrial processes.
Fiber-optic sensors work more effectively than older electronic devices in some applications where intense electromagnetic fields might produce false readings.
And in some processes unsuited to electronic observation -- mixing explosives, for instance -- the new light-wave sensors make continuous monitoring practical for the first time.


U.S. Plans Auction Of Housing Loans
The Department of Housing and Urban Development said yesterday that it planned to offer to investors $12 billion or more of 40-year multifamily housing loans some time early next year.


U.S. Students Memorize, but Don't Understand; Beginning to Think
To the Editor:
One of the worst problems America faces is in education.
When we look at international standings, the United States falls short of the competition.
In math and science, we are at the bottom.
And we do not fare much better in comprehensive reading.


Agencies Urged to Use Women's Voices in Ads
The Screen Actors Guild is calling on advertising agencies to "break through the sound barrier with a female voice."
The union's New York office is running an advertisement in this week's issue of the trade publication Advertising Age, encouraging agencies to use more women to produce voice-overs, the narrations of television and radio commercials.


For Bush, NATO Talks May Test His Strategy
For President Bush, the meeting in Rome of the Atlantic alliance this week will be yet another exercise in trying to hold together an institution shaken by the very new world order that he has been so eager to help create.
As was the case with Mr.
Bush's meeting in Madrid last week with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the summit meeting of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization on Thursday and Friday promises to be more symbol than substance.
Administration officials said they do not view the meeting as a forum for major policy advances, apart from an already agreed-upon effort to bring the former Warsaw Pact countries into a liaison role with NATO.


Leo Burnett Still Celebrates The Principles of Its Founder
THE Leo Burnett Company, the advertising agency that serves clients by creating symbols like the Marlboro Man and the Jolly Green Giant, is serving itself by making a symbol of its founder.
Leo Burnett, who died in 1971 at the age of 79, has become a representation of the Chicago shop he started in 1935 -- and, more important, a way to sell companies on hiring the agency.


Arthur Boardman Jr., A Retired Banker, 81
Arthur G. Boardman Jr., a retired president of the Irving Trust Company, died in his sleep early yesterday at his home at Meadow Lakes, a retirement community in Hightstown, N.J.
He was 81 years old and lived in Short Hills, N.J., until two years ago.
He died of emphysema, his family said.


One More Calamity in a Painful Decade for the Newspaper
For people who have lived through the last painful decade at The Daily News, the sight of the editor, James P. Willse, trudging toward the center of the newsroom yesterday morning could only signal bad news.
"These meetings aren't called frequently." said Andrew Kirtzman, a reporter at The News, "So you often go with a sense of dread."


Del Greco Joins Oilers
AL DEL GRECO, an eight-year veteran who lost his place-kicking job with the Phoenix Cardinals before the season started, signed a two-year contract with the Houston Oilers yesterday, replacing IAN HOWFIELD.


Opening Delayed Again For 'Nick and Nora'
"Nick and Nora," the once-postponed Broadway musical that was to have opened Dec. 2, has been put off again.
The show, based on "The Thin Man" series of novels by Dashiell Hammett, is now to open on Dec. 8 at 6:15 P.M.
"Nick and Nora," which is in previews at the Marquis Theater, stars Barry Bostwick as Nick and Joanna Gleason as Nora.
Jeffrey Richards, the show's press representative, said the opening was postponed because members of the cast and some critics, who usually see the show several days before the official opening, complained that Dec. 2 conflicted with the Thanksgiving weekend.


Health Care Program Endorsed
New Jersey voters told their elected representatives on Tuesday that they should urge President Bush and Congress to enact a national health-care program that would provide "high-quality, comprehensive personal health care" at "minimal out-of-pocket expense to taxpayers."
With 91 percent of the vote counted at 12:20 A.M. today, 84 percent, or 1,032,470 voters, approved the referendum.


Married A 3d Time, For History
FOR this wedding repast, Ashbell McElveen consulted with just about every cook he knows in the South, remembered a recipe for a black-eyed peas fritter picked up on one of his many visits to Senegal and, through a cousin, stumbled upon a recipe for fried apples and Madeira that had been recorded in a family Bible more than 100 years ago.
Charmaine Williams Jones, who is in charge of the cakes, called on friends, perused the shelves of several bookstores and combed the rare-books section of the New York Public Library, where she came upon a 19th-century recipe for Jamaican Christmas cake.


Industry Critics Were Target Of Pipeline Owner's Inquiry
An investigation begun by the owner of the Trans Alaska Pipeline escalated last year into a nationwide inquiry of oil industry critics that briefly had as a target a prominent Congressman, according to documents made public today by a House committee.
The investigation was shut down eight months after it began when oil industry lawyers wrote in a report to the pipeline's owner, the Alyeska Pipeline Service Company, that it was in danger of being prosecuted for mail fraud, wire fraud, theft and other violations of Federal law, according to the report, which was among documents subpoenaed by the committee.


Richard Thomas, 54, U.S. Election Official
Richard Clark Thomas, an official with the Federal Election Commission and a former Secretary of State in Vermont, died Saturday.
He was 54 years old and lived in Woodbridge, Va.
The cause of death was throat cancer, said Kent Cooper, an assistant staff director of the commission.


Sara Lee's Stake In Playtex Family
The Sara Lee Corporation agreed to pay $62.5 million for 25 percent of Playtex Family Products, a maker of baby and other personal-care products.
Sara Lee had agreed to acquire Playtex Apparel Inc., a privately owned company independent of Playtex Family Products, for about $170 million in Sara Lee stock and the assumption of $400 million in debt.


Voters in White Plains Reject Term Limits
Voters here today resoundingly defeated the only provision proposed in New York State to limit the terms of incumbents.
By a ratio of two to one, voters rejected a change in the city's charter that would have restricted members of the City Council to two consecutive four-year terms.
Another provision that would have expanded the powers of the Mayor was also defeated.
Neither change would have gone into effect until the next Council elections, in 1993.


Metropolitan Diary
The pedestrian on 46th Street who does not traverse Seventh Avenue and Broadway in one green light may look down, while waiting on the traffic island, to notice a bronze plaque that reads: "These landscaped malls were dedicated for the beautification of Times Square."
The reader looks up and around.
The traffic islands formed by the near confluence of two major avenues are not landscaped!
In fact, like Rudolphe's heart in Flaubert's "Madame Bovary," "no green thing grew there."


Quayle Spokesman Dismisses Allegation Made in Comic Strip
Vice President Dan Quayle yesterday dismissed allegations in an upcoming "Doonesbury" cartoon strip that suggests that Federal drug officials suppressed information about him in the 1988 Presidential campaign.
David C. Beckwith, Mr.
Quayle's press secretary, said of the assertion in the comic strip by Garry Trudeau, "It's just not true. 'Accused a Number of Times&gt;
"From time to time, virtually all public officials have allegations made against them -- drugs and other things," Mr.
Beckwith said.
"In the case of the Vice President, he's been accused a number of times of buying drugs, and numerous responsible news organizations have investigated those charges and found them to be bogus."


Unusual Public School Aiming to Turn a Profit
At the brand new South Pointe Elementary School here, learning is being dispensed using methods so unusual that some parents were not sure they wanted their children to attend the school.
Multiplication tables are being taught with colored rubber bands wrapped around nails protruding from a board.
Some students who are poor readers are learning new words by spelling them in whipped cream.
A recent rainy day found teachers and students out in the school yard measuring earthworms.
There seems to be almost nothing that teachers here will not do to push their young charges into the world of learning.


Hanoi Not Helping Enough on Missing, Cheney Tells Panel
Despite improved cooperation, Vietnam could do much more to aid the efforts of American investigators searching for clues about servicemen unaccounted for in the Vietnam War, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said today.
The Bush Administration has linked the pace and scope of normalizing relations between the two former enemies to Hanoi's cooperation in resolving the highly emotional issue of missing Americans in Southeast Asia.


Neutral Ground
As soon as the Arabs and Israelis stop posturing and maneuvering in their peace negotiations, the issue of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories will almost certainly provoke the first serious confrontation between them.
Arabs demanding an unconditional freeze will argue that the extensive building under way undermines the negotiations and prejudices the outcome by changing the situation on the ground.
Israel will argue that demanding a halt to settlement activities constitutes a condition for what are supposed to be unconditional negotiations.
To overcome this difficulty, which could threaten prospects for the talks, here is a proposal that found support among Arab and Israeli scholars meeting in Moscow recently, and which was considered by the U.S. and Egypt a decade ago.


Tale of Workers' Life Wins Prix Goncourt
France's top literary award, the Prix Goncourt, was won on Monday by Pierre Combescot for a sprawling tale of working-class Parisian life, "Les Filles du Calvaire".
His book, set between a sleazy bar and a circus and featuring a gallery of colorful characters worthy of a 19th-century epic, was the choice of 6 of the 10 jurors.


City College Gives a Seminar on Racial Issues, and Jeffries Comes
City College tried to hold a conference on race yesterday, in part to grapple with the tensions raised by the outspokenness of Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., but a combative Dr.
Jeffries showed up and repeatedly commanded the microphone to argue his case.
Several speakers took up his challenge, turning the conference's question-and-answer period into a debate over some of the issues with which the college has been anxiously wrestling.
But with Dr.
Jeffries dominating the microphone, the conference's organizer, Dr.
Jerome Brooks, had to end the morning session to silence him.


Mason's Law Work Investigated
The Manhattan District Attorney's office has begun a preliminary inquiry into a complaint by a former secretary for C. Vernon Mason, a lawyer known for his advocacy of black causes, that he defrauded clients and engaged in malpractice, a spokesman for the office said Monday.
"Obviously we'll look at it," said Gerald McKelvey, a spokesman for the District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau.
He said the complaint was filed last week by the former secretary, Kim Moorning, who said Mr.
Mason dismissed her and others last month after they refused to do work beyond their legal qualifications.


A Soviet Correspondent Goes Home Again
Viktor A. Linnik arrived in New York City four years ago as a foreign correspondent who sought to immerse himself in United States culture and write articles for his newspaper, Pravda, that described everyday American life for his Soviet readers.
Roaming across the United States, he sent reports to Moscow about the struggles of farmers in the American heartland and about the immigrants who were flooding into the cities of a country that had fascinated him since his days as an American literature major at Moscow State University.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 24 about national trends in wholesale electricity prices misstated the charge to industrial and commercial customers of the Louisiana Power and Light Company for each kilowatt-hour.
It is 5.7 cents, not 9.8 cents.
A public relations firm that provided the erroneous figure issued a correction on Oct. 23, but it was not called to The Times's attention until Monday.


A Dismal Record That Gets No Better
"Baseball should be ahead of the country in the things that mean the most in terms of the best positive, fundamental values. In the matters of race, matters of decency, baseball should lead the way."
Bart Giamatti made that statement back in 1989 as he explained his new campaign to assure equal employment opportunities in major league baseball.


Baghdad Now Seen Exerting Economic Pressure on Kurds
The Government of President Saddam Hussein is applying economic pressure against the 3.5 million-member Kurdish minority in northern Iraq, apparently to force its reconciliation with Baghdad.
The pressure campaign over recent weeks has reduced gasoline deliveries to at least two major cities, Erbil and Sulaimaniya, and may also be interrupting some food and electricity supplies to the region, Kurdish and relief agency officials said.
The campaign also has included a threat to the civil-service jobs of thousands of Kurds.


Garden Does the Trick as Knicks Trounce Bucks
When the 1991-92 Knicks finally erupted, it was sudden, it was spontaneous, it was scintillating.
And it was exactly what they needed to end the funk that had engulfed them for their first two games.
Outscoring Milwaukee, 40-13, in the third period, New York rolled to its first victory of the season last night, winning by 113-85 in its home opener before 15,768 fans at Madison Square Garden.


Vowing to Follow Housing Order, Zaleski Claims Yonkers Mayoralty
A 38-year-old state Assemblyman, Terence M. Zaleski, won a tight three-way race for mayor tonight after pledging during his campaign to "professionalize" City Hall and comply with a Federal housing desegregation order.
His victory appeared to signal the readiness of Yonkers voters to finally come to terms with a Federal judge's order to build subsidized housing in white neigborhoods.
That order had divided Yonkers, the state's fourth largest city, for years.


Books of The Times; The Official Churchill in One Volume
Churchill  A Life  By Martin Gilbert Illustrated. 1,066 pages. Henry Holt. $35.
"On the whole I think I would rather have lived through our lot of troubles than any of the others," Prime Minister Winston Churchill wrote in 1953 to Lord Beaverbrook, the newspaper publisher, "though I must place on record my regret that the human race ever learned to fly."


Imelda Marcos Posts Bond in Tax Fraud Cases in Philippines


Reviews/Fashion; Fresh Designs in a Lighthearted Mood
UP-AND-COMING designers who are smart keep their shows short, not more than 50 numbers, and hire as many first-rate models as they can, so the clothes will look their best.
That's what Jun and Soyon Kim of Isani did.
And what Gordon Henderson did.
There was nothing earth-shattering at either show, just fresh and playful ideas for warm weather.


CHRONICLE
THURGOOD MARSHALL is to receive the Charles Evans Hughes Gold Medal in a ceremony today at the Supreme Court.
The award, named for a Chief Justice of the United States, is given each year by the National Conference of Christians and Jews for "courageous leadership in governmental, civic and humanitarian affairs."


Eating Well
THE announcement today of the most extensive overhaul of food-labeling regulations ever attempted by the Food and Drug Administration has prompted Dr.
David A. Kessler, the agency's Commissioner, to make this sweeping pronouncement: "The misleading stuff is going off the label. There will be a confidence that when you see claims on the labels the words will have meaning."
The use of words like "no cholesterol," "less," "light" (or "lite") and "reduced sodium" will be strictly regulated, and nutrition labeling will be mandatory for almost all processed foods.
Labeling will be voluntary for raw fruits, vegetables, fish, meat and poultry, at least temporarily.


Robert T. Zintl, Journalist, 44
Robert T. Zintl, a journalist who was head of the Rome bureau of Time magazine and was a deputy managing editor of The Daily News in New York in the early 1980's, died yesterday in his office in Rome.
He was 44 years old.
The cause of his death remained uncertain, pending an autopsy by the Italian authorities, said Robert Pondiscio, a Time spokesman in New York.


New-Look Knicks Receive Same Old Mixed Reviews
Just before the start of their home opener against Milwaukee at the new-look Madison Square Garden last night, the new-look Knicks and their new-look coach each took a turn stepping into the spotlight for an introduction.
Greg Anthony, Carlton McKinney, Anthony Mason, Xavier McDaniel, Tim McCormick and the man who helped bring them all to Broadway, Coach Pat Riley, were cheered heartily by 15,768 spectators, many of whom sat in a building with new seats, a fancier scoreboard and Laker-like cheerleaders and wondered if all the new fixings and trimmings would add up to a winning season.


Outsider Campaign Works for Insider
Harris L. Wofford has the sort of dream resume that makes a hardened liberal swoon: he studied civil disobedience with Gandhi's followers, marched with the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., served under President John F. Kennedy and helped found the Peace Corps.
Yet when he was appointed in May to fill the vacancy created by the death of Senator H. John Heinz 3d, Mr.
Wofford was widely considered too inexperienced, too unknown and too liberal to have a realistic chance of re-election in a state that had not elected a Democrat to the Senate since 1962.


Bridge
When the famed Cavendish Club closed its doors at the end of May, most of its members transferred their activities to the spacious quarters of the Young Men's Philanthropic League, at 4 East 80th Street.
They are now the League Card Association, a club within a club.
But since League Card Association of the Young Men's Philanthropic League does not trip merrily off the tongue, players still talk about "going to the Cavendish" and will probably continue to do so, just as New Yorkers talk about "Sixth Avenue" rather than "Avenue of the Americas."
The diagramed deal was played in September at this phoenix-like Cavendish, with David Berah in the South seat playing four spades.
He would have had more trouble reaching that contract if East had opened three clubs, as many would do, or taken some other action.


Helene Mullins Johnson, Poet, 92
Helene Mullins Johnson, a poet, died on Oct. 26 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 92 years old.
She died of congestive heart failure, said Gerald Phelan, a friend.


60-Minute Gourmet
IT'S always fun to assemble a meal at the last minute with just the ingredients you happen to have on hand.
Not only does this test your skills as a cook, but it also pushes you to be resourceful and think of uncommon food juxtapositions.
Sometimes, what you come up with can be memorable.
I remember a fishing expedition to Canada nearly 20 years ago with my friends Ed Giobbi, the artist and cookbook author, and Sirio Maccioni, the owner of Le Cirque in Manhattan.
After a long day of fishing, we came back to our cabin to eat.
All we had were odds and ends of vegetables and some cream and pasta.
Putting our collective heads together, we came up with an ad hoc creation that we dubbed pasta primavera.
The dish, in a slightly more elegant form, is still on the menu at Le Cirque.


Quotation of the Day
"We want to make it easier for people to choose healthy food." -- DR.
DAVID KESSLER, Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration.  [ C12:1. ]


A Series Makes the Starting Gate
After months of turbulence over his new series, Steven Bochco, one of television's most successful producers, and the ABC network have agreed to start the new program on Nov. 20.
The one-hour series, "Civil Wars," explores the emotional, comedic and even tragic nature of domestic law.
It stars Mariel Hemingway and Peter Onorati as two New York divorce lawyers.


Theater in Review
Shmulnik's Waltz  Jewish Repertory Theater 344 East 14th Street Manhattan By Allan Knee; directed by Gordon Hunt; music by David Shire; sets by Ray Recht; costumes by David Loveless; lighting by Betsy Finston; musical director and adaptor, William Schimmel; production stage manager, D. C. Rosenberg; managing director, Nina Heller.
WITH: Rob Gomes, Wendy Kaplan, Robert Katims, Ilana Levine, Marilyn Pasekoff, Steve Routman and Stephen Singer.
If the central story of Allan Knee's new play, "Shmulnik's Waltz," seems wholly familiar, it is not less enjoyable for that; one version or another turns up in folklore and fairy tales from many cultures.


The Voters Said: What About Us?
Remarkable results.
The Democrats got pounded in New Jersey.
A nationally known Republican got pounded in Pennsylvania.
Different states, different circumstances, different losers.
But there was the hint of a common thread: Americans, particularly all those who think of themselves as the middle class, feel they're stuck on dead center.
They're dismayed by stagnant incomes, a drifting economy and unresponsive government.
In New Jersey, where Republicans seized control of both houses of the legislature for the first time in 20 years, voters rose up against a Governor who had raised their taxes but, in their view, delivered little in return.


In Congress, Calls for a Caucus for Area's Goals
Bridge closings.
Higher bus and subway fares.
And, ultimately, slow economic strangulation.
That was the apocalyptic picture painted this spring as lawmakers from the New York metropolitan region mobilized opposition here to an ambitious Bush Adminstration proposal to rebuild the country's transportation systems.
In a rare show of unity over what is expected to be the country's largest public works program for the rest of the century, Republicans and Democrats from the region worked together on House and Senate versions of the transport bills to get millions of additional dollars for the area.


Beijing to Sign a Pact With Hanoi on Trade
China said today that it would sign an economic agreement and a border agreement with Vietnam before Saturday, moving toward a resolution of a long dispute about the precise location of their 625-mile frontier.
It was unclear whether that meant that the border has been fully demarcated, whether troops have been removed from the area or if the two sides are simply planning to hold further discussions.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the crash of a military plane in the Canadian Arctic misstated the temperature reported at the crash site.
It was minus 4 degrees Fahrenheit; minus 76 was an estimate of the wind chill factor.


Handley Promises a Change, But (Wait for It) Next Season
Coach Ray Handley indicated today that a major change was coming in the Giants' offense.
But it will not be at quarterback and it will not be this year.
Handley indicated that next year he would name an offensive coordinator, a job he still holds.
In the past, he had said he would consider that move.
Today, he sounded surer.


New Name and Leader For Wall Street Firm
In a shift of leadership and direction, Labe, Simpson &amp; Company said yesterday that it was changing its name and was appointing Charlotte J. Walker as the chairman and chief executive of the Wall Street high-technology research firm.
The 37-year-old Ms.
Walker, who joined less than two years ago, replaced Peter Labe, who resigned.
He has gone to work for Josephthal, Lyon &amp; Ross Inc., another Wall Street securities firm.


NEW JERSEY G.O.P. VOWS TO ROLL BACK MILLIONS IN TAXES
Armed with a veto-proof majority in both houses of the Legislature, New Jersey Republicans vowed today to mount an intensive assault on the sweeping program pushed through by the Democrats and Gov.
Jim Florio last year.
Jubilant, joking and smiling, but leaving no doubt as to who is now in charge in Trenton, the Republican leaders introduced most of their party's victors in Tuesday night's rout of the Democrats as they held a news conference at the State House today.
They also reiterated their pledge to roll back about $550 million of the Democratic Governor's $2.8 billion tax package despite indications of another huge budget shorfall next year, even without a revenue cut.


Maligned Bat Still Carries Diseases
To the Editor:
"Far From Fearsome, Bats Lose Ground to Ignorance and Greed" (Science Times, Oct. 29) is fascinating and informative.
However, there are reasons to treat bats, and the places where they live, with caution.


Body, Yacht, Even Wind: All Clues in Maxwell Death
Medical examiners in the United States say that to determine the cause of Robert Maxwell's death, particularly to determine if he drowned, it is necessary to carefully examine his organs and to perform a series of tests.
Examination of the yacht for the height and structure of the railings and for evidence of drugs would also be key to determining the cause of death.


BRIEFS
*
American Telephone and Telegraph Co., said its NCR Corp. unit and Software Translations Inc., Austin, Tex., had formed a $15 million, five-year partnership to provide Digital Equipment Corp. systems users with a migration path to the open systems environment of NCR's System 3000. *
Citibank, New York, will open a branch in Warsaw later this month.


A Soviet Company Offers Nuclear Blasts for Sale to Anyone With the Cash
A new Soviet trading company is trying to market the power of underground nuclear explosions for commercial application to anyone in the world who has the cash.
It is the first time that nuclear blasts are known to have been put up for sale, but the venture is surrounded by great uncertainty given the political turbulence in the Soviet Union and rising opposition around the world to nuclear blasts.


Growth Amid Blight: Uneasy Worlds Coexist
David Lee has a collection of bullet shells that he picks up on the way to his knitwear factory in the morning.
Stephen Mayo occasionally has to step around crack vials that collect in front of his office-products factory during the weekend.
Lenny Gamss notes with bemusement that the free coffee he provides customers at his hardware store is often enjoyed by prostitutes on their way to work around the corner.
These are just some of the ways that local business people -- pioneers, really -- have learned to accommodate themselves to the torn landscape.
For myriad reasons -- the lure of $3-a-square-foot rents, historical happenstance or transportation needs -- they have staked their capitalist claims in and around Mott Haven, one of the poorest neighborhoods in one of the poorest places in New York, the South Bronx.


Albany Deeply Divided Over Budget Gap Plans
As Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo tonight began considering his Budget Director's plan to close the state's nettlesome budget gap, key legislators were deeply divided over their own approaches to the problem.
The lawmakers and their aides said that the Republican-controlled Senate favors closing the budget gap primarily through steep cuts in Medicaid and other social services.
Members of the Democratic-controlled Assembly have begun to push a plan to restructure the state's finances over the next 18 months -- an approach that could mean both more long-term change and more gradual cuts.


Port Authority to Evict the Homeless From Bus Terminal
Prompted by commuters' discomfort around the homeless, Port Authority officials said yesterday that they would begin a crackdown in the bus terminal on Eighth Avenue, evicting anyone found loitering, panhandling or sleeping there, even in freezing weather.
The policy, patterned on the one the Transit Authority intends to use in the city's subways, will include preventing anyone from lying down in the terminal or using the bathrooms to wash up.


Charge Taken By Dow Jones
Dow Jones &amp; Company said yesterday that it would take a $32 million accounting charge against fourth-quarter earnings to reflect the cost of abandoning an old computerized currency exchange system.
Dow Jones said the charge, which amounts to 32 cents a share, accounts for the development costs of the Trading Service, run by Telerate Inc., a Dow Jones subsidiary.


Review/Theater; Of Childbearing and Ticking Clocks
Watching Kathleen Tolan's "Approximating Mother," a man may feel he is eavesdropping on an intimate conversation among women.
That effect is somewhat akin to what might be a female response to plays by David Mamet.
In Ms.
Tolan's play (presented by the Women's Project at the Judith Anderson Theater), women talk about their most vital concerns: motherhood, marriage, love and self-fulfillment.
The dialogue is pungent and not flattering to the men in the play.
They are bystanders, either passive or uncaring, and they deserve the implied criticism.
The play begins as an engaging luncheon discussion between best friends, Mia Dillon as a pregnant wife and Deirdre O'Connell as a woman who is single, 38 and desperate to have a child of her own.
The biological clock is only one of several ticking urgencies.
In the case of both women, a world of hopes is passing by, and fortysomething is approaching.
Each would like to stop the clock and each, particularly Ms.
O'Connell, is thrown back on memories of romantic roads taken and not taken.


Harleysville Group Defers an Offering
Harleysville Group Inc. of Harleysville, Pa., a holding company for six property and casualty insurance companies, has indefinitely deferred its plan for a secondary common stock offering of 1.1 million shares, or 1.65 million shares after adjustment for a stock split that was effective on Monday.
Bradford W. Mitchell, the chairman of the company, noted that at the time the registration was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on July 31, the price of outstanding shares was $30.50, or $20.33 as adjusted for the 3-for-2 stock split this week.


New York State
ALBANY: A 70-year Democratic stranglehold on Albany County politics was broken when County Executive James Coyne was defeated by a former state assemblyman, Michael Hoblock.
BUFFALO: For the first time in a three-decade political career, Mayor James D. Griffin of Buffalo lost a general election.
Mr.
Griffin, a Democrat who ran on the Republican line, was defeated in a race for Erie County executive by the Democratic incumbent, Dennis Gorski.


Herbert Ferber Memorial
A memorial service for the sculptor Herbert Ferber is to be held at 5:30 P.M. on Monday at St.
Paul's Chapel on the Columbia University campus.
William Rubin, director emeritus of painting and sculpture at the Museum of Modern Art, is to speak at the service, which is open to the public.
Mr.
Ferber died of cancer of the bile duct on Aug. 20 at the age of 85.


Capital Levels for CalFed
CalFed Inc. said today that Federal regulators had proposed requiring the company's savings and loan subsidiary, the California Federal Bank, to increase its equity capital by $375 million.
The company called the requirement excessive and vowed to fight it.
It said it was already trying to strengthen itself through private market means and said the new requirement would harm that attempt.


Ads Against AIDS Presents 14 Awards
Ads Against AIDS, the organization conducting the advertising industry's first national educational campaign against that disease, last night presented 14 awards to anti-AIDS advertising.
The winners -- five television commercials, five print advertisements and four radio commercials -- were selected from more than 1,000 advertisements submitted by 425 entrants in a contest sponsored by the organization.
The creators of the ads were honored at a dinner at the Marriott Marquis Hotel in Manhattan, attended by about 1,200 people.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Violent Femmes The Ritz
All that Gordon Gano of Violent Femmes had to do on Monday night was amble up to his microphone, open his mouth and start to sing, and the predominantly under-21 crowd began slamming.
Halfway through the first song, writhing, euphoric bodies were being passed overhead.
By the middle of the set, large circles had cleared in which skinheads hurled themselves at one another.
By the last song, "Add It Up," from the Femmes' 1982 debut album, people were stripping off their clothes off and throwing them onstage.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Benny Green Trio Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street Manhattan Through Sunday
There comes a point in a young jazz musician's life when obsession takes over, when total immersion in one idiom, or an era, or a personality, seems like the only thing worth doing.
Benny Green, a pianist leading a trio at the Village Vanguard, has reached that point.
Mr.
Green's first set on Tuesday night showed his love affair with the 1950's sound of soul piano, in which gospel and blues and be-bop all mixed.


More Than 2,000 Die as Floods Swamp Towns in the Philippines
Sudden typhoon floodwaters swept through towns and villages in the central Philippines on Tuesday, killing more than 2,000 people and leaving behind flattened homes and piles of bodies, relief officials and witnesses said today.
One official said the flash floods, which hit some areas never affected by floods before, were a result of deforestation caused by the illegal logging that is stripping bare the hillsides of much of the Philippines.


I.B.M. and Intel Form Chip Alliance
Gaining a potentially significant edge over its hundreds of personal-computer industry competitors, I.B.M will announce a 10-year technology agreement with the Intel Corporation today to cooperate in designing the computer chips used in the most powerful desktop and portable computers.
I.B.M. has been struggling in recent years to distinguish itself from the multitude of clone makers that imitate the computer standard it established in 1981 with the introduction of the I.B.M.
PC.


More Woes At Russ Togs
Russ Togs Inc., one of the oldest publicly traded apparel manufacturers in the country, is close to bankruptcy with its banks calling in their loans and its suppliers refusing to ship fabrics and trims, garment industry executives said yesterday.
Last week, the New York company announced that it was discussing last-minute waivers or amendments to its bank credit agreements because it had failed to comply with certain covenants.
It also said it was seeking new financing and considering a court-supervised reorganization because its banks were entitled to call in their loans.


NATO CHIEFS SEEK TO DEFINE ITS ROLE
With NATO still looking anxiously for its place in the post-cold-war world, leaders of the 16-nation alliance who meet in Rome on Thursday are expected to point once again to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe to justify the 42-year-old pact's continued existence.
This time, though, with the Soviet Union no longer posing a credible military threat to the West, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization will be responding to requests by Moscow and its former satellites that the alliance expand its political role and become a security pillar for all of Europe.


Thousands Of Points Of Color
REI KAWAKUBO of Comme des Garcons is no traditionalist.
She sometimes designs dresses with one sleeve longer than the other.
Lately, in the Comme des Garcons shop in Manhattan, she doesn't even display her clothes in the window.
Instead, a room installation by Alessandro Mendini, an architect in Milan, Italy, takes up the entire front of the store at 116 Wooster Street (Prince Street).


Corrections
The Personal Health column yesterday, about a loss of flexibility of the eye's lens in middle age, misstated the lens location.
It is behind the iris, the colored portion of the eye, not over it.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-19 INQUIRY ON MAXWELL'S FATE
Robert Maxwell, the British publisher whose body was found in the Atlantic, apparently died before he fell from his yacht, a judge said.
But associates expressed doubts that he had a heart attack.
Page A1 Forensic experts are searching for clues to Maxwell's death.
D23 Heirs see no immediate crisis for publishing companies.
D23 The real power over the empire will rest with the youngest son.
D23 PHILIPPINE FLOODS KILL 2,000
Floodwaters from typhoons swept through the central Philippines, killing more than 2,000 people in one town alone.
It was the country's highest flood toll in a decade.
A1 REVOLUTION DAY NO MORE
Formally it was still a state holiday in the Soviet Union, but instead of celebrating the 1917 revolution, the day seemed devoted to humiliating its legacy.
A1 The Ukraine agreed to links with the other republics.
A19 NUCLEAR BLASTS FOR SALE
A new Soviet trading company is trying to market the power of underground nuclear explosions for commercial application to anyone in the world who has the cash.A18 Bush is expected to announce $1 billion in food aid for Soviets.
A15 NATO will consider aid requests from the former East bloc.
A7 Jews in Byelorussia are unexpectedly in demand for marriage.
A14 KUWAIT BLAZES ARE OUT
The last of Kuwait's burning oil wells was finally extinguished, eight months after they were set by invading Iraqis.
It was a quicker and less expensive task than expected.
A3 REMINDER OF MEXICO'S PAST
Tuxtla Journal: The jailing of a Mexican priest on charges of leading a peasant rebellion is an old story, but the context has changed.
A4 SUPPORT FOR THE AMAZON
Western countries are becoming more favorable to the idea of working in concert to protect Amazon forests and jungles, American and German diplomats say.
A5 Japan expressed regret over Bush's cancellation of his visit.
A9 Yugoslavia's 12th cease-fire was shattered by artillery duels.
A10 Guerrillas renewed attacks on Israeli troops in Lebanon.
A11 A "wait and see" attitude on aid to Zambia's new leadership.
A16 NATIONAL A20-26, B14-18 INTEREST RATES LOWERED
The Federal Reserve reduced the rates it controls to levels not seen since the 1970's, and banks responded immediately by reducing their prime rate.
A1 COMPTROLLER TURNED DOWN
Voting along party lines, the Senate Banking Committee killed President Bush's nomination of Robert L. Clarke to a second term as Comptroller of the Currency.
D1 ELECTION DAY AFTERMATH
News analysis: The White House hit the panic button.
The Democrats rejoiced in some states and mourned in others.
And around the country, the voters served notice that they were in a sour mood.A1 Political analysts who followed the Pennsylvania Senate campaign say Harris Wofford tapped into a deep well of middle-class anger.
B17 Man in the News: Harris Llewellyn Wofford Jr.
B17 Thornburgh cautioned Bush on voter discontent.
B17 Voters in Washington State turned down both a term-limit measure and a proposal that would have allowed doctors to kill terminally ill patients who asked to die.
B16 A little-known Republican, Kirk Fordice, defeated Gov.
Ray Mabus of Mississippi.
B18 Bush said David Duke was a charlatan unfit to hold public office.
B18 NEW RULES AT THE OFFICE
The nation's new sensitivity to sexual harassment is stirring men to rethink the protocols of working with women.
A20 ACCUSATION AGAINST QUAYLE
The Drug Enforcement Administration said that in 1982 it investigated, and found to be groundless, an accusation that Dan Quayle, then a Senator from Indiana, had used cocaine and Quaaludes.
A20 PHONE SERVICE DISRUPTED
Long-distance telephone service broke down for three hours in much of New England on Tuesday night, raising fresh concerns about the reliability of A.T.&amp;T.
A20 RELIGION IN THE SCHOOLS
The Supreme Court heard arguments in a case that could well be a vehicle for unsettling decades of precedent on the relationship between church and state.
A22 ABORTION RULE AT STAKE
The House passed a bill that would overturn a Federal rule barring doctors and other counselors at federally supported clinics to tell pregnant women that they have a legal right to abortion.
A24 Democrats moved toward a new unemployment bill.
B15 METROPOLITAN Digest, B1 G.O.P.
MAPS TRENTON PLANS
Armed with a veto-proof majority in both houses of the Legislature, New Jersey Republicans vowed today to mount an intensive assault on the sweeping program pushed through by the Democrats and Gov.
Jim Florio last year.
A1 DINKINS PLEDGES TAX FREEZE
Mayor David N. Dinkins pledged yesterday to keep shrinking its government and to freeze property taxes for two years by using $1 billion in aid from the Municipal Assistance Corporation, but the Corporation's head was skeptical.
A1 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 The Home Section Absence makes the heart skip for commuter moms.
C1  Castle Howard revisited, for an auction of relics.
C1  In Berkeley, architecture with luck on its side.
C1  Parent &amp; ChildC2  Where to Find It C2  Currents C3 Arts/Entertainment New answer to a riddle in an Elgar work.
C19  "J. F. K." film raises a fuss.
C19  Gauging the art market.
C19  Theater: "Approximating Mother" C21  Music: Pop and Jazz in Review.
C17  Word and Image: How films affected writers' lives.
C20  Home Video C28 Obituaries D25 Simone Feldman, interior designer Sports B19-25 Baseball: Showalter names coaches.
B23  Basketball: Nets may sign Anderson today.
B19  Column: Berkow on Olympics and David Duke.
B19  Olympics: South Africa going to Barcelona.
B19 Editorials/Op-Ed Editorials A28  The Speaker's salvation.
Voters said: What about us?
Mr.
Dinkins's vague virtue.
Fate orphans The News.
Letters A28  Tom Wicker: Cuomo and Wofford.
A29  William Safire: The great reshuffle.
A29  William C. Potter: Russia's nuclear entrepreneurs.
A29  David R. Mayhew and Rogan Kersh: Term limits aren't dead.
A29


Showalter's New Staff Has Been Around
Two features stand out in the six-man coaching staff Buck Showalter will have for his first year as the Yankees' manager: Everyone in it has worked in the club's organization, and half of it consists of pitching coaches.
Showalter announced his staff yesterday, retaining two coaches from the 1991 staff and adding four veteran coaches who have a total of 52 years of coaching and minor league managing experience.
One of the four, Russ Meyer, at the age of 68, could be the oldest person ever to become a major league coach for the first time.


Jackson Is Awaiting Return of the Nemesis
One day after the sun burst out over Madison Square Garden, and Mark Jackson finally basked in its glow, he was reminded today of a dark cloud named Scott Skiles.
It took Jackson a month of solid preseason work to reclaim his job as the undisputed starting point guard of the Knicks, but it took Skiles one night, in the season opener last Friday in Orlando, to recast Jackson as the embodiment of everything wrong with the Knicks.
He was back in New York City's doghouse, until he barked his way out with a spectacular third quarter in the Knicks' 113-85 rout of Milwaukee Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden.


D.M.B.&amp;B. Picks Up Proposed New Airline
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, yesterday was awarded the advertising account for a proposed new airline, to be called New Eastern Airlines, that hopes to complete its financing and begin operations early next year.
After several months of meetings with the Atlanta-based managers organizing the proposed airline, said Peter Rosow, the agency's managing director, D.M.B.&amp;B. executives have begun working on a campaign.
Advertising could be ready to appear as early as January, he added.


Jays Hire Hisle, Bailor
The Toronto Blue Jays have named LARRY HISLE as their hitting instructor and BOB BAILOR first-base coach.
Hisle served as the Blue Jays' minor league batting coach for the last two years.
He played 15 major league seasons with Philadelphia, Minnesota and Milwaukee, hitting .273.
Bailor was the Blue Jays' first selection in the 1977 expansion draft and has been a manager in their minor league organization for the last four seasons. . . .
Two Oakland third basemen, CARNEY LANSFORD , who missed virtually the entire season because of a knee injury, and BROOK JACOBY who was obtained to replace him, filed for free agency.
They were the 87th and 88th players to become free agents.


East German Factories
Manufacturing orders in the former East Germany rose 16.8 percent in August from July, the national Government said.
The Economics Minister, Jurgen Mollemann, said that even though the figure was inflated by large, one-time orders, the increase was "a welcome sign." In July, orders fell a revised 5.9 percent.
Foreign manufacturing orders in eastern Germany jumped 54.4 percent in August from July, the Economics Ministry said.
That compared with a revised decline of 21.9 percent in July from June.
Domestic orders rose by 3.1 percent in August after increasing by a revised 1.6 percent in July.


Lauren, making waves: page C6.


Harold E. Leaf; Investment Banker, 82
Harold E. Leaf, a retired investment banker, died Friday at the Ruth Taylor Institute, a geriatric center in Hawthorne, N.Y.
A resident of Scarsdale, he was 82 years old.
A native of New Rochelle, N.Y., Mr.
Leaf went to work in 1929 as a telephone clerk on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange.
He left in 1937 to become a founding partner in R. D. White &amp; Company, investment bankers in New York.
He retired in 1975 as the company's managing partner.


Vanni B. Montana, 89, Opponent of Fascism
Vanni B. Montana, an opponent of fascism and Communism in Italy and an advocate of unionism in the United States, died on Sunday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 89 years and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a stroke, his family said.


Corrections
A table of New York State election results in some editions yesterday misidentified the winner of the mayoralty in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was Donald P. DeRiggi.


Dinkins Tax-Freeze Plan Needs M.A.C. Nod
Mayor David N. Dinkins's plan to freeze property taxes for two years depends on $1 billion that has not been raised yet and might not be unless the state Municipal Assistance Corporation loosens its purse strings.
To raise the funds, the corporation would put off repaying bonds that mature over the next four years.
It would refinance the bonds, extending payments through the year 2008, much like a homeowner taking out a second mortgage and getting an immediate cash windfall.


10 Political Prisoners in China Said to Plan a Hunger Strike
About 10 political prisoners in northeastern China are planning a hunger strike unless the prison authorities stop beating them and forcing them to work 14-hour days on a diet of hard bread and vegetables, a Chinese who has been briefed on their circumstances says.
The 10 are among about 35 political prisoners at a prison in Liaoning Province.
They are serving sentences of up to 20 years for supporting democracy during and after the demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
They are divided up and housed with common criminals in cells packed with up to 40 men so that there is scarcely room to lie down.


West Moves Cautiously on Renewing Zambia Aid
Western donors, who often had stormy relations with Kenneth D. Kaunda, the defeated President of Zambia, say they are taking a "wait-and-see" approach before offering new aid to the country's newly-installed Government.
The restoration of the Zambian economy, one of the weakest in Africa despite the nation's fertile farmland and wealth in minerals, would be a long process with even more hardships ahead, they said.


Fate Orphans The News
Robert Maxwell died in the Canary Islands early enough on Tuesday for his thunderstruck employees at New York's Daily News to honor his memory with exemplary coverage and comment.
The timing was their only consolation.
Still recovering from a calamitous five-month strike, The News was only beginning to bounce back when it was struck twice by fate.
Two weeks ago its new managing editor, John Cotter, died just before he was to begin work.
And now its new British owner has perished in circumstances as improbable as his astonishing rise to riches.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Patti LaBelle The Paramount
For years, Patti LaBelle has sustained one of pop music's most fervent cults by giving herself to her fans with an extravagance that can turn her concerts into chaotic love-ins.
When Ms.
LaBelle displays a modicum of restraint, the mutual displays of affection can be uplifting.
But when she surrenders to the adulation, as she did on Saturday evening, her musical discipline disintegrates.


Budd Takes Aim at Barcelona


Phone Service Is Disrupted in New England
Long-distance telephone service was disrupted for three hours in much of New England on Tuesday night, and officials of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company said today that the breakdown was caused by workers performing routine maintenance.
The disruption raised fresh concerns about the reliability of A.T.&amp; T., the nation's dominant long-distance company.
It was A.T.&amp; T.'s fourth breakdown in two years and came only six weeks after management mistakes led to a major disruption in New York City.


THE 1991 ELECTION: The Restive Voters; Mixed Results at Polls Show Both Parties That Status Quo Won't Satisfy the Nation
The White House hit the panic button.
The Democrats rejoiced in some states and mourned in others, and around the country the voters served notice that they are in a sour mood and that incumbents should ignore them only at their peril.
Both parties tried today to put the best face on a mixed outcome, but there were omens and alarms aplenty as the nation heads into the 1992 Presidential campaign, with the economy ailing and public attitudes bubbling on health care, race relations and taxes.


THE 1991 ELECTION: Abortion; Referendum in Washington State Remains in Dead Heat
A Washington State initiative intended to insure that abortion rights are protected, even if the Supreme Court throws out the 1973 constitutional guarantees, finished in a virtual dead heat on Tuesday.
The outcome of the abortion referendum, which would amend the state's current abortion law to include the protections of the Supreme Court's landmark decision Roe v.
Wade, will not be known for several days, as more than 200,000 absentee ballots are counted.
But nearly a third of the outstanding ballots are from populous King County, which includes Seattle, where the measure was approved by more than 60 percent of the voters.
If the current patterns hold, the measure should pass by a narrow margin.


Review/Dance; An Indian at One With the Buffalo In Eiko and Koma's Spirit World
The highly original dance theater pieces that the Japanese-born choreographers Eiko and Koma have been performing in New York City since 1976 often begin in the aftermath of a cataclysm.
"Land," the ambitious if inconsistent premiere they presented on Tuesday night with two very fine American Indian musicians as part of the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music (30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene) is somewhat different.
It isn't until "Land," inspired by a visit to New Mexico and the Indian ceremonies of the Taos Pueblo, has progressed through 60 of its 80 minutes that an apocalyptic event suddenly makes itself clear.


U S West Taps Digital For Financial Officer
U S West said yesterday that it had hired as its new chief financial officer, James M. Osterhoff, who recently resigned from the Digital Equipment Corporation, the big computer maker that has been hurt by the recession.
Mr.
Osterhoff said in September that he had planned to resign from Digital but left his departure date open.
U S West said yesterday that he would assume his new post on Dec. 6.


Israel Wounds Itself Severely With Occupation; Hawks and Doves Alike
To the Editor:
Many Israelis and American Jews, including the American Jewish Congress, have urged the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to halt settlement activity in the territories during the peace negotiations.
After all, Mr.
Shamir's predecessor, Menachem Begin, did not find such a freeze inconsistent with Likud's principles when he was engaged in peace negotiations with the Egyptians.


Substance And Style Criticized In 'J.F.K.'
Twenty-eight years after the killing of John F. Kennedy, a film by Oliver Stone about the assassination has touched off a wave of controversy and accusations involving both the movie's conclusions and the way the film was made.
With Mr.
Stone working virtually round-the-clock to complete the three-hour movie, which is scheduled to be released across the nation on Dec. 20, movie executives say that the project, "J. F. K.," starring Kevin Costner, will be the most widely discussed movie of the Christmas season.
Hollywood is nervous about the season because an array of expensive films, like "J. F. K.," are being released, while box office receipts have plummeted over the last year.
The film's producers are plainly uneasy about the audience reaction to "J. F. K."


Moscow Hopes To Meet Debt
The Soviet Union plans to meet its foreign debt obligations this month despite a shortage of hard currency, an official of the Bank for Foreign Economic Affairs said today.
Anatoly P. Nosko, deputy head of the bank, known as Vneshekonombank, told reporters that contributions by exporters to the Government in November "might be insufficient to completely cover the sum of payments on the Soviet foreign debt." But he said alternative resources would be found.


Dow Advances by 7.15 in Light Volume
Stocks made mild gains yesterday in light volume, as trading kept within a narrow range.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 7.15 to close at 3,038.46.
Confusion reigned, as investors held off from doing any meaningful buying, traders said.
They focused more on a sputtering economy and weak corporate profits.


Oilers Beat Islanders, 5-3, As Damphousse Awakens
Vince Damphousse broke out of a slump with two goals during a four-goal Edmonton outburst in the second period tonight as the Oilers beat the Islanders, 5-3.
Damphousse, the key player obtained by Edmonton in a preseason trade that sent Grant Fuhr and Glenn Anderson to Toronto, had only one goal in 34 shots heading into the game.


10-Year Note Sale Disappointing
The Federal Reserve Board's decision to reduce the two interest rates it controls did not help the Treasury sell $12 billion worth of new 10-year notes yesterday.
Given the economy's poor performance and low levels of inflation, analysts and traders had little quarrel with the Fed's decision to cut the discount rate to 4 1/2 percent from 5 percent and cut the target on the overnight Federal funds rate to 4 3/4 percent from 5 percent.
But some analysts said the timing of the moves was strange.


Dollar Is Mixed After Fed Lowers Its Discount Rate
The dollar was mixed against other major currencies yesterday after the Federal Reserve lowered its discount rate.
Gold prices were also mixed, rising modestly in New York after falling overseas.


Israel Wounds Itself Severely With Occupation
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal in "The Double Standard" (column, Oct. 22) endorses the autonomy plan for the West Bank and Gaza Strip by Yitzhak Shamir's Israeli Government, which forms a central negotiating position in the Madrid peace conference.
This plan was originally proposed by Menachem Begin's Government in the unsuccessful negotiations with Egypt over the territories in 1980-82.


Of Earth and the Family: 6 Green Thumbs
I CANNOT imagine being a solitary gardener, one who gardens alone and has no one to talk to about the pleasures and the disappointments that come from a life passionately devoted to digging in the earth.
Elizabeth Lawrence, one of America's finest garden writers, always said it was impossible to garden alone.
Even the smallest and simplest garden is a place of humbleness and debt, in which the gardener owes much to the plant explorers who brought floral treasures from all the corners of the earth, or to neighbors who passed some prized plant over the fence.
Miss Lawrence's writing is full of references to her friends, both near and far, who shared plants and the love of plants with her.


League's Worst Team Provides Best Rookie
JEFF BAGWELL , the 23-year-old Houston Astros first baseman who knocked in more runs (82), scored more runs (79) and hit more home runs (15) than anyone else on the National League's worst team (67-95), was named the league's rookie of the year yesterday.
Bagwell, who also had the team's second-best batting average (.294) and was second in hits (163), beat out Pittsburgh first baseman Orlando Merced in balloting by the Baseball Writers Association of America.
He received 23 of 24 first-place votes and finished with 118 points.


Police to Track Brutality Charges Against Officers
New York City police officers will face automatic review when the brutality complaints against them exceed an established number, under a computer-tracking program announced yesterday by Commissioner Lee P. Brown.
Officers who are the subject of repeated complaints will face increased monitoring, be given career guidance and could face dismissal if the conduct persists, Mr.
Brown said.


F.D.A. Move on Drug Maker Is Challenged
Two members of Congress asked the Food and Drug Administration yesterday to explain why the agency was seeking to close a New York-based generic drug maker, which they praised as a "whistleblower."
Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, suggested that F.D.A. officials might have threatened to punish Barr Laboratories as retaliation for the company's part in uncovering corruption and fraud that led to criminal convictions of five former F.D.A. officials and five generic drug executives.


Yonkers Winner Benefits From Republican Split
This troubled city made a decisive break with the defiance and dissension of recent years by electing a new Democratic mayor, Terence M. Zaleski, a state Assemblyman who wants Yonkers to obey a Federal housing desegregation order.
Mr.
Zaleski, 38 years old, will be the first beneficiary of a new form of government, giving him executive powers previously vested in a city manager and a longer term of office.


Maxwell Family Sees No Financial Upheaval
Robert Maxwell's heirs and their investment bankers insisted today that the family-controlled publishing empire faced no immediate financial crisis and that they would not have to go beyond existing plans to sell some operations.
"I don't see any change in strategy," said Kevin F. H. Maxwell, who has been chief executive of the Maxwell Communication Corporation and who today became chairman, succeeding his father, who died on Tuesday.


House Votes to Overturn Limit on Abortion Advice
The House of Representatives today passed an appropriations bill that would overturn the Bush Adminstration's rule prohibiting doctors and counselors in federally financed family planning clinics from discussing abortion with women.
But the margin was well short of enough to override President Bush's expected veto.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Reserve cut the discount rate, the rate it charges banks for loans, to 4 1/2 percent, from 5 percent.
This is the lowest rate since January 1973.
Banks responded immediately and cut their prime rate to 7 1/2 percent, from 8 percent.
The Fed also bought large quantities of Government securities to indicate that it wanted to reduce the funds rate to 4.75 percent, from 5 percent.  [ Page A1. ]


Reviews/Fashion; Lauren Makes Waves, Naturally
RALPH LAUREN, in a masterly spring fashion show, proved that it is as important to a designer to know who he is and what he stands for as it is to the women who wear his clothes.
He cut his way through the dross and uncertainty of current fashion, presenting what he does best: classic clothes with a modern slant.
In absolute control of his craft, he proved that clothes can be classic without being boring, topical without being tacky, and lovely to look at as well.


THE 1991 ELECTION: Euthanasia; VOTERS TURN DOWN MERCY KILLING IDEA
Washington State voters have decided that doctors should not be allowed to kill terminally ill patients who ask to die, but both sides say the once intensely private subject will continue to be a prominent feature on the nation's political landscape.
Both proponents and opponents of the ground-breaking ballot initiative agreed today that something was terribly wrong with the ordeal faced by many dying men and women and that the record-breaking turnout here, the national and international focus and the quality of debate should alert policy makers to confront the issue.


KLM's New U.S. Manager Sounds Out His Employees
Toon H. Woltman knows his way around the United States, having been a manager for the Coca-Cola Company in Atlanta for four and half years.
In his new job as vice president and area manager of KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, the tall, slim Dutchman will assume responsibility for the airline's operations in the United States, Canada and Mexico at a time when KLM's position could change dramatically.
KLM, which announced Mr.
Woltman's appointment earlier this week, has been talking with British Airways, and while they have not disclosed what they are discussing, some analysts say the talk has been about a combination between the two and Northwest Airlines.


Distance Makes the Heart Skip for Commuter Moms
THE phone rang. Barbara Reisman's nightmare was on the line.
"It was the school nurse," Ms.
Reisman recalled.
"She said my daughter had seriously injured her foot, and she had to see a doctor right away."


Talking Deals; London Venture Tests JMB Skills
THE partnership that owns Randsworth Trust P.L.C., one of the most closely followed investments in European real estate by Americans, has stopped paying interest to Citibank on a $:185 million loan and is negotiating with the bank to recapitalize Randsworth, people close to the negotiations said.
The troubles with Randsworth underscore how treacherous it can be for even the most knowledgeable real estate investors to put together foreign deals, especially with substantial leverage.
With the venture not meeting its heavy debt payments, it now appears that a Dutch pension fund, which is already the largest Randsworth investor, will come to the rescue with a cash infusion.


Election Cited in Push for Jobless Bill
Buoyed by Harris Wofford's victory in Pennsylvania, Senate Democrats moved today toward trying to freeze foreign aid and using the money saved to pay for extended unemployment benefits for people out of work at least half a year.
Even without committing themselves to that way of paying for the $5.6 billion bill, they were using it as a political club to swing at President Bush.


Mr. Dinkins's Vague Virtue
Mayor David Dinkins of New York yesterday offered up a new financial plan.
Plan is an overstatement.
The proposal makes painfully clear how much work he and his advisers have ahead.
This is a well-intentioned effort that continues to cut the work force.
Recognizing the need to send a sympathetic message to recession-weary taxpayers, it calls for a two-year freeze on property taxes.
But so many details are sketchy, missing or left to the future that no precise judgment is possible.
Fortunately, the Mayor has time to turn this preliminary effort into a detailed blueprint by January, when his next financial plan is due.


Cold Causes Crowding of Shelters in South
Shelters in the South scrambled to accommodate homeless people caught unprepared as a three-day cold snap continued today.
Atlanta had a record low of 26 degrees on Tuesday.


YUGOSLAV FIGHTING BREAKS CEASE-FIRE
Croatian and Serbian forces engaged in artillery duels across the breakaway republic of Croatia today, shattering the 12th and latest European-brokered cease-fire accord less than 24 hours after it was reached.
For the second consecutive day, shells, apparently from Croatian artillery, fell on Serbian territory, hitting the town of Apatin and a village near the town of Sid.
Serbian officials also asserted that Croatian forces shelled areas in the republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which the pro-Serbian Yugoslav Army is using for its thrust into Croatia's eastern panhandle.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Alaska's $60 million in housing revenue bonds were won by Merrill Lynch, which repriced them to yield 6.90 percent for the 2032 maturity with a coupon of 6.5 percent.
Guaranteed by the Federal National Mortgage Association, the bonds are rated AAA by the rating services.
Preferred Stock  *
Applied Microbiology Inc., Brooklyn, a maker of antibacterial agents, said it had privately placed $1.15 million in convertible preferred. *
Northern Trust Company, Chicago, has filed for up to 1.4 million depository shares, or about $70 million, to be offered through Goldman, Sachs.
Each share represents one-twentieth of a share of cumulative preferred stock with a stated value of $1,000 a share.
Common Stock *
Xilinx Inc., San Jose, Calif., a maker of integrated circuits, filed for up to 3.5 million common shares to be sold through Morgan Stanley.


Home Video
The Senate Judiciary Committee has before it a proposal for a Pornography Victims' Compensation Act.
In short, the bill would allow victims of sex crimes or their families to sue the producers and distributors of obscene films, books and other publications on the ground that the material contributed to the crime.
While the measure has met stiff opposition from the film and publishing industries and its fate is unclear, even the existence of such a proposal alarms video dealers, who have been under increasing pressure to censor themselves in some parts of the country.
"If there is any question of opening themselves to liability, dealers are going to play it safe and not carry films with sex scenes or anything that might be considered controversial," said Rick Karpel, the director of government relations of the Video Software Dealers Association, a national trade organization.
"If this bill passes, they'll clear the shelves." "The Accused," about gang rape, is cited as the type of movie that might be removed.


William H. Shames, An Inventor, Author And Executive, 60
William H. Shames, a businessman who wrote a book about the pleasures and pains of trying to make profits from inventions, died on Monday at the Connecticut Hospice in Branford, Conn.
He was 60 years old and lived in Westport, Conn.
He died of lung cancer, said his daughter, Erica Leslie Shames-Massoud of Lewisburg, Pa.


Allegations of Drug Use by Quayle Were Held Groundless by Agency
The Drug Enforcement Administration said today that in 1982 it had investigated and found to be groundless accusations that Vice President Dan Quayle, then a Republican Senator from Indiana, had used cocaine and Quaaludes, a depressant.
Two former heads of the drug agency said in interviews today that they remembered the inquiry, and one said that the accuser, then a prisoner in Indiana, had recanted the accusation after being confronted with evidence that it was false.


Pre-1917 Ghosts Haunt a Bolshevik Holiday
It used to be the evening when Communist leaders gathered in the Kremlin for a solemn ceremony ushering in the premier feast day of their revolution.
Today, a descendant of the Romanovs and the Patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church celebrated the dropping of Lenin's name from this city and President Boris N. Yeltsin decreed a final ban on the Communist Party anywhere in the Russian republic.
Formally it was still a state holiday, the long weekend that for decades served as a last spree before the final onset of winter.
All across Moscow, St.
Petersburg and the rest of what most people and papers now call "the former Soviet Union," at least one reason for the long lines was the traditional need to stock up for the holidays.


Shearson Rejects Plan by MCorp
MCorp, the Dallas-based banking company, said a group of preferred shareholders dominated by Shearson Lehman Brothers had rejected its Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization plan.
As a result, creditors other than stockholders may be the only ones who receive bankruptcy court distributions, MCorp said.
Shearson Lehman owns almost all the shares in this preferred class.


Calendar of Events: Auctions and Sales
Benefit Auction
Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway at Washington Avenue; (718) 638-5000.
An auction of jewelry, artwork, clothing, books and other items will be held at 1 P.M. today, following the first talk in a free lecture series by museum curators.
Luncheon, at $15, is offered after each talk; call for reservations.
Proceeds from the auction will benefit the museum.
Crafts on Park
Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue and 66th Street; (914) 679-7278.
Handmade gold jewelry, porcelain vases and inlaid wooden boxes will be included in the craft show.
Hours: 3 to 9 P.M. tomorrow; 11 A.M. to 6 P.M Saturday; noon to 5 P.M.
Sunday.
Admission: one day, $6; weekend pass, $7; free for children under 12.
Exclusive Brand Names
Second Time Around Thrift Shop of Planned Parenthood, 220 East 23d Street; (212) 685-2170.
A benefit sale of plates, vases, flatware and service pieces including those by Tiffany and Royal Copenhagen starts today.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 6:45 P.M. today; 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M. tomorrow and Saturday.
Free.
Sale on Lexington
92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; (212) 996-1100.
A crafts sale of jewelry and ceramic works will be held from 11 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. on Sunday.
Free.
Warehouse Sale
The Pace Collection, 11-11 34th Avenue (near 12th Street), Long Island City; (718) 721-8201.
Designer furniture will be sold from 9 A.M. to 7 P.M. tomorrow through Sunday.
Free.
Museum Benefit
Birchwood Manor, 111 North Jefferson Road off Route 10, Whippany, N.J.; (201) 596-6550.
A preview reception and silent auction to benefit the Newark Museum will be held from 7 to 10 P.M. next Thursday at the Birchwood Manor antique show.
Tickets are $50 each; $75 a pair.
Show hours: noon to 10 P.M.
Nov. 15; noon to 9 P.M.
Nov. 16; noon to 6 P.M.
Nov. 17.


Dateline Indianapolis: Dickerson And Colts Live Nightmare Season
Asked what it's like to be a part of the Indianapolis Colts 0-and-9 season, and counting, running back Eric Dickerson summed it up bluntly.
"Frustration," he said.
"Total." The running back, who is the fourth-leading career rusher in National Football League history, did not offer any optimism for the rest of the season or his team's next game, against the Jets on Sunday at Giants Stadium.


METRO DIGEST
THE ELECTIONS  TAKING AIM AT FLORIO'S PROGRAM
Armed with a veto-proof majority in both houses of the Legislature, New Jersey Republicans vowed to do away with key parts of the sweeping legislative program pushed through by the Democrats and Gov.
Jim Florio.
Page A1.
RETURN OF THE 2-PARTY SYSTEM?
The election of five Republicans to New York's expanded City Council -- including the first to win a Council seat in Manhattan in 25 years -- has raised the hopes of beleaguered party leaders.
Page B7.
JUST LIKE OLD TIMES ON L.I.
Robert J. Gaffney, who recaptured Suffolk County government for the Republican Party, sees his election as a return to a quieter, less tumultuous way of running things.
Page B9.
NOT LIKE OLD TIMES IN YONKERS
The election of Terence M. Zaleski as Mayor of Yonkers represents a decisive break with the defiance of the recent past.
Page B9.
THE RECIPE FOR VICTORY
Joseph P. Ganim was elected Mayor of the troubled city of Bridgeport by presenting himself as everything the incumbent was not.
Page B9.
NEW YORK CITY A FISCAL PLAN FOR THE FUTURE
Mayor David N. Dinkins offered a five-year plan to balance New York City's budgets that relies heavily on workforce reductions and $1 billion in aid he is seeking from the Municipal Assistance Corporation.
But the corporation's chairman said he was not sure the plan would pass muster.
Page A1.
A FISCAL PLAN FOR THE PRESENT
As the Mayor released his plan, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo sought a quick solution to the state's nettlesome budget shortfall.
Page B6.
PORT AUTHORITY CRACKDOWN ON HOMELESS
In the latest move to roust the homeless from public places, officials said they would evict anyone found loitering, panhandling or sleeping in the Port Authority Bus Terminal.
Page B3.
TRIAL OPENS IN GAY MAN'S KILLING
The murder case gay-rights groups have called the "gay Howard Beach trial" began as prosecutors accused the two defendants of setting out on a hunt for a homosexual to kill.
Page B3.
LOOKING TO THE FUTURE AT THE NEWS
Kevin F. H. Maxwell, the publisher of The Daily News since the death of his father, Robert Maxwell, on Tuesday, said he hoped to name a permanent deputy to run the paper.
Page B5.
Police to begin closer monitoring for brutality. Page B3.
Tales from the auction block. General Post Office Journal, page B3.
5 more schools to get metal detectors. Page B3. REGION TOGETHERNESS IN WASHINGTON
The success of the region's members of Congress in the battle over a Federal transportation bill is fueling a new effort to create a Congressional caucus to press the region's case.
Page B10.
A WIFE'S LONG, HARD WAIT
As efforts continued to find a rescue specialist lost at sea in last week's Atlantic storm, his wife struggled to reconcile herself to the fact that he might never come home again.
Page B13.


Film Makers Union Ends Contract Dispute
A local film makers union and an association of producers of commercials reached agreement yesterday on the last unresolved issue in their contract talks -- the turnaround time between when a worker leaves the job and can be called back for the next day.
The union, Local 644 of the International Alliance of Theatrical and State Employees, had threatened to disrupt job sites this week unless that issue was resolved, but there were no disruptions while the negotiations continued.


THE 1991 ELECTION: Mississippi; Fordice Seized Anti-Incumbent Anger
An anti-incumbency mood among the electorate and skillful manipulation of racially charged issues were being cited today as the two main factors behind the upset victory of a little-known Republican, Kirk Fordice, over the Democratic incumbent, Gov.
Ray Mabus.
But another factor, disenchantment with what has been described as an aloof and distant personal style on the part of Mr.
Mabus, also helped Mr.
Fordice make election history in Mississippi, said Democrats and Republicans alike.
As a result of his victory, with 51 percent of the vote to Mr.
Mabus's 47 percent, Mr.
Fordice becomes the first Republican Governor to be elected since a carpetbagger, Adelbert Ames, presided in the statehouse during Reconstruction more than 110 years ago.


Woolworth Profit Falls 49%
The Woolworth Corporation said yesterday that its third-quarter earnings skidded 49 percent as the continuing slump in consumer spending took a heavy toll on the retailer's business.
The variety and discount retailer said it earned $41 million, or 31 cents a share, in the quarter ended Oct. 26, down from $80 million, or 62 cents a share, in the period last year.
Revenue fell 1.9 percent, to $2.42 billion from $2.47 billion.


For Council Winner, a Sign of Hope for Republicans
For five Republican candidates for New York City Council, Tuesday was a day of triumph.
For Charles Millard, it was that and more.
Not only did Mr.
Millard, a 34-year-old lawyer, run against a Democrat who had been in office since 1969.
He ran in Manhattan, where no Republican had won a Council seat in 25 years.


Simone Feldman Is Dead at 61; Partner in Interior Design Firm
Simone Yellen Feldman, an interior designer, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 61 years old.
She died of leukemia, said Victoria Hagan, her partner in Feldman-Hagan Interiors, a New York design firm.


Corrections
A brief report in the Book Notes column yesterday about a work by Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, this year's Nobel Peace Prize winner, included an erroneous title and publication date supplied by the publisher.
The book is to be called "Freedom From Fear and Other Writings," and is to be published by Penguin on Dec. 10.


British Car Sales Drop
New-car sales in Britain dropped 22.5 percent in October from a year earlier, the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders said today.
The October figure compared with an annual decline of 17.4 percent in September


Devils Display Talent Surplus
In leaner times, Neil Brady and Valery Zelepukin would have been rushed into the National Hockey League and would have been playing for the Devils at Byrne Meadowlands Arena on a regular basis.
Tonight, they were merely 2 of 12 minor leaguers brought up to fill in for one game as the Devils took their turn on the exhibition tour schedule of the United States Olympic team.
And both Brady and Zelepukin stood out on this one-night stand.


THE 1991 ELECTION: Term Limits; State of Washington Rejects A Plan to Curb Incumbents
A tide of negative sentiment against incumbent politicians gave way to fear of losing influence in Congress as voters in this state on Tuesday turned down the most severe term-limits measure ever to go before a state electorate.
After leading by as much 30 points in the polls, the ballot measure, which would have thrown out the entire Washington State delegation in the House of Representatives in 1994, lost by a margin of eight points.


INSIDE
Bush Nominee Rejected
The Senate Banking Committee killed the nomination of Robert L.  Clarke to a second term as Comptroller of the Currency.
Page D1.
Olympic Exile Ends
South Africa has accepted an invitation to attend the 1992 Summer Games in Spain and will send a racially integrated team.
Page B19.


Watson Ryder Cup Captain?
Tom Watson is expected to be named today as captain of the United States Ryder Cup team that will defend the cup against Europe in 1993.
PGA of America officials announced yesterday that a news conference concerning the Ryder Cup would be held today in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., where the association is holding its annual meeting.
Officials refused to discuss the exact nature of the news conference, but sources close to the situation said the PGA of America had decided earlier in the week to choose Watson.


Dinkins Woos Rohatyn's Aid On Budget Gap
Striving to win support for his handling of New York City's fiscal problems, Mayor David N. Dinkins pledged yesterday to shrink government and to freeze property taxes for two years by using $1 billion in aid from the Municipal Assistance Corporation to tide him over to better times.
But the chairman of the Assistance Corporation, Felix G. Rohatyn, said he was not yet persuaded that the Mayor's plans were anything more than borrowing from the future to cover current costs.
And a major Wall Street credit rating agency, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, said that "at first glance, the proposals fall short of a structural change in city finances and operations."


Amid Ceremony and Ingenuity, Kuwait's Oil-Well Fires Are Declared Out
The last of the burning oil wells of Kuwait was extinguished and capped yesterday.
The job took eight months, less time than almost anyone expected, at less expense in lives and money, and with very few technical innovations.
The Emir of Kuwait, Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah, walked across a red carpet to a blue lectern yesterday and pushed a lever that shut off a valve, news agencies reported.


U.S. to Announce $1 Billion in Food Aid to Soviets
President Bush is likely to announce next week a package of food assistance to the Soviet Union consisting of about $1 billion in agricultural loan guarantees and up to several hundred million dollars in humanitarian aid, Administration officials said today.
A separate set of technical advice programs is also being prepared that could cost from $10 million to $25 million this year, said one of the officials, who insisted on not being identified.
The programs would be mostly run by the Agriculture Department and would involve sending American experts to teach Soviet officials to organize better their system of food distribution and storage.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday about Robert Maxwell's major holdings misstated the ownership of The Racing Times.
It has been part of the Maxwell-dominated Mirror Group since May.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Mronz Upsets McEnroe  John McEnroe was upset, 6-3, 4-6, 6-3, by Alexander Mronz of Germany yesterday in the first round of the tournament in Birmingham, England.
A wild-card entrant to the event, McEnroe was seeded second, but was overpowered in 2 hours 19 minutes at the National Indoor Arena.
"He surprised me," McEnroe said.
"I underestimated him and you can't do that." Firing serves at up to 125 miles per hour, Mronz took the first set in 41 minutes.
He then took a 4-1 lead in the second set before McEnroe won five straight games to even the match, only to miss four break points on Mronz's serve in the first game of the final set.
Earlier, Richey Reneberg, seeded third, took advantage of Gary Muller's serving problems to reach the quarterfinals.
Reneberg won, 7-6, 6-3, against the South African, who was plagued by wildness on his serve in the second set.
Reneberg was joined in the final eight by an American, MaliVai Washington, seeded fourth, who defeated an Italian qualifier, Gianluca Pozzi, 6-0, 7-5. (AP)


Dudley True to Form As Nets Fall to 76ers
Chris Dudley doesn't like the free-throw line. Never has. Never will.
So when Dudley had two free-throw attempts with seven-tenths of a second remaining tonight and his Nets trailing the 76ers by 2 points at the Spectrum, the crowd serenaded him.
They chanted "Air ball," and the Philadelphia players raised their arms like conductors and urged them to continue.


Quotation of the Day
"This is the rarest thing in politics, an upset landslide." JAMES CARVILLE, a political strategist, on the Pennsylvania Senate race.  [ B17:1. ]


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NBA -- Announced that Los Angeles Lakers owner Dr.
Jerry Buss has been elected chairman of the league's board of governors.
Continental Basketball Association  ALBANY PATROONS -- Waived Horace Burton, forward, and Doug Herring, center.
BAKERSFIELD JAMMERS -- Named Jerry Stipo director of group sales and Todd Karli play-by-play announcer.
TRI-CITY CHINOOK -- Traded Tony Farmer, forward, to the Sioux Falls Skyforce for Clifford Scales, guard.
Traded Stevie Wise, guard, to the Rockford Lightning, for a player to be named later.
Waived Brian Sullivan, guard.
Placed Allen Pollard, forward, on the injured list.
Football  National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Claimed Daniel Stubbs, defensive lineman, off waivers.
Released Rod Saddler, defensive lineman.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Waived Jock Jones, linebacker.
Added Anthony Florence, cornerback, to the practice squad.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Placed Jason Staurovsky, placekicker, on injured reserve.
Signed Charlie Baumann, placekicker.
Moved Danny Villa, guard, from injured reserve to the practice squad.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Placed Craig Heyward, running back, on injured reserve.
Signed Cedrick Smith, fullback.
NEW YORK JETS -- Waived Reggie Moore, wide receiver, from the practice roster.
Moved Mark Boyer, tight end, from injured reserve to the practice squad.


Cuomo, Still Shy, Urged to Speak Up
Dodging the increasing pressure from leading Democrats to make up his mind, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today maintained his rather vigorous demurral on the question of whether he would run for President.
"I'll complete the process as quickly as I can and let you know as soon as I can," he told a call-in television program broadcast tonight on the state's public television stations.
But he gave no indication of just when that would be.


Family Begins to Lose Hope In Search for Lost Airman
Marianne Smith wants very much to believe that her husband, Air National Guard Tech.
Sgt.
Arden R. Smith, will survive the ocean that swallowed him a week ago.
But when she talks, her words drift into the past tense.
"My husband was only 32 -- I mean, he's only 32," she said quietly, her mind seeming to move every way at once.
"They're still searching, and as long as they're searching there's always a sense of hope. But there's also a sense of reality, and it's been there from the very minute they called me."


Bric-a-Brac Revisited: Not a Tag Sale
WHO would have thought that there was anything left in Castle Howard's attics but Nanny Hawkins and her memories?
Who, except Sotheby's, would have imagined that crammed into its attics, cellars, box rooms and stables were dusty bureaus and abandoned dinner services, outgrown prams and crates of old books, odd garden ornaments, shelves of rusted watering cans, gilded picture frames, forgotten family silver, bronze inkwells and numerous other leftovers from the lives of generations of the Howards of York?
All has been emptied now.
Castle Howard, known to millions of television viewers as the stately home where Evelyn Waugh's novel "Brideshead Revisited" was filmed, will be the site of a three-day Sotheby's house sale beginning on Nov. 11.
The $1.35 million that the Howard family hopes to raise at the auction will be used to restore portions of the house.


Tax-Exempts Mixed; Taxable Funds Off
Yields on tax-exempt money market funds were mixed in the week that ended yesterday.
Taxable-fund yields continued to decline, according to IBC/Donoghue's, which monitors the funds and issues The Money Fund Report.
Walter S. Frank, chief economist for IBC/Donoghue's, said total assets of the tax-exempt funds rose by $361 million, to $89.9 billion, in the week.
The average days to maturity of holdings in the tax-exempt portfolios remained at 60.


Metal Detectors to Be Deployed in More Schools
Citing an increase in weapons seized from New York City high school students, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez said yesterday that he would deploy metal detectors in five additional schools despite his initial misgivings about the program.
The expansion will bring to 21 the number of high schools where teams of security guards make surprise weekly visits and scan the bodies and bags of arriving students with Dustbuster-sized detectors.
Young men are scanned by male guards and young women by female guards.


Review/Dance; With Unfinished Works, Hinting of Things to Come
The choreographic showcases that Movement Research is presenting this fall at the Judson Memorial Church on Washington Square in Greenwich Village allow dancers to show both finished works and works in progress.
Excerpts from pieces still to be completed dominated the program on Monday night.
It was an evening of choreographic trial and error.
Because it is impossible to predict how the fragments on view will eventually fit into an overall composition, conclusions about the presentations can only be tentative.


Sports of The Times; Olympic Boycott of David Duke
IF David Duke is elected Governor of Louisiana, it will not be politics as usual there, it will not be business as usual, and it ought not to be sports as usual, either.
At the conclusion of the meetings of the United States Olympic Committee Sunday in Colorado Springs, The Athletics Congress, the governing body for track and field, announced that if Duke wins the election on Nov. 16, it will probably not hold its trials in New Orleans, as scheduled.
So come next June, if Louisianans opt for Duke, the former grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan and a longtime neo-Nazi, all those American athletes will be hauling their javelins and hammers and shots and track shoes to some other site in another state.


General Post Office Journal; What's Lost in the Mail Is Found at the Auction
Whoever mailed the suit of armor may still be wondering why it never arrived.
Likewise the camel saddle.
And the panties with a built-in cassette player.
They are among the more bizarre objects that have wound up on the postal auction block in New York City because they had nowhere else to go.


For Problem Readers, a Prenatal Magazine
A new magazine that explains prenatal care in terms that can be understood by people with limited reading ability made its debut today, the result of an unusual team effort by doctors specializing in pregnancy and childbirth, along with publishers and a literacy group.
The glossy magazine, "Baby on the Way: BASICS," is to be distributed this week at 4,000 sites, including public health clinics, state health agencies, doctors' offices, schools and other offices in the United States and Canada.


Jay C. Lipner, 46, A Lawyer-Lobbyist For Victims of AIDS
Jay C. Lipner, a lawyer who worked to expand AIDS patients' access to new drugs, insurance coverage and government assistance, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 46 years old.
He died of AIDS, his family said.


Tuxtla Journal; The Power and the Glory, With a Singular Twist
In the lush highlands that connect Mexico and Guatemala, the value of land is measured in the patchwork of tiny plots that rises more steeply than farmers would seem able to climb.
For decades, the mountains and surrounding jungle have been a setting for undeclared war between landowners and Indian peasants, and a parallel conflict between liberal priests who have encouraged the peasants to organize and heavy-handed governors sent from Mexico City to keep control.


It Was a Hoax: Lenin's Not for Sale
In these days of post-Communist turmoil, the Soviets are desperate.
But not that desperate.
FYI, a business quarterly published by Forbes magazine, admitted yesterday that it had pulled a hoax by announcing in its latest issue that Soviet officials had decided to sell Lenin's embalmed body for at least $15 million.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day in some copies last Thursday misstated the position being assumed by Robert W. Cardy at the Carpenter Technology Corporation.
It is chief executive.
He will also remain president and chief operating officer.


A Designer in Spite of Himself
FOR those who believe in being sensitive of the environment during the holidays, John Rossi, a stationery distributor, has designed wrapping paper made of recycled material.


Sigmund Rothschild, An Art Appraiser, 74
Sigmund Rothschild, an art restorer and appraiser of paintings and other collectibles, died yesterday in Del Mar, Calif.
He was 74 years old and lived in Del Mar.
He died of complications from diabetes, said a former colleague, Juliana C. Nash of Manhattan.


Long Wait for Anderson Appears to Be Over
After four months of strained negotiations fraught with long stretches of silence and bouts of frustration, the New Jersey Nets apparently agreed to contract terms today with their No. 1 draft choice, Kenny Anderson.
A league official said that the two sides were sorting out language in the contract and that an announcement might come Thursday.


House Panel Approves Scaled-Down Bank Bill
The House Banking Committee today approved a scaled-down version of a broader banking overhaul measure that was overwhelmingly defeated on Monday by the House of Representatives.
The approval of a bill that would provide more money for the nearly bankrupt bank insurance fund and tighten bank regulation followed agreement late Tuesday night between Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady and the committee's Democratic and Republican leadership to put off more controversial issues.
The approach reflects the view that the need to strengthen the bank insurance fund is so urgent and the other issues so politically volatile that the two had to be split.


New Mayor in Bridgeport Faces the Same Old Problems
Joseph P. Ganim presented himself to this troubled city's voters as a sort of anti-matter alternative to the incumbent Mayor, Mary C. Moran: what she was, he was not, and vice versa.
Where Ms.
Moran was hot-tempered, impetuous and difficult to get along with -- traits that many residents in this tough-minded city still admire -- Mr.
Ganim said he would be a cool, decisive coalition builder.
Ms.
Moran, he charged, had dragged the city down over her two-year term and made it a symbol of urban failure with a bankruptcy filing that drew national headlines.
He promised that he would make Connecticut's largest city great again, first of all by making it safe.
One hundred new police officers would be added to the force.


Court Appears Skeptical Of Argument for Prayer
The question before the Supreme Court today was whether public school graduation ceremonies can include benedictions that refer to God.
But that was only the starting point for an intense and lively argument that ranged widely over the landscape where church and state meet, and left the Justices sounding unexpectedly wary about changing that landscape very drastically.
The case, which could well be a vehicle for unsettling decades of precedent on the relationship between church and state, is one of the most important of the Supreme Court's term.
At issue is an appeal by school officials in Providence, R.I., of a ruling that the inclusion of prayers in a middle-school graduation had the unconstitutional effect of advancing religion.


Quarterback Suspended
Alabama quarterback DANNY WOODSON , the Southeastern Conference's second-leading passer, was suspended indefinitely yesterday for violating team rules and will miss Saturday's game against L.S.U.
Coach GENE STALLINGS would not say what Woodson did.
A freshman, JAY BARKER , will replace Woodson, who has completed 64 of 101 passes for 882 yards, with four touchdowns and three interceptions. (AP)


MAXWELL'S DEATH IS CALLED NATURAL
Robert Maxwell, the British publisher whose body was found in the Atlantic on Tuesday, apparently died before he fell into the sea from his yacht, a Spanish judge in charge of investigating the case said today.
"Our preliminary finding is that he did not drown, but that he died before he fell into the water," said Judge Luis Gutierrez Sanjuan.
"All the signs are that this was a natural death, probably a heart attack."


Accounts
*
Wolverine Worldwide Inc., Rockford, Mich., to the Chicago office of BBDO Worldwide to handle international advertising for its Brooks and Wolverine lines of apparel and footwear.
The budget is in excess of $5 million, though additional billings will be allocated to other BBDO offices.
The domestic portion of the account continues to be handled by Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis. *
Scent Overnight Ltd., New York, to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Direct, New York, for direct-response advertising to promote the introduction of an overnight fragrance delivery service, which uses a toll-free telephone number.
The campaign, which has a budget of about $2.5 million, is scheduled to begin appearing in select markets in February, pending a national roll-out planned for next October.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.62
4.94
7.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.62
4.76
7.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.69
4.81
7.05
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.14
7.19
8.40
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.99
8.02
8.68
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
9.00
9.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.83
6.83
7.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


We're Still Training Salvadorans to Kill
To the Editor:
Nov. 16 will be the second anniversary of the brutal slayings of six Salvadoran Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and her daughter.
Five of the nine soldiers arrested in the case were trained at Fort Benning, Ga., according to a Congressional task force sent to El Salvador.


Bridge
For players in the New York area attempting to climb the ladder of tournament success, an important step in the ascent is the Harter Cup, a double knockout team championship that starts each fall and lasts almost a year.
Each player must be below life master rank when competition begins.
The 1990-91 winners were Bob De Grande, of Hoboken, N.J.; Liz Dvorkin and Steven Kaplan, of Manhattan; Albert Tom, of Flushing, Queens, and Quien Wang, of Woodside, Queens.
Playing at the Manhattan Club at 23 West 73d Street, a week ago, they won the final by the slender margin of 6 imps.


High-Risk Procedures
To the Editor:
Re "Unexpected Defiance Greets AIDS Guidelines" (Science Times, Oct. 15): A good starting point for an official list of high-risk procedures for transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus is the list of invasive procedures prepared by the Centers for Disease Control (Morbidity and Mortality Reports, July 12):


Wary Bidding at Auctions Reflects a Weak Art Market
Judging from the results of the last two nights of auctions of Impressionist and modern paintings, drawings and sculpture at Christie's and Sotheby's, it appears that the art market is still struggling.
At both sales, the adage "quality sells" proved truer than ever.
But even quality, these days, must come at the right price.
Christie's began the two-night round of auctions on Tuesday with the highly touted collection of paintings from the estate of Burton and Emily Tremaine.
As the bidding began, it seemed as if the whole art world was dancing on a tightrope.


Safeway Ratings Raised by S.&amp; P.
Safeway Inc., the big supermarket chain based in Oakland, Calif., has announced that the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation has raised the rating on its senior secured debt to BB, from BB-.
The company also said Tuesday that the rating on its senior unsecured debt had been raised to BB-, from B+.


Big Shifts at Salomon Bros.; Directors Will Be Replaced
In a move that underscores the firm's rapidly changing culture, Salomon Brothers announced a large management shake-up yesterday, under which its board would be replaced and power would be spread across more Salomon divisions.
The changes, while broad in nature, may signal that Salomon is preparing to name Deryck C. Maughan, the chief operating officer, as the successor to Warren E. Buffett, the interim chairman who assumed the post after John H. Gutfreund resigned in August.


CHRONICLE
The Pen American Center, the writers' association, plans a demonstration outside the United Nations at Dag Hammarskjold Plaza on Nov. 11 at 1 P.M., to support the British author SALMAN RUSHDIE.
It will mark the 1,000th day since Mr.
Rushdie was forced into hiding after an Iranian death sentence pronounced because his novel, "The Satanic Verses," was deemed insulting to the Islamic faith.


Photos by Radar Hint at Ice on Poles of Mercury
As the planet nearest the Sun, Mercury bakes in temperatures hot enough to melt lead, but new radar observations have revealed that the planet's polar regions, which get little sunlight, appear to be covered with vast sheets of water ice.
Scientists said the discovery, announced yesterday, was surprising and exciting and could have important implications for future exploration of the Moon.
If Mercury has reservoirs of frozen water, they speculated, the Moon, where conditions are somewhat similar, might also have some polar ice that has gone undetected.


Empty Offices Offer Guide To the Region
There are enough empty offices across the New York metropolitan area to fill 15 World Trade Centers, according to some experts.
Planners, real-estate executives and local officials say the shape and health of the region are likely to be defined largely by the way those offices fill up -- or fail to fill up -- when and if an economic recovery begins.
Company choices about whether to locate in New York City, in the downtowns of cities like Stamford or White Plains or in the suburban office parks that sprouted across the region in the 1980's are likely to influence not only the vitality of Manhattan but also the quality of life throughout the metropolitan area.


Few Troubled Insurers Seen
A review of nearly 2,600 insurance companies released yesterday shows that most remain financially secure, despite the industry's problems with junk bonds and bad mortgages.
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, a financial rating agency, said its review showed that companies responsible for 87 percent of some $457 billion of insurance premiums in the United States were "adequate or better" in terms of financial health.


EXECUTIVES
*
Geraghty &amp; Miller Inc., Plainview, L.I., an environmental services company, appointed Robert B. Ziegler senior vice president of operations, Edward R. Rothschild chief operating officer and John McCusker senior vice president of finance. *
Nichols Research Corp., Huntsville, Ala., an aerospace and professional services company, named Dr.
Lawrence R. Greenwood president and chief operating officer.


THE 1991 ELECTION: Louisiana; Bush Denounces Duke As Racist and Charlatan
In his strongest comments to date on the Louisiana governor's race, President Bush said today that State Representative David Duke was a charlatan unfit to hold public office because he has espoused racist and neo-Nazi beliefs.
The President's remarks came after a statement by Mr.
Duke on Tuesday that equated the extermination of Jews in Nazi Germany with affirmative action programs in the United States.


Attacks on Israeli Forces in Lebanon Resume
After a four-day lull, pro-Iranian Muslim fundamentalist guerrillas resumed bombing attacks today against Israeli troops and their southern Lebanese militia allies despite a warning of strong retaliation from an Israeli general.
A bomb at a roadside went off near an outpost of the South Lebanon Army, the Israeli-sponsored militia, at the northern edge of the border buffer zonethat the Lebanese force controls in conjunction with Israeli troops, the militia's Voice of the South radio station reported.
It said there were no casualties.


Books of The Times; Writers on the Deep Imprint a Film Can Leave
The Movie That Changed My Life Edited by David Rosenberg 304 pages. Viking. $21.95.
Can a movie change your life, as the poet David Rosenberg suggests in the title of the lively and varied collection of essays he has edited, "The Movie That Changed My Life"?
Of course, the movie that changed most of our lives was the first one we ever saw, if only because it suggested how we would be spending from 5,000 to 10,000 hours of our next 60 or 70 years.


Japan, in Rare Move, Charges Price-Fixing of Food Wrap
Attempting to show it is getting tougher in enforcing long-neglected laws against monopolies, Japan's Fair Trade Commission charged eight major chemical companies today with fixing the price of plastic food wrap, the first criminal charges the commission has brought in 17 years.
Although some described the charges as more symbol than substance, since the food wrap business is much smaller than other industries where price fixing is said to be rife, most agreed that the symbol was a potentially powerful one.
The commission also conceded that the charges had resulted from United States pressure to open the Japanese economy.


CHRONICLE
DAVID HAMPTON, a convicted confidence man whose exploits inspired the hit play "Six Degrees of Separation" by JOHN GUARE was arrested yesterday and accused of taking on yet a new identity.
He was charged with impersonating a police officer and with sexual abuse.
But just what happened, and why, remains unclear.
The police said that Mr.
Hampton, 27 years old, and another man walked into the Midtown South Precinct station house on West 35th Street at about 5:30 A.M. yesterday, and that the other man, whom they did not identify, gave the following account: Mr.
Hampton invited him into a taxi at 48th Street and Eighth Avenue at 4:45 A.M., grabbed him, and said: "You're under arrest. I'm a police officer. Don't move. Don't attempt to jump out or I'll blow your brains out."


With Soviet Aid in Limbo, Wheat and Soybeans Drop
Wheat and soybean futures prices fell sharply yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade as more traders gave up hope that the Bush Administration would announce a new Soviet food-aid package soon.
Wheat for delivery in December settled at $3.57 1/4 a bushel in Chicago, 5 1/4 cents below Tuesday's settlement; December corn fell 2 3/4 cents, to $2.46 1/2 a bushel; December oats fell 1/2 cent, to $1.29 3/4 a bushel, and November soybeans dropped 6 cents, to $5.57 a bushel.


A Traveling Showroom Of Design
Hot dogs and ice cream -- this is the stuff usually sold from vans on the street.
But next week, architects and designers in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut can order wood cabinets handpainted to resemble chestnut, iridescent silks to cover sofas and rolls of wallpaper -- from a van.
The 27-foot van is painted hunter green with "David Parrett and Associates" in gold lettering.
Mr.
Parrett, who represents eight manufacturers of home furnishings, has modernized the idea of the traveling salesman.
Outfitted with cabinets painted faux chestnut, silk curtains, a damask-covered loveseat, a television, a videocassette recorder, a phone and a refrigerator filled with cold drinks, the van is Mr.
Parrett's answer to the recession: a showroom on wheels.


Inventor Finds Ally In Philips
Gilbert P. Hyatt, the California inventor who was granted a patent for a computer on a chip last year, has enlisted a strong ally in his quest to receive millions of dollars in royalties from the electronics industry.
Philips N.V., the Dutch electronics giant, said today that it had licensed 23 of Mr.
Hyatt's United States patents, including the one for a computer on a chip.
Philips also said it would, in effect, become Mr.
Hyatt's agent, helping him license his patents to other manufacturers.


Events: Landmarks And Heavenly Gates
Protecting History
Municipal Art Society, Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 935-3960.
A panel discussion about the New York City Council and the landmarks preservation process will be held at 6 P.M. on Wednesday.
Admission: $5.
Reservations required.
Painted Cloth
American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.
Two artists displaying large-scale fabric works at the museum will give talks on their work: Robert Kushner on Tuesday and Sam Gilliam on Nov. 19.
Each talk starts at 6:30 P.M. and will be followed by a reception.
Tickets, including museum admission, $10 (members, $5).
Masterly Gates
Brooklyn Center for the Urban Environment; (718) 788-8549.
A walking tour of the perimeter of Prospect Park to examine the park gates and entrances designed by McKim, Mead &amp; White will be held from 1 to 4 P.M. on Sunday.
Meet at the Grand Army Plaza entrance, Flatbush Avenue at Prospect Park West.  $6 for adults; $3 for those 12 and younger and 65 and older.
An Italian Designer
Peter Joseph Gallery, 745 Fifth Avenue (57th Street); (212) 751-5500.
Furniture by the architect and designer Gaetano Pesce, including tables and chairs of unusual materials like felt, colored urethane, rags and sandbags, is on display through Nov. 30.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Tuesday through Saturday.
Free.
Changing Landscapes
Storefront for Art and Architecture, 97 Kenmare Street (Lafayette Street); (212) 431-5795.
"The New American Ghetto," with photographs by Camilo Jose Vergara, shows decay in four American cities and analyses of neighborhoods by students at the Graduate School of Architecture at Columbia University.
It runs from today through Dec. 21.
Hours: noon to 6 P.M.
Tuesday through Saturday.
Free.


In the Nation; Cuomo and Wofford
If Mario Cuomo decides to run for President -- a question not yet settled in his mind -- he almost certainly will not resign as Governor of New York, even though he would feel it necessary to wage time-consuming campaigns in most state primaries.
Mr.
Cuomo is "very close" to a decision that he will not quit as Governor even if he enters the Presidential race.
After nine years in office, and facing "the hardest part" of his tenure -- the state's and New York City's deficit problems -- he cannot "imagine dropping it here and saying there's something more important."


THE 1991 ELECTION: The Loser; The Search for a Culprit In Thornburgh's Defeat
For Murray Dickman, the chief political adviser to Dick Thornburgh, Tuesday, Oct. 29, was an ominous sign of things to come.
On that morning, a poll by the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette showed that his boss's lead over Senator Harris Wofford, Mr.
Thornburgh's Democratic opponent in the race for the United States Senate, had been sliced one percentage point.
Then, after Mr.
Dickman had dropped off his boss at the airport, Mr.
Dickman's car broke down.


FEDERAL RESERVE CONTINUES PUSHING LOAN COSTS DOWN
With the economy at a standstill and political pressure mounting, the Federal Reserve today reduced the interest rates it controls to levels not seen since the 1970's.
Banks across the country responded immediately and reduced their prime rate, the rate that determines the cost of many mortgages and other consumer and commercial loans, to 7 1/2 percent from 8 percent, the lowest since 1987.
Credit card rates will probably not be affected, but the lower bank rates could save money for people who plan to borrow money to meet Christmas expenses.


Craftsman's Handiwork
HENRY LAPP, an Amish furniture maker and folk artist who lived from 1862 to 1904, was born deaf.
To communicate with prospective customers and to entice them to buy his furniture, he painted his designs in watercolors in a small notebook and drove a buggy from his home near Intercourse, Pa., to Philadelphia, where he showed his sketches.


Removing the Edge From 'What Is Sexy'
"What Is Sexy" in the 1990's may be much less controversial than what was sexy in the 1980's.
The latest commercials for Jovan Musk fragrances, scheduled to be introduced today, continue the "What Is Sexy" theme that generated headlines in 1987.
But in the four new spots, "the edge is off a little bit," said Victor Zast, senior vice president of marketing at Quintessence Inc. in Chicago, which makes Jovan.


A Special Risk for Leukemia Patients
Children who are successfully treated for leukemia are at a disturbingly high risk of developing a second tumor, particularly a tumor of the brain, scientists have reported.
In the largest follow-up study ever done on children treated for acute lymphoblastic leukemia, the most common childhood cancer, scientists found that the young patients contracted a second cancer of any type at about seven times the rate that would be expected among people their age who had not suffered from leukemia.


Big Honor on the Line
Florida State linebacker MARVIN JONES has become the first sophomore finalist in the 22-year history of the Lombardi Award, given annually to the nation's top collegiate lineman or linebacker.
Also listed in Tuesday's nominations was Washington defensive tackle STEVE EMTMAN , who is a junior.
The nomination added to the speculation that Emtman will be the No. 1 National Football League draft choice in April.
Also nominated were defensive tackle SANTANA DOTSON of Baylor and offensive tackle GREG SKREPENAK of Michigan.
The award will be presented Dec. 5 at a dinner that raises money for the American Cancer Society.


Japan's Chief Regrets Scrapping of Bush Trip
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa expressed regret today over the cancellation of President Bush's visit to Japan, while his aides struggled to come up with a new plan to overcome recent strains in the relationship with the United States.
Officials had hoped that Mr.
Bush's trip, which had been scheduled for this month, would arrest the rising mutual criticism between Japan and the United States, especially focused on the approaching 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.


Clean and Simple Lines
MICHAEL WARD collects Arts and Crafts furniture and pottery.
George Fontanals makes Arts and Crafts-style furniture.
When they met two and a half years ago, guess what they talked about?


Trial in Gay Man's Killing Opens in Court in Queens
Testimony in a murder case gay-rights groups have called the "gay Howard Beach trial" began yesterday with a friend's description of the dying moments of a gay man beaten with a hammer and stabbed to death after what prosecutors say was a hunt by three men for a homosexual to kill.
The victim, Julio Rivera, was killed in a Jackson Heights, Queens, schoolyard that the prosecution contends was known as a gay cruising strip.


Guarding a City's Terra Cotta Haven
THE hearts of the Friends of Terra Cotta were broken two years ago when the Marine Grill was razed.
The majestic ceramic walls at the restaurant on Avenue of the Americas at 34th Street in Manhattan bore Art Deco harbor scenes.
Without warning, its owners reduced it to a storage space for a Gap store.
But the Friends, who are concerned with architectural ceramics, have found another colorful terra cotta-trimmed space in New York City.
It contains Fiori, an Italian restaurant on Park Avenue at 33d Street.


THE 1991 ELECTION: Election Roundup; Wave of Voter Discontent Sweeps Many From Office
Tuesday's elections across the country were a sharp expression of voter anger, with mixed results for Democrats and Republicans.
The Democratic Governor of Mississippi, Ray Mabus, lost to a conservative Republican businessman, and in the day's most celebrated contest, Pennsylvania's Senate race, Harris Wofford scored a major triumph for the Democrats by defeating Dick Thornburgh, the former Attorney General.
On a local level, new people will be moving into mayor's offices in several cities.


Byelorussian Jews Skeptical About Their New Popularity
"I am looking for a wife to emigrate to Israel. Any age. Write 220036 Minsk."
"I want to meet Jewish man, 27-35 yrs, not shorter than 1m70  [ 5 feet 7 ] , nice build/disposition, unmarried. Me: 25 yrs; 1m60  [ 5 feet 3 ] ; Byelorussian woman. Tel: Brest 226-10."


U.S. Pushing States to Curb Water Pollution
Seeking to push states into complying with a Congressional directive to make water cleaner, the Environmental Protection Agency said today that it would impose Federal rules unless 22 states and territories set their own limits for discharges of toxic chemicals in lakes and rivers by early next year.
The proposed action, announced by William K. Reilly, the Administrator of the environmental agency, affects chemical plants, sewage treatment installations and other industrial factories that discharge millions of pounds of toxic chemicals into water each year.


Comptroller Rejected for A 2d Term
The Senate Banking Committee killed President Bush's nomination of Robert L. Clarke to a second term as Comptroller of the Currency today, first rejecting the nomination and then blocking further consideration of it by the full Senate.
Both 12-to-9 votes were strictly along party lines.
They came a day after the President and Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady had lobbied the Democratic members of the committee in the hope that they would be able to turn two of them to join the Republican minority and approve Mr.
Clarke's nomination to serve another five years as one of the nation's senior banking regulators.


K.O. Donelian, 77; Worked on A-Bomb And Nuclear Plants
Khatchik O. Donelian, who worked on the first atomic bomb and designed nuclear plants and whose inventions included a smoke detector similar to those in widespread use today, died on Oct. 25 at Fish Memorial Hospital in New Smyrna Beach, Fla.
He was 77 years old and resided in New Smyrna Beach.
He died of liver failure, his family said.


Gaffney Sees Quieter Politics in Suffolk
The morning after his election as Suffolk County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, in a move that was as symbolic as it was ordinary, woke up early and drove his daughter Beth Anne to school and picked up the family cat, Sandy, from the neighborhood veterinarian.
After four years of partisan squabbling in Suffolk County, Mr.
Gaffney recaptured the county government for the Republican Party, which has controlled it for most of the last two decades, and he saw his election as a return to a quieter, less tumultuous style of government.


New Answer to a Riddle Wrapped In Elgar's 'Enigma' Variations
A noted British pianist may have solved the 92-year-old riddle of the hidden theme in Sir Edward Elgar's "Enigma" Variations, according to an authoritative scholar who is now amazed only that it took so long.
"What is really astonishing is that nobody has come up with it before," said Jerrold Northrop Moore, a leading musicological authority on Elgar, who revealed the possible cracking of the riddle by Joseph Cooper, in The Sunday Telegraph.


THE 1991 ELECTION: The Winner Man in the News: Harris Llewellyn Wofford Jr.; Backstage No Longer
Senator Harris Wofford of Pennsylvania toiled for decades in obscurity as a backstage political operator and idea man, gaining the ears of figures like President John F. Kennedy and the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
But his election to the Senate on Tuesday marked Mr.
Wofford's ascent to center stage as a political giant slayer.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR the first few weeks of his life, Brenden Thompson brought his mother a mixture of joy and misery.
He fussed and cried constantly, and never slept more than two hours at a time.
He rejected breast feeding in favor of bottles of formula.
"He was such a voracious eater that he would work up a sweat when he ate," recalled Shelly Thompson, Brenden's mother, who provides child care for other families in her home in Golden Valley, Minn.
"I thought I would go nuts. Once, at 3 A.M., after a night of his constantly wanting to be fed and held, I completely broke down and cried, 'Please let me sleep!' "


Agencies Are Paying More To Lure Top Creative Talent
EVEN as the advertising industry suffers through its worst slump in two decades, salaries for a handful of top creative executives are soaring.
The reason?
"The law of supply and demand," said Jerry Fields, chairman of Jerry Fields Associates, an executive recruiting firm in New York.
As agencies, eager to woo jaded consumers, place an increasingly higher premium on creativity, they must pay an increasingly higher premium for the people expected to make creative ads.


Chandeliers Just for You
Gem Monogram and Cut Glass
628 Broadway near Houston Street, New York, N.Y. 10012; (212) 674-8960.
Lead crystal has a number of attractive properties, says Martin Noren, senior president of Gem Monogram and Cut Glass, makers of custom chandeliers.
It has clarity, weight and is easier to cut than ordinary window glass.
"And it sounds nice when you hit it," he added.


An Era Ends, Another Begins: South Africa to Go to Olympics
South Africa will send a racially integrated team of athletes to the Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain, next July, ending an absence of 32 years, sports officials announced here tonight.
But disputes remain over the flag, anthem and emblem to be used by the South African athletes.


THE 1991 ELECTION: Pennsylvania; Wofford Helped by Voter Mood Swing
As Senator Harris Wofford basked in victory and television lights during a morning of nonstop interviews in a hotel lobby here, his two top campaign strategists sat nearby, sipping coffee and marveling at their strategy's success.
"This is the rarest thing in politics, an upset landslide," said James Carville, a 47-year-old strategist from Louisiana, whose partner, 30-year-old Paul E. Begala of Houston was the Wofford campaign's manager.


VW Is Offering A New Mini-Van
Volkswagen of America Inc. said its new Eurovan mini-van will go on sale in the United States in March.
A Volkswagen spokesman, Larry Nutson, said the company expected to sell at least 10,000 Eurovans next year and 15,000 a year later.


1915 Tub, 1920's Bar, 1991 Door
FOR nine years, people searching for architectural artifacts -- a 19th-century pew, a porcelain tub perched on four chubby feet -- often went to the Great American Salvage Company at 34 Cooper Square in Manhattan.
But last December, the store closed its doors.


Essay; The Great Reshuffle
The Great Reshuffle is under way in the lives of nations.
The Era of Political Dissolution is overlapping the Age of Economic Reassembly.
Political imperialism is on the wane.
Russia is spinning off its losing acquisitions; Yugoslavia is breaking up bloodily, Czechoslovakia amicably; the Quebecers may part from Canadians and Scots quit Brits.


Quiet, Everyone; Woody's Filming
Every year about this time, Woody Allen grapples with his sexual obsessions, his Jewish angst, his existential despair and man's inability to find God -- or a plumber on weekends.
This time the director is doing it while running loose at an all-women's college.
On Monday he could be found pacing across a fourth-floor classroom in the English department of Barnard College, directing himself in the role of a writing professor.
In the scene he was filming, one of the professor's students, played by 20-year-old Emily Lloyd, turns in a term paper on unusual sexual practices in the early Renaissance.


The Speaker's Salvation
Congress and House Speaker Tom Foley both won reprieves when Mr.
Foley's home state of Washington refused to impose a 12-year term limit on members of Congress.
The limit would have ended Mr.
Foley's career -- and the impulse would surely have spread.
It may still.
Mr.
Foley was right to campaign hard against this unwise initiative.
Such artificial limits constitute reckless vengeance against public officials.
But voters remain dismayed by governmental excess and now the time has come for the Speaker to put his energies behind a reasonable remedy.


Ukraine Signs Economic Link to Soviet Republics
The Ukraine, the second largest Soviet republic, belatedly signed an economic agreement today linking it with other republics, dropping itself into place as a potentially major piece for the shape of a new Soviet Union.
The signing, which took place in the Kremlin, came after the Ukrainian Parliament in Kiev voted today to authorize participation in the new economic free-trade zone, but only on the condition that the final agreement be returned for ratification after a republic-wide referendum on independence next month.


Market Place; Breakfast Cereals Lose Some Luster
CHECKED the coupons in a Sunday newspaper lately?
There are enough in one day's offerings to save shoppers more than $12 on breakfast cereals from General Mills and Kellogg.
The recent costly marketing battles between the largest ready-to-eat cereal makers, while good for consumers, have taken some snap and crackle out of several analysts' views on the stocks.
"The competition clearly has intensified," said John M. McMillin, an analyst with Prudential Securities in New York, who is advising investors to hold the cereal stocks.
One reason is the drag on earnings from the costly marketing battles.
They added $100 million, a 25 percent increase, to Kellogg's selling and administrative expenses in the third quarter.


Review/Dance; The Works Of 4 Women Diverge Widely
There was something for just about everyone at the New Stuff program at Performance Space 122 on Sunday night.
The evening got off to an elegantly exuberant start with "In Endless Description," choreographed and performed by Lucy Guerin and Sarah Perron to music by Tim Otto that was as juicily textured as the dance was sleek.
Small Ms.
Guerin and tall Ms.
Perron are a perfect match, crisp and resilient dancers who maintain a piquant sense of distance from the audience.
The dance progressed interestingly from simple, slow parallel movement phrases to enjoyable flailing at pillars and at empty space.
But it was the skin of the piece at least as much as its flesh and bones that drew one into the dance, from the music and dancers to witty, uncredited costumes that clothed them in red tops and green trunks wrapped in sacks of red and green tulle.


Aiding Amazon Forest Gains Support in West
Western countries, including the United States, are becoming more favorable to the idea of a major international program to protect Amazon forests and jungles, diplomats in Bonn and Washington say.
For the last several years, the German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, has been the only leader of a wealthy industrial country who has pressed the cause of rain forest preservation at international summits.
As recently as last July, he sought action at the London summit of the Group of Seven industrialized democracies, but without notable success.


Politics of Running Fall Into Step
Zola Budd Pieterse is eight years older and four inches taller, and she carries a few more pounds than she did when she rocketed into world competition as a 17-year-old prodigy who shattered middle-distance records while running barefoot.
As Zola Budd, she took more than her share of knocks, not just in her traumatic collision with Mary Decker of the United States at the 1984 Olympic Games in Los Angeles, but also in the politics of sport and her private life.


F.T.C. Settlement In Vista Takeover
The Federal Trade Commission approved a consent agreement with Germany's RWE-DEA A.G., settling charges that RWE's acquisition of the Vista Chemical Company would reduce competition in the market for high-purity alcohol process alumina used in refining.
Alumina is an oxide of aluminum.


Men Say Worry About Harassment Leads Them to Tone Down Conduct
The nation's new sensitivity to sexual harassment is stirring men to rethink the protocols of working with women.
Out of respect for women or out of fear of recrimination, they say they are trying harder to keep lewd jokes, raunchy language and the voyeur in their blood to themselves.


Maxwell's Son Cites Commitment to Daily News
Kevin F. H. Maxwell, the publisher of the New York newspaper The Daily News since his father's death on Tuesday, said today that he would visit the paper's offices in Manhattan later this week, and possibly name a new, permanent deputy.
"From the family's perspective, The Daily News was Bob's last great coup as a businessman," his 32-year-old son said in an interview in his office today.
Mr.
Maxwell said he would pick up where his father left off and assure "the staff, the unions, the advertisers, the suppliers and the readers that the family commitment remains absolutely solid."


Pepsico Sets Its Sights on Spain
Faced with sluggish sales at home, Pepsico Inc. said yesterday that it would invest $1 billion in Spain to build soft-drink plants, open fast-food restaurants and set up an elaborate computerized system to track snack-food sales.
The five-year program is part of an aggressive plan by Pepsi to expand overseas, where its businesses have been growing twice as fast as those in the United States.
In fact, Pepsico has already spent $4 billion in the last three years to build up its foreign presence, said Wayne Calloway, the company's president and chief executive.
He spoke in an interview yesterday from Spain.


No Settlement Seen
DOUG ALLEN , assistant executive director of the National Football League Players Association, said yesterday that he didn't expect the owners' latest contract offer to be accepted.
The offer, which contains some free-agency provisions, was made recently to lawyers representing players who have filed antitrust suits against the league seeking free agency.
"I fully expect the case to go to trial without a settlement," said Allen.
The union has renounced collective bargaining rights for the players but still keeps in contact with the lawyers and players involved in the lawsuits.


Florio Still Firm on Some Issues, But Vows to Work With G.O.P.
Giving a hint of what the next two years will be like in New Jersey government, Gov.
Jim Florio pledged today to cooperate with the new Republican-controlled Legislature but said there were some issues on which he would be unyielding.
A day after Democrats suffered a devastating defeat at the polls, Mr.
Florio met with reporters for an hourlong news conference during which he bristled, joked and jousted with reporters over questions about how much his economic policies and his own unpopularity contributed to the outcome.


New York City Needs Money for Schools, but Also for Teachers; Too Many Supervisors
To the Editor:
To "See the Future, in the Schools" (editorial, Oct. 28), one need only look at the figures you cite.


Deep Sixed: Canadiens Put an End to Rangers' Streak
Playing against the most disciplined team in the league last night, the Rangers made silly, junior-hockey mistakes that began on the ice at Madison Square Garden and carried into the corridor outside their locker room.
There, after the game, frustrated by a 4-1 thumping by the Montreal Canadiens and by a very untimely penalty call, Tie Domi belittled the former playing career of Referee Paul Stewart and was hit for a gross misconduct.


Industry Bid For Insurer Is Rejected
The California Insurance Commissioner today rejected a revised bid for the Executive Life Insurance Company from a group backed by the insurance industry and said he would choose instead between two other competing offers.
The commissioner, John Garamendi, said the industry group had failed to come up with sufficient financial backing to make sure that it could handle any further substantial declines in the value of Executive Life's huge junk bond portfolio.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
CUTTING and mounting gypsum wallboard, or drywall, is fairly easy, but joining the seams between panels can be tricky.
Patience and practice are the keys, but if you are a beginner, knowing what to expect can help.
Seams between panels are joined with layers of joint compound -- an adhesive putty -- and special paper tape.
The trick is to apply the compound in increasingly wide, thin layers, leaving no obvious hump over the seams, and no ridges, grooves or bumps, which will be obvious after the walls are painted or papered.


Toasters. Beefcake. Even Clothes.
STRIPES are the new plaid.
Transparency is the tease of choice.
Hemlines don't matter, but cheek is chic, as in dresses and skirts that barely cover the territory.
So far in the American fashion shows this week, models have become expert at gracefully tugging down spandex dresses in anatomy-covering moves.


Finances Cloud Tampa Bay Team's Situation
The elevator was going down, but his expansion franchise isn't, Phil Esposito said.
He emphasized this as he stepped into the lobby and continued the conversation yesterday on the plush carpet of the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan.
He was there for a meeting of the National Hockey League Board of Governors, who wanted to know more about Esposito's financial plans as president of the Tampa Bay Lightning.
Along with the Ottawa Senators, Tampa is to join the league next season, as long as Esposito's group pays the entry fee and arranges a lease for a place to play.


Maxwell Sons Step Out of Shadow
There are three doors into Robert Maxwell's sprawling office on the ninth floor of the Daily Mirror building here.
One leads to his secretaries, a second opens onto a hallway and reception area, and a third connects directly with an adjoining suite he shared with his youngest son, Kevin.
Now Kevin F. H. Maxwell faces a daunting task with the sudden death of his father, the flamboyant publisher whose body was found Tuesday in the Atlantic Ocean off the Canary Islands, where he had been sailing on his yacht.
Kevin must try to reassure nervous investors and bankers that he will be able to hold together his father's tangled global empire before it collapses under the weight of its debt.


New York City Needs Money for Schools, but Also for Teachers
To the Editor:
"See the Future, in the Schools" (editorial, Oct. 28), calling for increased resources for New York City's public schools, is most welcome.
However, in noting the needs of our school system, you overlook what could be the most crucial: the need to attract and retain the best teachers for our 980,000 students.


Owner of Observer Looks to L.I. Papers
Arthur L. Carter, the owner of The New York Observer, said yesterday that he planned to acquire a 50 percent interest in The East Hampton Star and The Sag Harbor Herald from the Rattray family.
He said the transaction would occur "probably on Monday," at a cost he declined to specify.


Art in Review
Tom Doyle
Bill Bace Gallery 584 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through tomorrow
In Tom Doyle's 15th one-man show in New York City since 1961, two large wood sculptures crowd the gallery like giant insects or disjointed handmade bridges.
"Cobh," the larger and stronger work, has a kind of nautical character, as if the artist had propellers or rudders in mind while he was fashioning its big, flat-sided shapes.
Each part seems the result of a few broad, well-placed knife cuts.
The suggestion of whittling on shapes so big makes for an unexpected wit and intimacy, which are additionally buoyed by the arching tripod composition.


John J. Anglim, Stock Executive, 82
John J. Anglim, a retired Wall Street executive and a former member of the New York Stock Exchange's Board of Governors, died on Monday at Morristown Memorial Hospital in New Jersey.
He was 82 years old and lived in Madison, N.J.
Mr.
Anglim, who was born in New York City, went directly into the securities business after graduating from high school.
For 28 years he worked for W. E. Hutton &amp; Company, and was a partner when he retired.


News Reverberates Through Basketball, And Well Beyond It
Even before Magic Johnson announced that he was infected with the AIDS virus and would retire from basketball to serve as a spokesman in the fight against AIDS, there was evidence that his message was getting through.
"Are you kidding me?" said Lawrence Taylor when he was told about reports that Johnson had tested positive for the virus.
"That totally blows my mind. I'm going to get my test done tomorrow."


Brooklyn Philharmonic
Dennis Russell Davies is to conduct his first concert as principal conductor of the Brooklyn Philharmonic this weekend at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene.
On the program are Villa-Lobos's "Choros" No. 8, with Voices Saintpaulia; Peggy Glanville-Hicks's "Etruscan" Concerto, with the pianist Keith Jarrett; the New York premiere of Mr.
Jarrett's "Bridge of Light," with the violist Patricia McCarty, and the world premiere of Terry Riley's "June Buddhas." Performances are tonight and tomorrow at 8, and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets are $12 to $25.
Information: (718) 636-4100.


Art in Review
Patty Martori
Pat Hearn Gallery 39 Wooster Street SoHo Through tomorrow
In Patty Martori's disturbing sculptural works, home is not a refuge, but rather a prime battleground in the war between the sexes.
The central pieces in this impressive exhibition are three schematic houses, each the size of a playhouse, made of unfinished slabs of Sheetrock.
A huge sword dangles above one of the structures, while the windows and chimneys of the other two are stuffed with pillows, which turn them into claustrophobic hideaways.


A Book Asserts Reagan Slowed Hostage Release
In a new book, Gary Sick, a Middle East expert and former Carter Administration official, presents what he describes as an exhaustive collection of evidence to bolster his assertion, now under heated debate in Congress and elsewhere, that senior officials of the Reagan campaign negotiated a secret agreement with Iran in 1980 to delay the release of the American hostages.
Mr.
Sick's book, "October Surprise; America's Hostages in Iran and the Election of Ronald Reagan," published by Random House, is the latest of several arguments and counter-arguments over whether efforts by Reagan campaign officials to monitor what President Jimmy Carter was doing to free the hostages, escalated into illegal negotiations with representatives of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the Iranian ruler.


BUSH CHALLENGES PARTNERS IN NATO OVER ROLE OF U.S.
President Bush challenged his European allies today to state clearly whether they wanted America to withdraw from Europe's defense, and as leaders of the Western alliance unveiled their first major strategic shift in 24 years, he was rapidly assured that they did not.
The exchange was made as NATO leaders, seeking to reshape their role in a continent transformed by the collapse of Soviet might, underscored the changes and uncertainties in Europe's new power balance by offering their former adversaries in Eastern Europe a formal link to the Western military alliance, but witholding any commitment to safeguard their security.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.68
4.62
7.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.63
4.62
7.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.68
4.69
7.05
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.06
7.14
8.41
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.91
7.99
8.70
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
9.00
9.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.83
6.83
7.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 570 money market mutual funds increased by $5.1 billion, to $469.23 billion, in the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 209 institutional funds increased by $4.38 billion, to $149.42 billion.
The assets of the 270 general-purpose funds were up by $773 million, to $173.51 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $59.4 million, to $146.30 billion, the institute said.


Sounds Around Town
Legere on Dietrich
Phoebe Legere, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Manhattan, (212) 244-3005.
Ms.
Legere wrote the music, lyrics and book and is the show's musical director and conductor.
Her shows at the Ballroom are tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11:15 P.M., and Sunday at 7 P.M.
There is a $15 cover charge and a two-drink minimum.
Remembering Sanders
Judy Kreston, "Remembering Felicia Sanders," Judys, 49 West 44th Street, Manhattan, (212) 764-8930.
Felicia Sanders, who died in 1974, was one of the great cabaret singers in the 1950's and 60's.
She introduced hits including "Song From 'Moulin Rouge' " and Bart Howard's "In Other Words," later retitled "Fly Me to the Moon." Judy Kreston and her husband, David Lahm, are doing a retrospective of Sanders's songs that has an unusual stamp of authenticity.
Irving Joseph, who was Sanders's husband and accompanist, noticed a similarity in the two women's singing.
He suggested the show to Miss Kreston and is now part of the performance, which is based on Sanders's act at the Bon Soir in Greenwich Village, where she was a long-running favorite.
Show times are tomorrow and every Saturday through Dec. 21 at 9 and 11 P.M.
There is a $15 music charge and a $10 minimum.
Wider Horizons
Frank Vignola and the Hot Club Quintet, J's, 2581 Broadway, between 97th and 98th Streets, (212) 666-3600.
The guitarist Frank Vignola formed his all-acoustic quintet, the Hot Club, four years ago to build on the music and style of the Belgian gypsy guitarist Django Reinhardt.
The group has recently taken a broader approach.
It now features jazz standards from swing to bop and Latin material, although Mr.
Vignola's Reinhardt-influenced guitar is still a coloring factor in the group's work.
They play tomorrow from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M. for a $12 minimum at tables and a $7 minimum at the bar.


Duke Expresses Shock at the Lineup Against Him
At a candidates' forum today, State Representative David Duke said he was shocked by the number and diversity of the endorsements received by his opponent in the Louisiana governor's race, former Gov.
Edwin W. Edwards.
When Mr.
Edwards took his turn at the podium, he replied, "David, I, too, have been shocked by some of the endorsements I've been given and I guarantee that if it wasn't for you I would never have gotten them."


On a Sad Day, Knicks Beat Orlando and Even Record
It was fitting for the Knicks to play a team nicknamed Magic last night.
The hearts and minds of both teams were with Magic Johnson, who announced his retirement from basketball earlier in the day because tests showed he had been infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
Before the opening tap, Knicks Coach Pat Riley walked to center court at Madison Square Garden, grabbed the microphone, and led the crowd in reciting the Lord's Prayer as both teams gathered around him.


New Grace Strategy Plans A $1.5 Billion Sale of Units
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Company, the conglomerate that has interests in energy, video distribution, textiles and fertilizer, said yesterday that it was adopting a new strategy that would result in the sale of businesses worth $1.5 billion and narrow the company's focus on chemicals and health-care businesses.
Grace has said since last year that it will slim its focus to specialty chemicals and health care.
But yesterday's announcement detailed which businesses the company planned to sell and the pace at which they would be divested.


Mexico Frees Priest
A priest jailed for seven weeks in the southern state of Chiapas on charges of leading peasants in the seizure of private lands has been freed.
The Rev.
Joel Padron was released on Wednesday night from the maximum-security cell where he had been held in the state capital, Tuxtla Gutierrez, since Sept. 18.
A state judge dropped the case against him one day after a federal appeals judge ruled in the 52-year-old priest's favor on a writ of habeas corpus.


Judge Acquits 4 of Distributing Needles in an Effort to Curb AIDS
Four people were acquitted today of all charges stemming from their attempts to distribute clean needles to drug addicts to help prevent the spread of the AIDS virus.
Judge Alan Horowitz of Municipal Court said he believed that the defendants had made a moral decision to risk arrest in order to save lives and to "send a message to the country and to New Jersey."


FRAUD IS CHARGED IN METER PROGRAM IN NEW YORK CITY
The company that dominates New York City water-meter installation was indicted yesterday on charges of defrauding the city in a scheme that investigators said could not have succeeded without mismanagement by city officials.
The indictment, which follows months of investigation by city and Federal authorities, charges the company, Vanguard Meter Service Inc., of Owensboro, Ky., and four of its current or former officers with performing sloppy work and using hundreds of underpaid workers to beat out its competition.
The indictment threatens to throw the $290 million water meter program, the largest in the nation, into disarray.


Market Place; Analysts Pleased By Time Warner
FOR the first time in perhaps six months, some Wall Street analysts are turning bullish on Time Warner stock.
Since the news came out that Time Warner had managed to raise $1 billion from the Toshiba Corporation and C. Itoh on Oct. 2, the stock has risen from $83.875, to $89.75 yesterday.
And a number of analysts say that the prospects are looking up.


Southern California Agency Eases Stance on Air Quality
Faced with growing complaints from businesses and politicians that pollution control rules are creating too much of an economic burden, Southern California's air quality authorities say they plan to soften their hard-line approach to enforcing the regulations.
Officials of the South Coast Air Quality Management District, which sets air-quality rules for most of Southern California and is extremely influential in setting statewide and national policies, said they do not plan to roll back the strict emissions standards for businesses, automobiles and individuals they have set in recent years.


Frank Binswanger, 88, A Philadelphia Broker
Frank G. Binswanger, a developer and civic leader in Philadelphia, died last Friday at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 88 years old.
Associates said he had cancer, heart disease and pneumonia.


Economic Scene; Voters Rewrite Domestic Agenda
THERE were seeming ideological contradictions in this week's election results.
For instance, Pennsylvania voters handed a decisive Senate victory to the liberal Democrat, Harris Wofford, who stressed the need for national health care, over former Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, who upheld the conservative Bush Administration program, with heavy support from the President.
But New Jersey voters appeared to have shifted sharply to the right, handing Democratic state legislators a crushing defeat for supporting Gov.
Jim Florio's tax increase last year.
However, the common denominator in the Pennsylvania and New Jersey elections was money -- and the voters' anxiety, whether the worry was over how to pay medical bills or how to pay taxes.


METRO DIGEST
WEICKER OPTS OUT OF ANTI-SMOG PLAN
Setting his state on a course independent of 11 other Northeastern states from Maine to Virginia, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. said Connecticut would not accept strict new standards on automobile emissions as part of a regional effort to control smog.
Page B5.
NEW YORK CITY  INDICTMENTS IN METER PROGRAM
The company that dominates New York City's water meter installation program was indicted on charges of defrauding the city by performing sloppy work and using hundreds of illegally underpaid workers to beat out its competition.
Investigators said the scheme could not have been successful without mismanagement by the city's environmental agency.
Page A1.
HOLDING THE LINE IN MOTT HAVEN
In the South Bronx neighborhood of Mott Haven, where most institutions are regarded with mistrust or worse, St.
Luke's Elementary School is a rare place indeed -- a small island of hope amid the general despair.
Page B2.
HOSPITAL CRITICIZED IN 4 DEATHS
Disorganization at Kings County Hospital has led to two patient deaths and contributed to two others, according to a report by the State Health Department.
Page B3.
WELFARE FRAUD: EVADING THE WATCHDOGS
More than 100 women were able to bilk New York City of millions of dollars in welfare payments using fake Social Security cards, because of serious flaws in the city's oversight system, prosecutors said yesterday.
Page B3.
California Speaker gives $50,000 for Dinkins trip. Page B3.
Defendant's father tells of struggle before subway slaying.
Page B3.
REGION  PREPARING FOR A PATRIARCH
Alexy II, the Patriarch of Moscow and a hero of the forces of democracy in the Soviet Union, is coming to St.
Vladimir's Orthodox Theological Seminary in the Westchester community of Crestwood, and the campus is abuzz with preparations.
Page B5.
ACCORD IN HOMELESS MAN'S SUIT?
The most famous resident of Morristown, N.J. -- domiciled or not -- has agreed to accept $150,000 to drop a harassment suit against the police.
But some ifs and some strings might yet dissolve the deal.
Page B5.
FURLOUGH DAY IN HARTFORD
About 5,500 state workers, or more than 10 percent of the Connecticut work force, have been ordered to stay home today.
But state officials promise that their absence will barely be noticed, if at all, by the average resident.
Page B5.
NEW CHARGES IN PET SCANDAL
Two members of Long Island family already accused of illegally burying pets in mass graves at a pet cemetery were arrested on new charges: that they sold adulterated, mislabeled, bug-infested dog food.
Page B5.
Coast Guard calls off search for flier lost in storm. Page B5.
4 are acquitted in Jersey City needle-distribution case.
Page B7.
Our Towns B7  Real Estate B9  Fashion B10  Law B20


Maxwell Executive Knows U.S. Unit Well
David Shaffer, the new chief operating officer of the Maxwell Communication Corporation, brings to the job a thorough knowledge of the company's key operation: its United States division.
As president of Macmillan Inc. since March 1990, he has supervised the book publishing company and a subsidiary that publishes the Official Airlines Guide.
Having just returned from London last night, Mr.
Shaffer said in a telephone interview that everyone was "terribly saddened by Bob's death, but he had structured the company in such a way that the company will not feel it at all." He added, "The day-to-day operating decision was already under my control."


Broad Gain Lifts Dow by 15.65, to 3,054.11
Blue-chip issues posted moderate gains in active trading yesterday, drawing strength from I.B.M. and retailers, as the Dow Jones industrial average rose 15.65, to 3,054.11.
The broader market made solid advances, taking the Nasdaq and Russell 2,000 indexes to new highs.
A favorable outcome to yesterday's 30-year bond auction strengthened Treasury securities and lowered interest rates, helping stocks become that much more attractive to investors, some analysts said.


Opponents of Breast Implants Open a New Drive to Stop Their Use
Critics of breast implants today began new attacks on companies that make and sell the silicone gel devices, as plastic surgeons continued their multimillion-dollar lobbying effort to keep them on the market.
The Food and Drug Adminstration will hold a hearing beginning next Tuesday to help decide the matter.
A preliminary recommendation from an advisory board is expected at those hearings, and a final decision should be reached by early January.


Corrections
The obituary of Robert Maxwell on Wednesday misidentified the afternoon newspaper he began in 1987.
It was The London Evening News, not The London Daily News.


Ashland Oil Appoints Successor to President
Ashland Oil Inc. said yesterday that it had selected Paul W. Chellgren, senior vice president and chief financial officer, to become president and chief operating officer at the end of January.
Mr.
Chellgren, who is 48 years old, will succeed Charles J. Luellen, 62, who had previously announced his attention to retire in January.
John R. Hall, 58, remains chairman and chief executive.


Maxwell's Gift to Campus in Doubt
Much as he did at The Daily News, Robert Maxwell swept like a gallant knight last summer into another New York City institution, Polytechnic University.
Mr.
Maxwell, a trustee at the university since 1986, was elected chairman in July, then promptly announced that he would donate $10 million to begin a fund-raising campaign.
Exuding what the university president called "an aura of a very successful businessman," he gave the sometimes beleaguered campus a sense of renewed confidence.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Wednesday about Sara Lee's plan to buy 25 percent of Playtex Family Products misstated a stock-price change in some copies.
Sara Lee's stock rose, not Playtex's; Playtex is a private company.


American Express Demotes Ogilvy
Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, which since 1962 has created such memorable advertising lines for American Express as "Don't leave home without it" and "Membership has its privileges," yesterday lost the most prestigious part of that account to Chiat/Day/Mojo Inc. in New York.
The loss, which involves the creation and execution of advertising ideas for the green charge card, is an unexpected blow to Ogilvy New York and its parent, Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide.
It was especially unwelcome news to their corporate parent in London, the financially pressed WPP Group, because American Express's annual ad spending on the green card totals $60 million.


A Print Ad in Memory Of Rock's Bill Graham
A Gap print advertisement featuring a stark portrait of the late rock music impresario Bill Graham is appearing in the new issue of Rolling Stone magazine, less than two weeks after his death in a helicopter crash.
In the top right-hand corner of the ad, in the magazine's issue dated Nov. 28, is the inscription "Bill Graham, dance-hall keeper, 1931-1991, appearing on behalf of the Haight-Ashbury Free Clinic." Across the bottom is the Gap name.


As He Faces Devils, Muller Feels Sting
Kirk Muller, his big smile unaffected by little, bloody facial scratches, stood in the corridor of Madison Square Garden, saying the same things over and over again to the dozen reporters who asked.
He has nothing against the Devils' players or coaches or fans, Muller kept saying, reflecting on his seven seasons with New Jersey.
They were mostly good years, he said, recalling thick and thin times and his tenure as team captain.
He was looking forward to playing against the Devils tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, his first visit there in the uniform of the Montreal Canadiens.


Alligator Hunts Harm Florida's Public Image
To the Editor:
"In Florida, Gators and Humans Vie for Same Turf" (news article, Oct. 9) fails to give the reasons for those opposing the alligator hunts.
These hunts are, we believe, without justification, inhumane and a disgrace to the public image of Florida.


Review/Art; Knighthood Is in Flower Once Again at the Met
UNTIL it closed nearly four years ago, even the most peace-loving families found themselves drawn, if not dragged by their youngest members, to the rooms full of ornate swords and helmets and shields, and especially to the suite of armored figures on horseback, that had been housed since 1956 in the Pierpont Morgan wing of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The drama of that cavalcade for the children who invariably gathered around it was rivaled perhaps only by the room of dinosaurs across Central Park at the American Museum of Natural History.
No matter that the display of arms and armor had become almost as outdated as the objects in it, that because it lacked climate controls and was stored in antiquated cases the collection needed refurbishment.
When the museum closed the galleries for renovation in January 1988, more than a few New Yorkers feared that another beloved landmark might go the way of the old Pennsylvania Station.


Waiting for Capitalism in Ever Longer Lines
The free market is nowhere and it is everywhere.
It is yearned for and it is feared by shoppers waiting like wraiths in long lines for something to buy, staring through the midafternoon darkness with their breath vaporizing in the early winter cold as they hunt and forage about the city.


Talks Snagged, Caterpillar Closes 2 Plants
With labor negotiations at a standstill, Caterpillar Inc. announced yesterday that it was closing plants in East Peoria and Aurora, Ill.
The company's action escalated a dispute with the United Automobile Workers that has idled 8,000 workers, half of Caterpillar's factory work force in the United States.


On My Mind; Anatomy Of a Scoop
This is a report on a one-man inquiry into an important exclusive story carried in a column about the U.S.S.
Liberty by the famous Washington journalists Roland Evans and Robert Novak.
On June 8, 1967, during the six-day Arab-Israeli war, the Liberty, an intelligence ship working secretly off the Israeli-Egyptian coast, was attacked by Israeli planes.
Thirty-four Americans were killed, 171 were wounded and a bitter controversy was started that lasts to this day.


Doubts Persist After Finding on Maxwell's Death
The one-page death certificate of Robert Maxwell states in Spanish that he died at age 68 of "parada cardio-respiratoria," or heart and lung failure.
Attached to it is another page with a provisional autopsy report.
But those two documents are not likely to form the final chapter of the extraordinary life of the Czech war orphan who rose to become one of the world's most powerful publishers.


Ringing: The Health Care Alarm
Harris Wofford's striking upset victory over Dick Thornburgh in Pennsylvania's Senate race makes health care reform Topic A on the domestic agenda.
Mr.
Wofford's rousing declaration that "working people should have the right to a doctor when they are sick" contributed mightily to his triumph.
That said, his call for national health insurance doesn't advance debate very far.
Everyone in Congress agrees there should be universal, affordable coverage for medical catastrophe.
The practical question is how.


Russ Togs Is Forced Into Bankruptcy Filing
Russ Togs Inc., the New York apparel maker for Diane Von Furstenberg, the Villager and other labels, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy court protection yesterday, as its banks began calling in their loans and suppliers refused to ship fabrics.
The company, which listed assets of $140.39 million and liabilities of $65.90 million, said it planned to continue operating while it revamped its finances.


Review/Art; At I.B.M. Gallery, a Double-Headed Exhibition
A first prize, complete with rosette and citation, should be accorded to the double-headed exhibition that is now running at the I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art.
Whether by accident or by long-laid plan, it results in a confrontation and an antithesis of the purest, most classical kind.
We can imagine I.B.M.'s corporate barker on duty at the entrance.
"On my left, ladies and gentlemen, is the art of ancient Tibet, which teaches us that wisdom and compassion can save the world." Even those who know nothing of Tibet, ancient or modern, must respond to the thought of universal salvation.


Quotation of the Day
"It can happen to anybody, even me." MAGIC JOHNSON.  [ B12:1. ]


People
*
Lori Sharbono has been promoted to director of new business, a new position, at Bozell Inc., Minneapolis, from business development coordinator.


At the Bar; From Hoboken to Hollywood: A 1960's Idealist Finds a Home in 1990's Television.
A little more than a year ago, Roger Lowenstein was sitting in his law office in Hoboken, blearily looking out at the Clam Broth House next door.
It was 10 o'clock at night.
He still had not eaten dinner.
Everyone else had long since gone home and he still had loads of work to do.
His marriage had disintegrated, in part because of the demands of his work.
As courts grew clogged and the practice more complicated, his law work had turned from trying cases to pushing paper.
Moreover, his partners grew increasingly rebellious, his clients unappreciative, and, it seemed to him, the profession more cynical.
In short, Mr.
Lowenstein was experiencing yet another existential crisis in his 47-year-old lawyerly life, one that came to an end only when a friend, a Hollywood type, called to entice him out with tales of the good life.


For Children
'Concerts for Kids'  Merkin Concert Hall  129 West 67th Street  Manhattan  (212) 362-8060  Recommended ages: 7 and up  Sunday
The Elaine Kaufman Cultural Center's multi-cultural concerts for elementary-school children were so successful last year that the center decided to present concerts that explore Jewish communities in Europe and Africa.
The first program will focus on the Sephardic Jews who were expelled from Spain in 1492, said Adrienne Cooper, a Yiddish singer and educator.
Ms.
Cooper is to be the host of Sunday's program, which is to feature music by the Elias Ladino Ensemble along with audience participation.
Youngsters will sing, be given worksheets and learn about Ladino, the language of Sephardic Jews.
The music promises to be unusual: Joe Elias, a Sephardic Jew whose parents emigrated from Turkey to America, and his son, Danny, play such instruments as the pendero (tambourine), darbuqa (drum) and oud (a type of lute).
They also sing Ladino folk music, which uses a smattering of Spanish, Hebrew, Arabic and Turkish.
"Our music doesn't sound like Second Avenue Jewish songs," Mr.
Elias said.
"It's lively, like 'Zorba the Greek.' " The music, which is also inflected with Moorish overtones, mainly centers on love and how children and parents relate, or don't relate, to one another.
The 1 P.M. hourlong concert has no intermission and is held in a formal concert hall.
Tickets, $10, can be reserved through the box office or picked up, including the day of the concert, starting at noon. (The box office is closed tomorrow.)


Tension Grows in South Lebanon As Israel Bombs Guerrilla Targets
Israeli military aircraft attacked Palestinian guerrilla targets in southern Lebanon today, in a further increase of tension in the area.
Security officials said helicopter gunships made separate air strikes at the seaside Palestinian district of Al Rashidiyeh in the port city of Tyre, 43 miles south of here, and against the Ain el-Hilweh district on the outskirts of Sidon 20 miles to the north.


Cursed and Praised, Retiring Judge Recalls Storm
For the last 36 years Judge Frank M. Johnson Jr. has sat at the eye of a social and judicial storm.
First, as a Federal District Court judge, then on the Federal appeals court, Judge Johnson heard cases that set the standard in the region -- and often the nation -- on civil rights, voting rights, school desegregation, employment discrimination and affirmative action, as well as on the rights of mental patients to adequate care and prison inmates to minimal standards of incarceration.


Review/Art; In Portraits on a Grand Scale, Chuck Close Moves On
In his new large-scale portraits at the Pace Gallery in SoHo, Chuck Close expands decisively and impressively upon methods he introduced in his last show at the gallery's 57th Street space three years ago.
Primarily portraits of other artists -- including Alex Katz, Elizabeth Murray, Eric Fischl and Judy Pfaff -- these new efforts are the most painterly and liberated canvases Mr.
Close has ever made.
Some, though not all, rank among his strongest and most emotionally complex statements.
This sounds simple enough: an artist pushing his work forward.
But it also leaves out a lot.
In the fall of 1989, a year after his last exhibition at Pace, Mr.
Close suffered a catastrophic illness that left him partly paralyzed and radically reduced the mobility of his hands.
Sitting in a wheelchair with a brace on his painting arm, he returned to work; in fact, the two earliest paintings in this show, small portraits of Janet Fish and Mr.
Katz, were painted late in 1989 while Mr.
Close was still in the hospital.


Abortion Counseling Ban Is Rejected by Senate, 72-25
Auguring a collision between the White House and Congress, the Senate voted 72 to 25 today to knock down a Federal rule prohibiting doctors and counselors from discussing abortion with women in federally financed family planning clinics.
The vote was enough to override the Presidential veto of the measure that is expected.
A day earlier, the House failed to get a veto-proof margin on the same measure, voting 272 to 156, 14 votes short.
To override a veto, both chambers must vote to do so by two-thirds majorities.


New Jersey Opener Is Old News
The Nets canceled their morning practice session today.
Too bad they were unable to cancel the game against Miami 10 hours later.
The players would have enjoyed prime-time television much more than this hardly-ready-for-prime-time basketball game.
The home opener proved to be a disturbing eye-opener for the restless fans at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena as the Nets exhibited a listless style of play that hastened memories of previous failures.
New Jersey did not shoot with accuracy and did not play with zest as Miami rolled to a 111-89 victory.


Handley at Least Gets Peace From His Bosses
In recent weeks, almost everyone on this planet seems to have offered advice, mostly unsolicited, to Ray Handley, the first-year coach of the beleaguered Giants.
One adviser is not Wellington Mara, the Giants' president and 50-percent owner.
One may be Bill Parcells, Handley's predecessor as the head coach.
Handley and Parcells would not say if they had talked, and Parcells declined to discuss anything about this team.


Review/Circus; For Moscow Daredevils, All the Air's A Stage
Russian gymnasts and equilibrists seem to leap higher, fly faster and defy gravity with greater daring than their counterparts in other countries, all of which was in evidence in the Flying Cranes sequence in the Moscow Circus's last visit to Radio City Music Hall.
Only one act in the new Moscow Circus-Cirk Valentin approaches the Flying Cranes, and that is the Chimes, a troupe of daredevils who simulate the hands and pendulum of an enormous clock high above ground.
The remainder of the show at the Gershwin Theater has its ups and downs.
Many of the acts should entertain the dedicated circusgoer, but there is not enough imagination to justify the ballyhoo that made this company sound like a wonder of the new-age circus world.
Cirk Valentin, under the artistic guidance of Valentin Gneushev, the impresario responsible for the Flying Cranes, is not a conceptual invention like the Cirque du Soleil or Le Cirque Imaginaire but a random anthology of acrobatic and clown routines.


Net Up 25% At Wal-Mart
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. said yesterday that its earnings rose by 25 percent in the third quarter, as the nation's largest retailer once again outperformed its competitors.
Wal-Mart said it earned $353.2 million, or 31 cents a share, in the quarter that ended on Oct. 31, compared with $282.8 million, or 25 cents a share, in the comparable 1990 period.


Democrats' Finance Choices on Jobless Bill
Senate Democrats today proposed legislation extending unemployment benefits that would give President Bush three choices on how to pay for it: declaring a budget emergency and increasing the Federal deficit, curbing foreign aid or raising estimated income tax payments.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, scoffed at the plan as "government by multiple choice." And Representative Thomas J. Downey, Democrat of Suffolk and the leading House sponsor of the measure, called it a "Chinese menu" approach.


BRIEFS
DEBT  *
Salem County, N.J., priced $60.2 million Pollution Control Authority disposal-system revenue bonds through Morgan Stanley to yield 6.77 percent, with a 6.5 percent coupon for the 2021 maturity.
Ratings are AA2 by Moody's and AA by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Art in Review
Ed Moses
Louver Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo
Through Nov. 23
In recent years Ed Moses has moved away from his grid paintings to a much looser brand of abstraction.
A member of the California School of Abstract Expressionism in the 1950's, Mr.
Moses now paints large, handsome canvases that feature translucent splashes of color.
These distinctive marks are halfway between stains of the sort used by Helen Frankenthaler or Morris Louis and more conventional brushstrokes.


Art in Review
Tina Barney
Janet Borden Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo
Through Nov. 27
Tina Barney has long relied on an essentially theatrical technique, deploying a troupe of family and friends in large color photographs that combine the exactness of staged tableaux with the seeming spontaneity of snapshots.
Characters recur from one image to another, making her pictures seem like episodes from a story.
In her earlier pictures, Ms.
Barney sketched a world of moneyed ease, depicting the upper classes at home in work that verged on the documentary.
Increasingly, though, she has been moving toward portraiture, focusing on individuals rather than on their milieu.


Reporter's Notebook; Away From It All, Bush Savors Rome
President Bush fairly bounded out of the double glass doors of the American Ambassador's palatial residence, Villa Taverna, today, extending his hand to Prime Minister John Major of Britain and crying, "Hello John!"
As the two posed for cameras, glancing upward and commenting on the clear blue Roman skies for lack of anything else to say in that peculiarly uncomfortable moment known as a photo op, Mr.
Bush seemed visibly relieved.


Art in Review
Roni Horn
Mary Boone Gallery 417 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through tomorrow
For several years, Roni Horn has been bringing a 1980's elegance to early 70's sculptural concerns -- maybe a little too much of it, in fact.
Her low-lying concentrated forms can evoke the work of Bruce Nauman or Joel Shapiro; her emphasis on visual perception, some of Richard Serra's double shapes or surfaces.
But her choices of metals and surfaces can suggest high-priced baubles.
In her latest effort, Ms.
Horn disperses 18 gleaming knoblike forms across the newly whitened floor at Mary Boone.
Made of either copper or brushed stainless steel, they suggest high-tech mushrooms or an extended suite of space-age hat forms.
Although little more than ankle-high, these forms exude a dominating sense of scale that can actually make the viewer feel a bit dwarfed.
In addition, they're all unique, with varying heights or diameters, differently curved or slanted sides, slightly rounded or flat tops, and sharp-edged or rounded transitions betwen side and top.
Contemplating their differences can be quite an engrossing lesson in geometry.
One expects an underlying system but can find none, except that a smaller gallery holds another set of identical forms -- the second half of the piece -- in a different arrangement that creates a different sense of space.
The contradiction between such pure thoughts and such rich materials -- inherent in much Minimalist-inspired art -- still nags, but this is the best piece Ms.
Horn has yet exhibited in New York.


Sandinista Unions Reject Nicaraguan Accord
Sandinista labor groups have angrily rejected an accord between the Government and the leaders of the Sandinista Front that was supposed to end union takeovers and strikes at sugar refineries and other industries in Nicaragua.
"Not one sack of sugar moves until we see results," said a Sandinista labor spokeswoman, Lily Soto, at a news conference Wednesday.


Salomon Cuts Europe Staff
Salomon Brothers International said today that it had cut its European staff of just under 1,000 by 5 percent.
The move was part of a review that began last June, a spokesman said.


Art in Review
Francesco Clemente  Gagosian Gallery 980 Madison Avenue (at 77th Street) Manhattan Through Nov. 16
Francesco Clemente is the master of the state of not-quite-there: a kind of floating, hallucinatory limbo between waking and sleeping, living and dying, sacred and profane, inside and outside.
Now Mr.
Clemente has compressed that limbo into a series of 27 small, variously proportioned canvases in which faces, bodies and body fragments push against the surface.
While a number of these images seem a bit rotelike, others retrieve the power of the artist's early pastels, which are among his strongest works.


Books of The Times; Horrors! Or, Why People Love Being Scared
The Thrill of Fear 250 Years of Scary Entertainment By Walter Kendrick 292 pages.
Grove Weidenfeld. $21.95.
What Virginia Woolf called "the strange human craving for the pleasure of feeling afraid" is an all too familiar phenomenon these days, as attested to by the mass popularity of Stephen King's books, by the cult status of movies like "Night of the Living Dead" and "The Texas Chainsaw Massacre," and by the endless sequels to "Halloween," "Friday the 13th" and "Nightmare on Elm Street."


Reviews/Fashion; Bob Mackie's Showstoppers
Fashion began to sizzle yesterday as the week of spring shows careered into the home stretch.
Bob Mackie staged the spectacular to end all spectaculars at the Hotel Macklowe, which is turning into an effective place to hold fashion shows.
As many as 700 people can be shoehorned into the theater there, one of two sites for fashion shows at the hotel.
The Mackie production rivaled many Broadway shows both in concept and execution.
A costume designer in Hollywood for many years, Mr.
Mackie proved that he can also function as a director and producer.


Art in Review
Haim Steinbach
Jay Gorney Modern Art 100 Greene Street SoHo Through Nov. 16
Haim Steinbach's newest efforts come in two forms.
First there are the artist's characteristic shelf pieces on which he displays groups of related objects.
In the upstairs gallery, it's 19th-century metal items on sparkling metal-laminated shelves: mirror and portrait photographs in Victorian metal frames in one piece, a combination of toy banks and food graters in the other.
Downstairs, it's a white shelf with seven plastic mannequin heads on which the hair has been dressed, or more accurately, attacked, by student hairdressers -- a far funnier, less nostalgic bit of social commentary.


Lawrence W. Hecht, Educational Tester, 40
Lawrence W. Hecht, an educational testing expert, died on Monday at New York Infirmary-Beekman Downtown Hospital.
He was 40 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from AIDS, his family said.


Accounts
*
Stanley H. Kaplan Educational Center Ltd., New York, a test preparation organization, to Ackerman Advertising, Glen Head, L.I., to create advertising, brochures and other promotional material.
Billings were not disclosed.
Kaplan had previously produced its own advertising.


Chief Operating Officer For Cincinnati Milacron
Cincinnati Milacron Inc., a leading producer of machine tools, has named Raymond E. Ross president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Ross, who is 55, was previously executive vice president of operations for the company.


Precious Metals Are Down As Weak Economy Is Seen
Silver and platinum futures fell sharply yesterday amid perceptions that this week's cut in interest rates would spur neither an economic recovery nor a rise in inflation.
Silver for delivery next month fell 7 cents on the Commodity Exchange in New York to $3.998 an ounce, the contract's first close below $4 since Sept. 11.


Messianic Link to Christianity Is Found in Scrolls
In one of the first revelations since access to complete photographic copies of the Dead Sea Scrolls was opened to all, scholars yesterday reported finding a fragment of a text mentioning the execution of a Messiah-like leader.
They said the fragment lends support to theories that the writers of the scrolls could have been part of a Jewish religious movement that also gave rise to early Christianity.
An analysis of the text was said to indicate a strong connection between ideas contained in the ancient scrolls and those in Christian theology.


Chile's Chilly Idea
One of Jorge Luis Borges's fictions describes an obsessive Bureau of Cartography that builds a map the size of the nation it serves.
And Gabriel Garcia Marquez, in "One Hundred Years of Solitude," writes of a town so humid that fish swim in the air.
Readers of Latin America's magical realist fiction will immediately recognize the impulse behind the sculptured iceberg that Chile is preparing for Expo '92, the world's fair that opens next April in Seville, Spain.


Senate Votes Dialer Ban
The Senate unanimously approved bills today that would virtually ban the use of automated dialing machines in telephone marketing and would make it easier to block unwanted calls by live sales representatives.
The first measure, sponsored by Senator Ernest F. Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina, would make it illegal to use machines that automatically call homes and play recorded sales pitches, unless a person has given specific written or spoken permission.
A person who receives two or more unwanted calls would be entitled to sue the company in small-claims court for as much as $500 a call, with a maximum total of $1,500.


Review/Art; Inspiration From Dreams, Spirits and the Center of the Earth
Marcel Duchamp's emphasis on the importance of the ideas behind art, rather than the ways they are expressed, has long been a central tenet of much contemporary art.
But where do artists' ideas come from?
This is the question implicitly addressed in "Incognito," a fascinating and often funny show, organized by Carole Ann Klonarides, at the Curt Marcus Gallery in SoHo.
What unites the work here, which includes painting, photography, architecture and installations, is that all the artists say they get their ideas from distinctly unusual sources.
Certainly the artist here whose ideas came from the strangest place was Richard S. Shaver, a popular writer for science-fiction magazines like Amazing Stories and Mystic in the 1940's and 50's, who later took up painting.
Shaver, who died in 1975, said he had discovered a land called Lumeria, situated in the center of the earth and populated by a race of creatures who controlled human affairs.
He described this land in great detail in magazine articles and books, and when he turned to painting, he tried to depict the creatures he had seen there.
He based his paintings on what he called "rock books," rocks that suggest various figures and scenes through their natural patterns of stratification and color.
The two examples of his painting here both feature clusters of women, perhaps some of the 50-foot-tall women he said were among the denizens of Lumeria.


Moody's Weighs Upgrade for Lilco
The Long Island Lighting Company, has been put on the review list by Moody's Investors Service for a possible upgrade of its long-term debt ratings.
About $4.9 billion of securities are involved, Moody's said.
Moody's cited a final order approving annual rate increases of about 4 percent through 1993 that is expected by the end of November from the New York State Public Service Commission.


Pee-wee Herman Enters a Plea of No Contest
At the courthouse on Ringling Boulevard here, the comedian and actor Paul Reubens brought an end today to a three-and-a-half-month ordeal and avoided the prospect of a media circus by pleading no contest to charges of indecent exposure.
Mr.
Reubens, who played Pee-wee Herman as the host of the children's television program "Pee-wee's Playhouse," was arrested here in late July by detectives who said they had observed him masturbating in a local theater showing pornographic films.
But in an agreement approved today by Judge Judy Goldman of Sarasota County, Mr.
Reubens's lawyers and prosecutors announced that they would forgo a trial in return for a plea that includes a small fine and a promise of community service.


Abroad at Home; 'Your Best and Worst'
The conflict between Israelis and Palestinians has been going on for so long that even in its pain there has been, for many, a kind of security.
The established pattern of force and bitter words seemed safer than actually negotiating with the other side and lowering the barriers of hate.
One achievement of the talks in Madrid -- a singular achievement -- has been to make the idea of negotiation more attractive to both sides.
Suddenly they were talking, and living with the other in peace seemed possible.


Easier Rules For Banks Are Issued
As part of a drive by the Administration to stimulate the economy, the four Federal bank regulatory agencies announced new guidelines yesterday to make bank examinations less tough and encourage banks to make more loans.
The measures would permit examiners greater latitude in reviewing commercial real estate loans to try to "insure that regulatory policies and actions do not inadvertently curtail the availability of credit to sound borrowers," the agencies said in a joint statement.


Gene Tierney, 70, Star of 'Laura' And 'Leave Her to Heaven,' Dies
Gene Tierney, the elegant actress whose beauty bewitched a tough detective in the 1944 film "Laura" and whose portrayal two years later of a diabolically selfish woman in "Leave Her to Heaven" won her an Academy Award nomination, died Wednesday night at her home in Houston.
She was 70 years old.
Miss Tierney died of emphysema, a spokesman for the family said.


Exports Would Help New York Area
To the Editor:
In "New York City's First Hurdle: Defeatism" (editorial, Oct. 13), you are too pessimistic about the economic growth possibilities for the three-state New York, New Jersey, Connecticut region.


Corrections
A picture caption in some editions of Business Day yesterday about the takeover of Mr.
Maxwell's financial empire by two of his sons reversed their ages.
Kevin is 32; Ian is 35.


Colts Suspend Dickerson, Citing His 'Insubordination'
Eric Dickerson, the fourth-leading rusher in National Football League history and an unhappy member of the Colts in recent seasons, was suspended for four weeks today by Indianapolis, the Jets' opponent on Sunday.
In a statement issued in Indianapolis, the Colts said that Dickerson had been suspended without pay for four weeks and fined an additional week's pay "for insubordination and conduct detrimental" to the team.
He refused to participate fully in Wednesday's practice, the team said.


From 3 Designers, a Lighthearted View of Spring
Anna Sui started with some of the season's trends -- lingerie lace, bouffant skirts, mid-calf hemlines -- then added a dose of imagination and wit that resulted in a winning brew.
Randolph Duke crowded fashion and society figures into a room at the Macklowe Hotel near Times Square on Wednesday for a bumpy ride that traveled from the Paris of Leslie Caron movies to the depths of Africa.


Father of Slain Tourist Fought Back, Defendant's Statement Says
A defendant charged with the killing of Brian Watkins said in a written statement shown to the jury yesterday that the victim's father had fought back while being robbed moments before the stabbing death on a Manhattan subway platform.
The defendant, Johnny Hincapie, said that one of the gang members ran up to the Watkins family, tapped the father, Sherwin, on the shoulder and demanded, "Give me your money." Then, he said, the elder Mr.
Watkins "started fighting, and they all started screaming."


The Spoken Word
READING, Writer's Voice, 2 West 64th Street, Manhattan.
"Looking Back With Pleasure," a slide show and discussion with cartoonists from The New Yorker: Roz Chast, Edward Koren, Lee Lorenz and Mischa Richter.
Tonight at 8.
Tickets: $8.
Information: (212) 875-4124.
PANEL DISCUSSION, Great Hall, Cooper Union, 7 East Seventh Street, Manhattan.
The Drawing Center will present "Representation and Value: What Role Will the Language of Feminism Play in the Art World of the 90's?" Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $8.
Information: (212) 219-2166.


Two in Pet Cemetery Family Accused in Dog Food Case
Two members of a family that is already accused of illegally burying pets in mass graves at a pet cemetery were arrested by the Federal Bureau of Investigation on new charges: that they sold adulterated, mislabeled, bug-infested dog food.
An untold number of dogs in Nassau County fell sick after eating the food, which was routinely sprayed with flea powder or insecticide when the bugs became too plentiful, said James M. Fox, assistant director in charge of the bureau's New York office, displaying some of the food at a news conference here.


INSIDE
Maxwell Stock Plummets
Despite pledges by banks of ongoing support for Maxwell Communication, the debt-laden publishing company's shares dropped 39 percent in trading in London.
Page D1.
Weicker's Different Air
Breaking with 11 other Northeastern states, Governor Weicker said that Connecticut would not accept strict new standards on automobile emissions.
Page B5.
U.S.
Weighs Haitians' Fate
Nearly two hundred Haitians seized while fleeing are being kept aboard Coast Guard cutters while the United States considers their fate.
Page A3.
Civil Rights Bill Goes to Bush
With only an echo of the job-quota debates that held it back for two years, a major civil rights bill won final passage in the House.
Page B8.
Gene Tierney Dies
The elegant actress whose beauty bewitched a tough detective in "Laura" is dead at 70.
Page D19.


Dinkins Endorses a Needle-Exchange Plan
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday officially endorsed a needle-exchange program for New York City as part of what he said would be a more aggressive approach by his administration to fight both AIDS and drug abuse.
The Mayor had already said this week that he would support a privately financed pilot program to be run by community organizations, changing his previous stance against needle exchange.
He said yesterday that he had directed the Acting Health Commissioner, Dr.
Margaret A. Hamburg, to help the community groups design the program, including linking drug treatment to the exchange.


EXECUTIVES
*
American Express Co., New York, has appointed Joseph W. Keilty executive vice president. *
First Colony Life Insurance, Lynchburg, Va., a subsidiary of Ethyl Corp., has named Ronald V. Dolan chief executive.


Review/Film; How to Succeed in Hipness by Really Trying
"Strictly Business" is an utterly joyless romantic comedy about young upwardly mobile blacks who make it big by adapting themselves to the worst values of the white establishment.
Specifically, it's about Waymon Tisdale 3d (Joseph C. Phillips), a Sidney Poitier look-alike and a hotshot member of a big midtown Manhattan real estate brokerage.
Waymon wears Brooks Brothers suits and is engaged to the beautiful, equally ambitious Diedre (Anne Marie Johnson) who, though black, affects the speech of the lockjawed white upper-middle class.


IN FILIPINO TOWN, BODIES UNCOUNTED
Each time another dump truck enters the little hilltop cemetery here, Joel Baltondo climbs up to look through the corpses inside it to see if he can find the body of his uncle.
Other relatives search for him along the seashore, where the bodies of men and women float with the tide alongside those of pigs and water buffalo.


U.S. Legal Volunteers Aid Russian Judges
To the Editor:
In "Russian Judges Want Real Justice" (Op-Ed, Oct. 30), Judge Stephen Breyer calls upon the United States, its bar associations, foundations and law schools, to assist Russian judges in transforming their legal system into an independent judiciary.
Such an effort is under way.


The Times, They Are A-Changin' for Women
After reviewing videotapes of the start of the New York City Marathon last Sunday, race officials determined yesterday that runners using the red starting lane, where the women started on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, began running nine seconds before the starting cannon went off.
As a result, the race coordinator, ALLAN STEINFELD, said the times of the first 200 women who finished the race would be increased by nine seconds.
That means that the time of the women's winner, LIZ McCOLGAN of Scotland, whose finish had been reported as 2 hours 27 minutes 23 seconds, will be recorded as 2:27:32.
The correction does not change the 27-year-old McColgan's record for the fastest first-time marathon by a woman or for the 6th fastest finish by a woman in a New York City Marathon or for the 53d fastest marathon ever run by a woman.


Magic's Loud Message For Young Black Men
Magic Johnson's announcement yesterday that he was infected with the AIDS virus will help provide grim proof to a skeptical nation that it is not an aberrant disease that most of society can readily ignore.
What public health officials have stressed for years will now reverberate viscerally across the nation.
And the message will be loudest for those who need to hear it most: the millions of black and Hispanic children for whom Johnson has been a special hero and an invulnerable symbol of hope.


Geraldo Rivera Report On Clio Awards Scuffle
The nationally syndicated tabloid television series "Now It Can Be Told" and its host, Geraldo Rivera, have turned their attention to the contretemps over the 1991 Clio Awards.
In a lengthy report broadcast in most parts of the country on Wednesday, the advertising industry came in for as much censure as Bill Evans, the owner of Clio Awards Enterprises Inc.
In a segment titled "The Madman of Madison Avenue," Mr.
Rivera recapitulated the financial problems that led to the disruption and cancellation of the two annual Clio ceremonies in June.


Letelier Case at Critical Stage as Chile's Top Court Takes Over
Three months after the Government of President Patricio Aylwin renewed charges that the head of Chile's secret police under Gen.
Augusto Pinochet had masterminded the killing in 1976 of a former Chilean diplomat in Washington, the fate of the case rests with the Chilean Supreme Court.
Emotions here are divided and running high as a panel of five members of the court, all appointed by General Pinochet, will decide over the next two weeks whether the evidence against Gen.
Juan Manuel Contreras Sepulveda and his deputy, Col.
Pedro Espinoza Bravo, is sufficient to charge them with murder and to proceed to a criminal trial.


The House of Morgan, Doubled
There are several reasons to rejoice in the expansion of New York's Pierpont Morgan Library.
The first is that the glass-roofed courtyard that now links the original library with J. P. Morgan Jr.'s Italianate brownstone mansion is appropriately grand.
The second is that on a stretch of Madison Avenue low on such amenities, the courtyard offers a place in which one can both soothe the soul and rest the feet.
The third, and most important, is that the expansion gives the Morgan more room to display its treasures.


Review/Film; A Journey To Nowhere On the Street
Norman Loftis's "Small Time," opening today at the Cinema Village on 12th, records the sad life of Vince Williams (Richard Barboza), a young Harlem thief, as he goes about his business on the streets, sidewalks and subways of Manhattan.
As much a case history as a drama, "Small Time" follows Vince as he drifts from Harlem to midtown to the Upper West Side, snatching purses, hanging out with casual friends, looking for the big payoff without ever really expecting to achieve it.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about mail-order foods gave incorrect telephone numbers for Guadalupe Pit Smoked Meats in New Braunfels, Tex.
Its numbers are (800) 880-0416 and (512) 625-4036.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
American Southwest Mortgage Investments Corp., Tucson, Ariz., a mortgage finance investment company, acquired most of the assets of Residential Mortgage Investments Inc., Fort Worth, for $1.1 million in cash and about 1.8 million new American shares. *
Angeion Corp., Plymouth, Minn., a maker of medical components, received approval from the Japanese Government to begin marketing two additional lines of accessory devices.


At the Movies
One Busy Producer
If Edward R. Pressman seems to be everywhere at once these days, maybe that's because he is.


Orthodox Seminary Awaits the Russian Patriarch, Aleksy II
Students at the Orthodox Christian seminary here today wrapped their teacher, a mere priest, in the silk and linen garments of a bishop, complete with gold trim, fringes and richly embroidered crosses.
The exercise was part of a regular class in church ritual, but it took on a special meaning as St.
Vladimir's Orthodox Theological Seminary prepared for the visit of one of Orthodoxy's most famous bishops, Patriarch Aleksy II, a hero of the democracy movement who strongly opposed the short-lived coup in the Soviet Union.


'Island' to Close Dec. 1
"Once on This Island," a musical with book and lyrics by Lynn Ahrens and music by Stephen Flaherty, is to close on Dec. 1 at the Booth Theater, 222 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
The Dec. 1 show, which is directed and choreographed by Graciela Daniele, will be the 469th regular performance; there were 19 previews.
A national tour is to begin in Chicago in March.


Magic Johnson Ends His Career, Saying He Has AIDS Infection
Magic Johnson, one of the most popular and accomplished players in basketball history, said today that he had been infected by the virus that causes AIDS and that he would retire immediately from the Los Angeles Lakers.
Speaking in composed, straightforward terms, Johnson said at a news conference at the Great Western Forum, where he played with the Lakers for 12 seasons, that he learned only the day before that he was infected with the human immunodeficiency virus.


Why Central Park Should Be Entirely Closed to Motorists; Traffic Light Roulette
To the Editor:
I was pleased to read that a speed limit of 15 miles per hour has been set for bicyclists in Central Park (news article, Oct. 24).
My wife and I were 2 of the 199 people injured by bicycles in Central Park last year.
We were hit by a racing bicycle at full speed on the pedestrian crossing at 80th Street and Park Drive West.
She spent three weeks in the hospital and months at home recovering.
Had the bicyclist been going at 15 m.p.h., her injuries would no doubt have been less severe.


Retail Sales Up Slightly In October
Thanks to cold weather that swept most of the nation in the last week of October and widespread, generous price promotions, the nation's retailers saw a slight uptick in sales.
But most analysts and merchants took little encouragement yesterday from the numbers, which showed winners like Wal-Mart Stores Inc. and the Gap Inc. continuing to gain market share at the expense of those selling more expensive merchandise.


For Dinkins's South Africa Trip, A Donor List From Who's Who
More than a third of the money that Mayor David N. Dinkins has raised to finance his trip to South Africa next week came in a $50,000 check from the Speaker of the California Assembly, Willie L. Brown, according to a list of contributors released yesterday.
The list is also sprinkled with prominent New Yorkers like Felix G. Rohatyn, the financier and head of the Municipal Assistance Corporation; Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the developer, and Howard J. Rubenstein, the public relations executive.


Somebody Out There Likes Mancini
"So whatcha think?" asks Ray Mancini.
It is noon.
We are eating breakfast in Greenwich Village.
"You act the way you used to fight," I say.
"Not a lot of finesse, but a lot of energy. Straight ahead. Fun to watch. I was surprised how good you were."


Queens Man Describes Hunt For a Victim, Then a Murder
A Queens man took the witness stand yesterday to testify that he and two friends hunted through the streets of Jackson Heights on a summer night for "a drug dealer or a drug addict or a homo out cruising" to beat, a hunt that ended when he stabbed a man to death "because he was gay."
The man, 21-year-old Daniel Doyle, held the packed courtroom rapt as he described in a monotone the events that led up to the death of Julio Rivera.
His tale began as a party petered out in his family's home.
It ended, he testified, in an ambush in a dark corner of a schoolyard with Mr.
Rivera collapsing under a rain of blows from a hammer, a beer bottle and Mr.
Doyle's knife.


Sounds Around Town
Understated Folk-Pop
Peter Holsapple and Chris Stamey, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Peter Holsapple and Chris Stamey aren't the two most forthright fellows in the world: they tend to undersing certain lines in their wistful folk-pop songs, and they're more likely to tell you something about themselves than to make bold declarations about the world at large.
Onstage, their dual acoustic guitars build up graceful hooks, and their harmonies wrap around lines about breaking and mending hearts.
As Ms.
Stamey sings in one song from their album, "Mavericks" (Rhino), they write their stories in parentheses; in other words, they are remarkably unafraid to be vulnerable.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.; tickets are $7.
Gospel Saxophone
Vernard Johnson, Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity, 157 Montague Street, at Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, (718) 858-2424.
With its towering stained-glass windows and lofty arched ceiling, St.
Ann's is the perfect setting for Vernard Johnson: He'll rock this house harder with his gospel saxophone than most metal bands could with a mile-high stack of Marshall amps.
Mr.
Johnson takes gospel seriously; his current album, "I'm Alive" (Elektra Nonesuch's American Explorer Series), includes his versions of standards like "Lord Help Me to Hold Out." But his fat, splendiferous saxophone tone is at times raunchy enough to sound as though he were leading a rhythm-and-blues revue, at times distorted enough to veer into funk and jazz.
Tomorrow night at 8; tickets are $13 to $15.
Country Plus
Tracy Nelson, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 727-7788.
Tracy Nelson's voice is bigger than country music; it's as broad as the nave of a church, as deep as a river.
Her range includes gospel, blues and folk, and even when she's singing a line like "When you went away I cried for so long," there's nothing weak or drastic about her.
Ms.
Nelson has been recording since 1965; she was part of Mother Earth in San Francisco in the late 60's, backed up Willie Nelson and made several solo albums.
This is her first New York City appearance in two years.
Shows are Saturday at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.; tickets are $5, with a free dinner for the first 20 patrons.


U.S. Is Holding 200 Haitians on 2 Ships
Nearly two hundred Haitians seized as they sought to flee their homeland in small boats are being kept aboard two Coast Guard cutters while the United States considers what to do with them.
Washington is reluctant to send them back to a country whose elected leader was forcibly overthrown or to admit them and risk encouraging a new surge of Haitian boat people to head north.
Before last month's coup, the Coast Guard routinely returned Haitians they intercepted sailing for the United States.
But officials here said that since the coup this practice has been suspended and that recently apprehended boatloads of Haitians have been housed aboard the two ships -- some for as long as 10 days -- while Washington asks other Caribbean countries to offer them temporary sanctuary.


Arkansas Pact to Increase Black Judgeships
A Federal district judge today approved a settlement intended to get more blacks elected to Arkansas judgeships while softening the blow for white incumbents who are displaced by the changes.
The approval by the judge, Henry Woods, creates 10 judicial seats in predominantly black subdistricts that will be carved from 5 of the state's 24 judicial districts.
All 24 districts are now predominantly white, and judges are elected at large within each.


24-Hour Oil Market Is Set
The New York Mercantile Exchange, the world's largest oil market, announced yesterday that it would trade petroleum futures contracts around the clock beginning late next year.
The exchange said it had approved a deal Wednesday night with the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and Task Management Inc. to establish a computerized trading system that would be activated in late 1992.


Wage Freeze Set At Continental Air
Continental Airlines said it would freeze wages for nonmanagement employees later this month to cut costs as it enters the slow winter travel season.
The six-month freeze will take effect on Nov. 16 for all nonmanagement workers at Continental Airlines, Continental Express; its food kitchen, Chelsea Catering, and the computer reservation operation, System One, said a spokeswoman, Peggy Mahoney.
Continental expects to save $13.5 million through the salary freeze and other cost-cutting measures, she said.


Merck Reports Major Shift In Its Marketing of Drugs
Heralding a major shift toward price competition in drug company marketing, Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest pharmaceutical company, said yesterday that most of its American drug sales were now being made to large buyers like hospitals and health maintenance organizations that insist on price discounts.
In the past, drug makers like Merck have been able to keep sales high by persuading individual physicians to prescribe their patent-protected products.
But when hospitals, H.M.O.'s and other large buyers select drugs for their restricted buying lists, price discounts are usually requested.


Homeless Man Accepts $150,000 Peace Offering
Richard R. Kreimer, currently Morristown's most noteworthy citizen, homeless or domiciled, has agreed to accept $150,000 to drop a lawsuit against the police that seems to have many here at wit's end.
But some "ifs" might yet unravel his settlement with Morristown.
The biggest potential hang-up is a requirement of mutual disavowal of any more lawsuits over anything that has happened so far between Mr.
Kreimer, self-anointed champion of rights for the homeless, and the flock of people he has sued.
They include five current and former town officials and 16 current and former police officials and officers.


Investors Lured to Long Bond
The third and most speculative part of the Treasury's $38 billion quarterly refunding auctions got the best reception of the three from investors yesterday as the wide gap between long-term and short-term interest rates created demand at the sale of $12 billion worth of 30-year bonds.
The bond auction came on the heels of disappointing auctions of new 3-year and 10-year notes, and that had created concern among many market participants about who might be willing to venture a bid on the new 30-year securities.
The longer out in time the securities go, the riskier they are to hold because their value could decline if inflation heated up, driving up interest rates, but yesterday the higher yield on the long-term bonds attracted buyers.


On Stage, and Off
Sondheim at Carnegie Hall
Although there's no official announcement yet, the show everyone will want to see next spring (April 22, to be exact) won't be on Broadway, but at Carnegie Hall.
A tribute to Stephen Sondheim is in the very early planning stages, with Ken Marsolais producing the gala as a benefit for the hall.


Review/Film; Two Cute Children and Their Christmas Wish
It isn't believable that ruggedly handsome Michael O'Fallon (Jamey Sheridan) and his pert ex-wife, Catherine (Harley Jane Kozak), are divorced.
But it's no more plausible that they were ever married in the first place.
Anyway, there's not much to prevent the cute O'Fallon children, Hallie (Thora Birch) and Ethan (Ethan Randall), from engineering a Christmas Eve reunion of their parents and creating the kind of warm, festive, happy-family holiday that so often brings on clinical depression in others.
But the emotions on display in the vigorously heartwarming "All I Want for Christmas" are as fake as the snow.
As directed by Robert Lieberman, who has more than 800 commercials to his credit and can now chalk up another, this film is filled with good-looking people and products that appear to have walked right out of a store. (Some of the action actually takes place in a store, with Leslie Nielsen playing a Santa Claus who is given his marching orders by the take-charge little Hallie.) Everything seems brand new and easily replaceable, which turns the idea of an O'Fallon family tragedy into a painless problem.
The kids don't have to do much more than coax their father into a suit to get him back into their mother's good graces.


Our Towns; Bagging Old Rules to Keep a Food Co-op Viable
FIRST, the dirt on this guy Fred Cramer: He's a vegetarian, which is all right, of course.
But he's a vegetarian who has been spotted cruising the Grand Union supermarket aisles here with, would you believe, cans of commercial food in his cart.
He has also purchased aluminum foil there.
And, worst of all, it must be revealed, a member of the nutrition police with a dog trained to detect preservatives uncovered within Mr.
Cramer's basket a box of non-soy-based cookies.
"O.K., all right," he admits, "I've been known to open a can of soup."


Brown Is Term-Limit Convert
In campaigning here against the unsuccessful proposal in Washington State to limit politicians' terms, former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California called it "a castor oil that democracy needs to take." Mr.
Brown, a Democratic candidate for President in 1992, is a relatively recent convert to term limits.
Last year, as the chairman of the Democratic Party in California, Mr.
Brown said he was against term limits, and the party spent millions of dollars fighting a California proposal that would have limited the terms of state office holders.
The measure passed.


REVOLUTION'S DAY GRUDGINGLY NOTED
There were no tanks, no soldiers, no giant red portraits of Lenin, no columns of factory workers waving banners extolling the glorious achievements of the Communist Party.
Instead, on the 74th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution, once the most hallowed and orchestrated of Soviet holidays, Red Square filled up today with a crowd of several thousand angry and confused people, who came before the Lenin Mausoleum to profess their loyalty to a party that has been outlawed, and a state that is on the verge of collapse.


The Art Market
The lure of the bargain is the main attraction in the print market this fall.
From the size of the crowds recently at both Sotheby's and Christie's in New York and the traffic at last weekend's Print Fair at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan, it appeared that business was booming.
But while the market is showing definite signs of recovery from its spring slump, the enthusiasm may have been greater than the money spent.
"People are still holding back," said Christopher Drake, who runs the print department of Agnew's in London.
But David P. Tunick, a Manhattan dealer, reports renewed interest in prints.
"Old clients are coming back to us saying, 'Tempt me,' " he said.
"There's a pent-up yearning to buy."


Athletes' Endorsements May Now Be in Doubt
The use of professional athletes as product spokesmen is about to undergo a landmark test now that Ervin (Magic) Johnson, who has earned more than $12 million a year from commercials and other endorsements, has become the first such star to announce publicly that he has the AIDS virus.
Some advertising and sports marketing executives said yesterday it was likely that Johnson, one of the most visible spokesmen in American professional sports, would all but vanish from his endorsing venues.
Others suggested that companies deciding to end their relationships with the Los Angeles Lakers' star could face a backlash from a sympathetic public.


Bell Labs Laser Said to Be World's Tiniest
Scientists at A.T.&amp; T.'s Bell Laboratories announced yesterday that they had produced the world's smallest lasers, an advance that one day may simplify the manufacture of a new generation of ultrafast computers controlled by beams of light.
The same technology may also have other promising applications, including sensitive artificial vision systems that could operate in a manner similar to the human retina, the researchers said.


Art in Review
Ashley Bickerton  Sonnabend Gallery 420 West Broadway (at Spring Street) SoHo Through Nov. 16
In several works here, Ashley Bickerton deploys the trademark elements of his sculpture -- nylon cords, portholes rimmed with bolts, cages constructed out of aluminum tubing, all recalling high-tech underwater gear -- to present appropriately kinky subject matter.
"The Limits of the World I," from 1991, presents a grid of men's faces painted from black-and-white photographs, with the names of branches of knowledge, from anthropology to teleology, stenciled on the pictures' mounts.
From the center of each man's nose hangs a small yellow nylon bag of sand, on which is printed a classified ad from a sexual swingers' magazine.
The cool, analytical categories of science, the work suggests, are no match for the mysterious workings of sexual desire.


Wilder Called Factor in G.O.P. Gains in Virginia
When the Virginia General Assembly convenes next January, Republicans will be a major legislative force for the first time since Reconstruction, thanks to the anti-Democratic tide that swept across the state in Tuesday's elections.
But that tide did more than drown the political hopes of Democratic incumbents and challengers spread from suburbs here on the outskirts of Washington to rural mountain hollows in the state's western reaches.


Critic's Notebook; Sex Icon Once, Oddity Now
HE wore a turban and tons of eyeshadow in "The Sheik," played a Spanish bullfighter in "Blood and Sand" and was a tango-dancing fool dressed as an Argentine gaucho in "The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse." But when Rudolph Valentino put on a powdered wig to play an 18th-century French nobleman in "Monsieur Beaucaire," his fans rejected the film as a foppish turn in the Latin lover's steamy career.
"Something has happened to the Valentino of 'The Sheik' and 'Blood and Sand,' " the movie magazine Photoplay complained in 1924.
"He doesn't look a bit dangerous to women." Back in the 1920's, a girl really had to watch out for those Argentine gauchos.
Valentino is the best proof that one generation's sex symbol is another's campy curiosity.
Though he was one of silent film's greatest superstars, today he would be more comfortable in a Mel Brooks parody than as People magazine's sexiest man alive.
When he wasn't dancing or dueling, he acted by posing in elaborate costumes and popping open his eyes to show emotion.
Love, hate, surprise, any emotion at all.
Even considering that exaggerated gestures were standard in silent films, Valentino lacked subtlety.


Nets Finally Sign Anderson
The Nets finally signed Kenny Anderson to a contract today, a five-year deal worth $14.5 million, but time ran out on their effort to get him into uniform for tonight's home opener against the Miami Heat.
The Nets worked frantically all day to slot the deal with Anderson, their top draft pick, beneath the National Basketball Association salary cap.
In the final hours before the game at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the Nets asked Derrick Coleman for help.


Frank White to Manage
FRANK WHITE, who spent 17 years as a second baseman with the Kansas City Royals, will join the Boston Red Sox as a rookie manager of the Red Sox's Gulf Coast League team in Winter Haven, Fla.


Bogus Document Scheme Costs New York Millions
More than 100 women were able to bilk New York City of millions of dollars in welfare payments using fake Social Security cards, because of serious flaws in the city's system for preventing such abuses, city and Federal officials said yesterday.
The city's Department of Investigation announced yesterday that it had arrested 17 people, most of them in the last week, and is seeking 84 more.
In July, six people were arrested on similar charges.


Shostakovich Quartet
The Shostakovich String Quartet is to make its New York debut in a concert tomorrow evening at 8 at Washington Irving High School, Irving Place at 16th Street, in Manhattan.
On the program are Borodin's Quartet No. 2, Shostakovich's Quartet No. 13 and Schumann's Quartet No. 3.
Tickets are $3.50.
Information: (212) 586-4680.


School That Battles To Save Small Souls
The main entrance to St.
Luke's Elementary School is on East 139th Street.
You can't get in that way, though.
The doors are locked to guard against the open drug dealing on the block.
Instead, you enter the school from East 138th Street, walking past a litter-strewn lot and through a dim alley screened by razor wire.
The passageway, speckled with graffiti, is a dreary exercise in urban blight.
But just inside the back door, where a hall monitor in a St.
Luke's tie is posted, all traces of the street wondrously disappear.


Death Toll Rises in the Philippines as Scope of Flood Emerges


Leaders Vie To Cut Taxes In New Jersey
With Gov.
Jim Florio standing on the sidelines, Democratic and Republican leaders began an angry feud today over who would be first to repeal the $2.8 billion tax increase the Governor pushed through the Legislature 16 months ago.
The Democrats who provided all the legislative support for the increase, the biggest in the state's history, said they might repeal it before the Republicans take control of both the Senate and the General Assembly in January.


Two Officers Suspended
Two New York City police officers were suspended without pay yesterday after they were involved in a locker-room brawl that left a third officer slightly injured.
The police said a fistfight broke out between Officers Ann L. Hay, 31 years old, and Ivette Serrano, 27, at 9:35 A.M. at the 50th Precinct station house in Riverdale, the Bronx.
A third officer, who was not identified, was treated for scratches and bruises but was not disciplined.
A police spokesman said the fight followed a disagreement between the two suspended officers while they were on patrol.
The spokesman said the incident was under investigation.


CHRONICLE
Until this week the YIVO Institute for Jewish Research, the leading repository of information on Eastern European Jewry, was planning its annual benefit dinner as a festive tribute to the publisher Robert Maxwell and his wife, ELISABETH MAXWELL.
But Mr.
Maxwell's death on Tuesday has transformed the occasion into "a solemn celebration" of Mr.
Maxwell's life and his commitment to Jewish history and culture, said ROSALINE SCHWARTZ, a spokeswoman for the institute in Manhattan.
Ms.
Schwartz said the institute's staff "is still in a state of shock" over Mr.
Maxwell's sudden death at sea.
But she said the organization's board met late Tuesday and decided to go ahead with the benefit dinner on Nov. 24.
Ms.
Schwartz said no one knew yet whether Mrs.
Maxwell, who has been as active in Jewish causes as her husband and was also to be honored, would attend.
The board has sent condolences, but has not tried to talk with the Maxwell family, she said.


2 Banks Tied to B.C.C.I. Get Aid From a Worried Federal Reserve
Spurred by both financial and political concerns, the Federal Reserve Board is engaged in an extraordinary effort to try to make sure the two American banks that were secretly owned by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International do not fail, according to Government officials and others familiar with the assistance program.
The two banks -- the Independence Bank of Encino, Calif., and First American Bankshares Inc. of Washington -- are linked only by their association with B.C.C.I., which the Government says illicitly bought both institutions acting through front men.
Their operations are separate, and their financial problems are quite different, with Independence in worse shape.


Weicker Drops State From Regional Clean-Air Effort
Setting his state on a course independent of 11 other Northeastern states from Maine to Virginia, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. said yesterday that Connecticut would not accept strict new standards on automobile emissions as part of a regional effort to control smog.
The other states have agreed among themselves to use a plan adopted by California that will eventually require cars that run on alternate fuels like natural gas, methanol and electricity.
The plan phases in tighter controls on hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxide, two chemical ingredients of smog, produced by cars powered by gasoline.


I.B.M. Chief Issues Threat On U.S. Tariff
I.B.M.'s chairman, John F. Akers, said today that the company might soon be forced to move production of some of its smallest machines out of the United States unless the American Government removed a stiff anti-dumping duty imposed on a key Japanese-made component -- the most advanced flat-panel display screens used in portable computers.
Mr.
Akers's comments, at a news conference in Tokyo, appeared to intensify the pressure on United States officials to reverse a decision that was supposed to protect a nascent sector of the American computer industry.
The issue has put the International Business Machines Corporation at the center of a debate that has been rife with trade politics, including questions of whether the Bush Administration, in its effort to get tough with Japan, may be crippling a critical part of America's personal computer industry.
At Issue: a 63% Tariff
Most computer makers depend heavily on Japanese sources for their flat-panel displays, also known as liquid-crystal display screens.
And manufacturers in the United States have argued that the 63 percent tariff imposed last summer makes their computers uncompetitive against models made in Japan.


Dhahran Journal; General's Star Feat: Desert Armies Come, and Go
The gas masks are gone.
His office looks decent compared with the shabby theater at the Dhahran air base that was his headquarters when he first landed.
And Lieut.
Gen.
William G. Pagonis has three stars now instead of the two he had when he arrived on Aug. 9, 1990, a week after Iraq invaded Kuwait.
Still, the most senior American commander in the Persian Gulf region speaks fondly of his first night in Dhahran.
Exhausted then from a week of continuous work, he practically collapsed on a bed, outdoors, in 140-degree heat.
Nearby, American planes were touching down at the rate of one a minute to begin allied operations in the desert.


Sports of The Times; Magic Johnson's Legacy
MAYBE there's not just one moment you remember about Magic Johnson, the basketball player and the man.
Maybe it's a great and wonderful collection of moments, seen in the mind's eye like a film, of Magic's no-look passes; of that quirky, high dribble and then sliding to the hoop for a finger-roll layup; of his long, looping one-hander, and of his spirited professionalism, which could be seen with his unabashedly high-fivin' his mates or getting on the case of, say Vlade Divac, for blowing kisses to the crowd and not keeping his mind squarely on the game.
Coming through in each of the frames of that mental film, though, is the smile of Magic Johnson, who played basketball with so much joy.
Even when things were low for him in the game, even, for example, after the Lakers fell behind in the last N.B.A. final in a terrific series with the Bulls, he said, "This has been beautiful basketball." His smile was somewhat wan, but he smiled.


M. Vandergrift, 90, Founder and Leader Of Auction House
Mary Vandergrift, a founder and longtime executive of Parke-Bernet Galleries auction house and for many years a major figure in international auctions, died in her sleep on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 90 years old and also had a home in Bucks County, Pa.
Her daughter, Joan Sweeney of Manhattan, said the cause of death was heart failure.


Tax Cut for Middle Class Urged by Rostenkowski
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the most influential tax writer in Congress, today introduced a tax cut for working-class and middle-income families that would be offset by taxes on the wealthy.
The proposal was immediately endorsed by the House leadership, underscoring the Democratic strategy of promoting the interests of the middle class as the Presidential election season nears.


Review/Film; The Shadows Behind 3 Sun-Drenched Colonial Lives
"Overseas" was shown as part of the 1991 New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 27.
The French-language film opens today at the 68th Street Playhouse, at Third Avenue, in Manhattan.
Brigitte Rouan's film "Overseas" brings a Jane Austen-like sensibility to the story of three sisters living in Algeria during the final years of French colonial rule.
The movie's opening scenes, set in the late 1940's, present a romantic picture of French colonial life in the days before the nationalist uprising that eventually drove a million Europeans to leave the country.
It is a vision that the director, who also co-wrote the film and who plays one of the sisters, spends the rest of the movie demolishing in a story that is subtly colored with Marxist and feminist overtones.


Studies Cite 10.5 Years From Infection to Illness
Magic Johnson's extraordinary physical strength and stamina are unlikely to slow the rate of progression of his AIDS virus infection, researchers said yesterday.
Nor would playing basketball be expected to make him get sick faster, they said, although the Lakers' physician, Dr.
Michael Mellman, said at yesterday's news conference that the rigors of the game could weaken Johnson.


Why Central Park Should Be Entirely Closed to Motorists
To the Editor:
The decision to impose a 15-mile-per-hour speed limit for cyclists and skaters in Central Park displays the tremendous cowardice of New York City's government and Parks Department.
True, the mix of cyclists, skaters, runners, walkers and strollers is intolerable.
Each day within a confined space, thousands of cyclists and skaters in one lane hurl down hills at speeds nearing 40 m.p.h. toward runners and walkers coming at them in the opposite direction in another lane.
They are separated by a five-inch-white line.
That's lunacy.
But the wrong decision has been made.


Corrections
A brief report in the Book Notes column on Wednesday omitted CBS's partners in the purchase of the American television rights to the novel "Scarlett." They are Robert Halmi, the chairman of RHI Entertainment Inc.; the Kirch Group, a German communications conglomerate, and Silvio Berlusconi, an Italian newspaper owner and broadcaster.


Market's Fear Engulfs A Maxwell Company
The stock price of the debt-burdened Maxwell Communication Corporation plunged nearly 40 percent today, despite the publishing company's announcement of another divestiture, pledges of continuing support from its banks and a key executive promotion.
The company said it would sell its stake in Berlitz International Inc., the language instruction company, to the Fukutake Publishing Company of Japan for $265 million.
It is also believed to be close to completing the sale of its computer-books unit for $160 million.


Pop/Jazz; Voice of the Beehive's Singular Viewpoint
The recipe for poverty salad is simple.
"Onions, carrots, celery -- just the cheapest veggies you can get," said Tracey Bryn of the band Voice of the Beehive, who invented the concoction with her sister and partner, Melissa Brooke Belland.
"You put it into a big bowl, and that's what you eat for breakfast, lunch and dinner. Melissa ate so much of it one night, she got ill and she's never been able to eat it since."
Ms.
Bryn and Ms.
Belland, who share lead vocals in Voice of the Beehive, said they lived on poverty salad for most of 1987.
The sisters had just moved to London from Los Angeles, where they grew up, in the hope of getting a band together and landing a record deal.
Ms.
Bryn had worked with bands in California, and the sisters had gained exposure to the music business through their father, Bruce Belland, who was a member of the 1950's vocal group the Four Preps.
Once in London, they were so determined to set their career in motion that sustenance was a low priority.


CIVIL RIGHTS BILL IS PASSED BY HOUSE
With only an echo of the bitter debate over quotas that held the legislation back for two years, the House today passed and sent to President Bush a major civil rights bill that makes it easier to sue in job discrimination cases.
The vote for the bill overturning at least eight Supreme Court decisions was 381 to 38, with 252 Democrats, 128 Republicans and 1 independent in favor, and 5 Democrats and 33 Republicans voting no.
Mr.
Bush has said he would sign the bill.


Editorial Notebook; An Exception to Civil Rights Rules
Nothing in this Act shall apply to any disparate impact case for which a complaint was filed before March 1, 1975, and for which an initial decision was rendered after October 30, 1983.
So reads the final sentence of the civil rights bill Congress passed yesterday.
It was Congress's quaint way of designating, without naming, the one case to which the law would not apply.
Only one case fits the description: the one the Supreme Court decided so strangely that Congress felt obliged to weigh in, Wards Cove Packing Company v.
Atonio.


Diner's Journal
Mystery at Hot L
Hot L looks like everybody's idea of a little bohemian restaurant in Greenwich Village.
The name is a play on the former occupant, a bar named Hotel Morrison.
Hot L has a mysterious air to it, with candles reflecting off copper wainscoting; wall panels painted yellow, green or red, and antique sconces.
Waiters favor blue jeans and dark T-shirts.
Shaving every four days seems to be the fashion.


HEEDING ELECTIONS, LAWMAKERS OFFER HEALTH-CARE IDEAS
Congress reacted quickly today to Tuesday's election results, with Senate Republicans contending that the White House was moving too slowly to develop a health-care program and Democrats and Republicans alike objecting to a plan to divert $1 billion from the Pentagon budget to aid the Soviet Union.
Nineteen Republicans, including Bob Dole of Kansas, the minority leader, offered comprehensive legislation to provide basic medical care to most of the 34 million Americans who lack health insurance.
As for the Soviet aid plan, lawmakers on both sides of the aisle said that the $1 billion would be better spent helping poor people in the United States than providing food, medicine and other "humanitarian assistance" to the Soviet Union.


Zambia's Cabinet Is Named; Chief Vows to Fix Economy
The newly elected President, Frederick Chiluba, announced his Cabinet today and pledged to rebuild the shattered economy of this copper-producing country in southern Africa.
Mr.
Chiluba, who defeated the longtime leader Kenneth D. Kaunda in the first multiparty elections here in 23 years, gave the crucial post of Finance Minister to a businessman, Emmanuel Kasonde.


The Law Decides Too Many Ethical Questions
To the Editor:
The ethics of "assisted suicide" continue to confound authorities responsible for enforcing criminal law, as in the case of Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, who has apparently fashioned devices to allow people with chronic or degenerative diseases to take their own lives (news story, Oct. 25).


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
The Fed is trying to make sure that the two American banks secretly owned by B.C.C.I. do not fail, according to government officials and others familiar with the rescue program.
The collapse of either Independence Bank or First American Bankshares would be "political dynamite," regulators said.  [ Page A1. ]
Many bankers say weakness in the economy will overpower the Fed's efforts to cut rates and stimulate more bank lending.  [ D1. ]


Most Searchers Give Up Looking For Missing Flier
The Coast Guard and the Navy ended their intensive eight-day search of the Atlantic off Long Island and New Jersey yesterday for a flier whose helicopter ditched in a storm at sea last week, but the Air National Guard will continue its search today and tomorrow.
The Coast Guard, in a statement issued at First District headquarters in Boston, said its joint search with the Navy for Tech.
Sgt.
Arden R. Smith, a member of the 106th Air Rescue Group of the New York Air National Guard, was called off at 2 P.M. after an evaluation had concluded that his survival was "not likely."


Get Pentagon Out of Civilian Research
To the Editor:
As a computer scientist, I find "Pentagon Wizards of Technology Eye Wider Civilian Role" (Science Times, Oct. 22) disturbing.
You distort the content of a longstanding debate in the scientific community, discussed in a 1987 book of which I was co-editor, "Computers in Battle: Will They Work?"


Critic's Choice/Film; Friends Who Probably Shouldn't Be
"Antonia and Jane" is the thinking person's "Thelma and Louise." In this English female-buddy movie, frumpy Jane and fast-track Antonia have a love-hate friendship.
Each envies the other and thinks her own life is a flop.
This does not make them hit the road and blow up an oil truck; instead, they have an annual dinner together, fret about their relationships with men, talk to their mutual psychiatrist and indulge in the occasional self-pitying fantasy.
Far from being dull, the result is funny, lively and shrewd.
Jane (Imelda Staunton), the heavy one with unstylish curls and oversize glasses, has good reasons for resenting the successful, sleek-looking Antonia (Saskia Reeves).
Among other slights, Antonia has married Jane's fiance.
This would crack most friendships, but there's no underestimating Jane's self-esteem.


CHRONICLE
The Sara Lee Corporation will honor four women for their achievements and will contribute $10,000 to each of three nonprofit women's organizations and a college at its annual Frontrunner awards program on Wednesday.
The award will go to JUDITH JAMISON, the artistic director of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater; HELENE HAHN, the executive vice president of Walt Disney Studios; CARLA A. HILLS, the United States trade representative, and HANNA HOLBORN GRAY, the president of the University of Chicago.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Rockets Roll By Cavs  Sleepy Floyd and Tree Rollins led a 28-8 run at the start of the second quarter that lifted the Houston Rockets to a 105-86 home-court victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers last night.
Floyd scored 8 of his 22 points during the second-period burst and Rollins added 7 of his 13.
It was the most points Rollins had scored since the 1987-88 season and the first time since the 1989-90 season that he had scored in double figures.
He also grabbed nine rebounds. (AP) Sonics 103, Jazz 95: In Salt Lake City, Benoit Benjamin had 22 points and 13 rebounds, leading Seattle to a 103-95 victory over Utah in the opening of the new Delta Center.
Derrick McKey had 20 points and 11 rebounds, and Michael Cage scored 17 points for the SuperSonics, who survived a late 15-0 run by Utah, which was 36-5 last season at the Salt Palace.
John Stockton led Utah with 23 points and 16 assists, while Karl Malone scored 19 points before being ejected with two technical fouls with 3:08 left in the third quarter.
Seattle saw a 90-74 lead with 5:51 left in the game shrink to 90-89 with 2:17 remaining.
Stockton scored 9 points in Utah's 15-0 rally, but a layup by Benjamin and a dunk by Cage put the SuperSonics back in control with 1:39 left. (AP) Nuggets 88, Timberwolves 77: Denver, playing at home, continued its surprising start as Dikembe Mutombo had 14 points and 18 rebounds in a victory over cold-shooting Minnesota.
The Timberwolves shot 34.6 percent from the field as the Nuggets won their third straight game after a season-opening loss.
Mark Macon led the Nuggets with 18 points, while Tony Campbell scored 18 for the Timberwolves, who have yet to win this season. (AP) N.H.L.
Red Wings Rout Blues  The Detroit Red Wings scored in double figures last night for the first time since 1987, routing the St.
Louis Blues, 10-3, in Detroit.
The Red Wings' last 10-goal game came against Chicago on Dec. 4, 1987.
The Blues hadn't given up 10 goals since Oct. 8, 1984, in a game against Minnesota.
Pat Jablonski, the Blackhawks' goalie, gave up eight goals in 27 minutes, and Curtis Joseph gave up the last two.
Paul Ysebaert gave the Red Wings a 1-0 lead at 3 minutes 10 seconds and the score stayed that way until Detroit unleashed a club-record barrage at Jablonski late in the period.
Shawn Burr made the score 2-0 at 13:20, then Jimmy Carson scored 59 seconds later.
Nicklas Lidstrom scored his second at 15:00, and Ysebaert finished the run with his 10th of the year at 15:45.
The four goals in 2:25 broke the team record by 57 seconds. (AP) Flyers 5, Sabres 2: Dan Quinn had a goal and an assist as Philadelphia, playing at home, reached the .500 mark for the first time since March 16 of last season.
The Flyers (6-6-1) have won six of their last nine games after starting the season with a four-game streak without a victory.
Buffalo has just one triumph in seven decisions (1-6) on the road this season. (AP) Flames 4, Bruins 4: In Boston, Calgary's Theoren Fleury and Boston's Brent Ashton scored two goals each as the Flames and the Bruins packed all their scoring into the first two periods en route to the tie. (AP) Blackhawks 4, Nordiques 2: In Chicago, Steve Larmer helped to make goaltender Ed Belfour's home debut successful, scoring twice in a 13-second span in the first period.
COLLEGE FOOTBALL  Aggies Keep Rolling Bucky Richardson passed for a career-high 321 yards and accounted for four touchdowns as Texas A&amp;M cruised to a 44-7 Southwest Conference victory over Texas Christian.
Texas A&amp;M (7-1 over all, 5-0 in the conference) is ranked 11th by The New York Times and 12th in the news-agency polls. (AP)


CHRONICLE
Many New Yorkers know that SEYMOUR DURST is a real-estate developer whose buildings dot midtown Manhattan and scores of other sections of the city, and that he played a big part in revitalizing the Grand Central area.
Some may even know that he built the "national-debt clock," the two-foot-high tote board at 42d Street and Avenue of the Americas that tallies the national debt.
FRANCES DEGEN HOROWITZ, the president of the City University Graduate School and University Center, said that further evidence of Mr.
Durst's deep commitment to New York City is his "incomparable" private library of written material on the metropolis, including books, maps and articles.


Holiday on Monday
Veterans Day will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK PARADE: Begins at 9 A.M. on Fifth Avenue at 39th Street and proceeds south on Fifth Avenue to 24th Street, ending around noon.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and Special Delivery only.
Post offices will be closed with the exception of the emergency window at the Main Post Office, 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Option to close.
PARKING: Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION: No Pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Open.
TRANSPORTATION: Regular weekday service.
TRAFFIC ALERT: The Brooklyn-bound lanes of the Brooklyn Bridge will be closed for repairs from 3 P.M. this afternoon until 3 P.M.
Monday.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Local option.
TRANSPORTATION: Regular weekday service.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Regular weekday schedules.


Now, Captain Watson
TOM WATSON, a five-time British Open champion, promises to be a great cheerleader in his new role as captain of the American Ryder Cup team.
As expected, Watson's selection to lead the United States in its 1993 matches against Europe was announced yesterday by DICK SMITH, president of the Professional Golfers' Association of America.


Admiral Is Said to Be Choice To Succeed Gates as Adviser
The White House is close to naming Adm.
Jonathan T. Howe, the commander of NATO forces in southern Europe, to succeed Robert M. Gates as deputy national security adviser, Pentagon officials said today.


Review/Theater; Robards and Ivey As Head and Heart
HE is "the oldest living man in Gloucester, Mass.," a crotchety retired high-school teacher who never married.
She is the warm-hearted young widow, also childless, who answers his ad for a live-in housekeeper.
He is Jewish.
She is Catholic.
He is a chilly intellectual.
She is a sentimental slob.
He likes Mozart.
She likes Phoebe Snow.
He has a hearing aid.
She has a big mouth.
So it goes, and goes and goes and goes, in "Park Your Car in Harvard Yard," the Israel Horovitz comedy that has parked Jason Robards and Judith Ivey at the Music Box Theater on Broadway, one of New York's most merciless tow-away zones.
The play is one of those one-set, two-actor, odd-couple contraptions that periodically seduce producers in search of low budgets and high returns along the lines of "Same Time, Next Year" or "Educating Rita." This particular example is only five minutes old before the audience is sure that the playwright can only be heading in one of two directions: either one of his characters will die in bed, or both of them will have sex there.
In the evening's sole burst of ingenuity, Mr.
Horovitz nearly pulls off both these denouements, though the advanced age of Mr.
Robards's teacher requires that the carnal climax be achieved by proxy.


2 More Twins Are Free
Two members of the Minnesota Twins' relief corps, STEVE BEDROSIAN and TERRY LEACH, yesterday joined BRIAN HARPER and DAN GLADDEN as players on the World Series champions who have filed for free agency.


Disorder Involved in Deaths at Kings County, Study Says
Disorganization at Kings County Hospital has led to two unnecessary patient deaths and played a role in two others, the New York State Department of Health has concluded.
In its review of the hospital, prompted by the case of Yankel Rosenbaum, a young Hasidic scholar who died in the Kings County emergency room, the state found numerous deficiencies.


Art in Review
Paul Thek
Brooke Alexander Gallery 59 Wooster Street SoHo
Through Wednesday
Paul Thek (1933-1988) is best known for rather gruesome excursions into realism, as in a famous 1967 installation piece titled "The Tomb -- Death of a Hippie" and unsettling plastic sculptures that juxtapose cross-sections of human flesh displayed with antiseptic Minimalist forms.


Assad Meets With Arafat
Yasir Arafat met today with President Hafez al-Assad in Syria in a sign of improved relations between his Palestine Liberation Organization and Syria at a time of growing dissent within Palestinian ranks over the peace negotiations with Israel.
The Syrian state radio said Mr.
Arafat had praised the stand Syria took at the Middle Eastern peace conference.
It said Mr.
Arafat and Mr.
Assad had conferred for two hours about the next phase of the talks with Israel.


Riley Leads the Prayers Riley Leads the Prayers
It was just Wednesday morning that Pat Riley had received a letter from Magic Johnson, whom he has always called by his given name, Earvin.
The letter spoke of their wonderful past together and an exciting future apart.
Riley had his new challenge with the Knicks.
Johnson had the Olympics next summer and the rest of his career, for as long as he wanted to hold on to it.
The letter was mailed before Johnson learned he had been infected with the AIDS virus, before Johnson knew he would be announcing his retirement from the Los Angeles Lakers yesterday in Los Angeles.


To Save Money, State Tells 5,700 to Take the Day Off
About 5,700 state workers, or more than 10 percent of the state work force, have been ordered to stay home and lose a day's pay on Friday, but state agency officials promise that the workers' absence will barely be noticed, if at all, by the average state resident.
So then, are those people needed?


Restaurants
Montrachet
It was an audacious move when Montrachet opened its doors in 1985 on a drab block south of Canal Street.
It may be hard to imagine today, but back then fine restaurants in TriBeCa were as scarce as yacht clubs.
Montrachet, owned by a former maitre d'hotel at La Grenouille in Manhattan, Drew Nieporent, began as an uptown restaurant that dared diners to venture into distant, darkest TriBeCa.


Groups Backing Abortion Rights Ask Court to Act
In a calculated move to intensify the political debate on abortion before the 1992 elections, abortion rights groups today asked the Supreme Court to take up a case that could decide the validity of the 1973 Roe v.
Wade decision that established the Constitutional right to abortion.
Abortion rights advocates acknowledged that calling for the Supreme Court to rule on a Pennsylvania case decided two weeks ago risked an outright reversal, by the increasingly conservative Court, of the 1973 ruling that made abortions available throughout the country.


TV Weekend; Murder, Rape, Mayhem: It Must Be Sweeps Time
Last Sunday, made-for-television movies featured a doctor who finds on her operating table the man who had raped her weeks earlier (CBS's "Rape of Dr. Willis") and a woman being imprisoned for a crime she did not commit and then being raped by a gang of female inmates (ABC's "False Arrest").
This Sunday at 9 P.M. -- are you ready? -- you can have a mother who fails to stop one bullying son from driving her other son to murder (CBS's "My Son Johnny") or one whale of a woman whose credentials are ticked off in the title (ABC's "Wife, Mother, Murderer").
Obviously, gentle reader, we are in another television sweeps period, during which ratings are crucial in the pricing of network commercials for an entire business quarter.
Industry researchers, those indefatigable souls who are generally proved wrong some 90 percent of the time, have evidently determined that women like to watch other women get into trouble and then, even if putting a considerable strain on credulity, get out.
And so another dumb formula is born, usually carrying the fuzzy label of "inspired by an actual event."


A Career Of Impact, A Player With Heart
He revolutionized basketball, playing it as no one of his size had ever before.
He helped lift the National Basketball Association to unprecedented popularity, not only in America but worldwide.
He led the Los Angeles Lakers to five league titles, bringing passing and teamwork back into vogue.
And he did it all with a charismatic smile and a magnetic personality that made him a favorite among fans of all ages.
Magic Johnson's career cannot be measured by mere statistics.
Before his retirement he was one of the greatest basketball players of all time, not just because of what he did, but because of the tremendous impact he had on the game.


Corrections
The table of winning lottery numbers yesterday included incorrect results for New York Lotto in some editions.
A corrected version appears today on page B7.


John Dillon, a Novelist And Ad Executive, 68
John Dillon, an advertising executive and a novelist, died on Tuesday at his home in Westport, Conn.
He was 68 years old.
He died of respiratory failure, his company said.


Jobs and Poverty Increase for Hispanic Americans
More Hispanic people are working, more are earning at least $50,000 a year and more are completing high school than eight years ago, but more are also living in poverty, the Federal Census Bureau said today in a new report.
Overall Hispanic buying power, bolstered by a 52 percent increase in the number of Hispanic households, rose 67 percent since 1982, the report said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  YANKEE, DON'T GO HOME, SAYS NATO
President Bush challenged his NATO allies at a meeting in Rome to state clearly whether they wanted America to withdraw from the defense of Europe and was rapidly assured that they did not.
Page A1  Reporter's Notebook: Smiles and photo opportunities for Bush.
A6  MARKET AND BOLSHEVIKS OUT IN COLD
The free market is nowhere to be found in Moscow's stores, but it is found everywhere on the sidewalks just outside.
A1  On the 74th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution, Red Square filled with a confused crowd, nervous about the nation's future.
A10  U.S.
WEIGHS FATE OF SEIZED HAITIANS
Nearly two hundred Haitians seized as they fled in small boats are being kept aboard two Coast Guard cutters while the United States considers what to do with them.
A3  PHILIPPINE FLOOD'S AFTERMATH
Two days after a flash flood swept away whole neighborhoods of the quiet Philippine seaside city of Ormoc, the scope of the disaster was still emerging.
A3  MAXWELL COMPANY'S STOCK DROPS
The stock price of the debt-burdened Maxwell Communication Corporation plunged despite the announcement of another divestiture, pledges of continuing support from its banks and a key executive promotion.
D1  Robert Maxwell's mysterious death continues to raise questions.
D18  DEAD SEA SCROLL FINDING
Scholars reported finding a fragment of a text in the Dead Sea Scrolls mentioning the execution of a Messiah-like leader.
A8  SANDINISTA LABOR ACCORD REJECTED
Sandinista labor groups have angrily rejected an announced accord between the Government and the leadership of the Sandinista Front.
A7  Dhahran Journal: The U.S. commander sends troops home.
A4  Israeli aircraft attacked Palestinian guerrillas in Lebanon.
A11  National A12-17, A28, B8  ECHOES OF THE ELECTION
Congress reacted quickly to the election results of Tuesday, with Senate Republicans contending that the White House was moving too slowly to develop a health-care program and Democrats and Republicans objecting to a plan to send $1 billion to the Soviet Union.
A1  CIVIL RIGHTS BILL PASSES
With little of the debate over quotas that held the legislation back for two years, the House passed a civil rights bill that would make it easier to sue in job bias cases.
A15  TACTIC IN ABORTION FIGHT
In a move intended to intensify the debate on abortion before the 1992 races, abortion rights groups urged the Supreme Court to decide whether Roe v.
Wade was still valid.
A1  The Senate passed a bill that would void a Federal rule barring doctors and counselors at Government-supported family planning clinics from discussing abortion.
B8  PROPPING UP B.C.C.I.
BANKS
The Federal Reserve is said to be engaged in an effort to try to make sure the two U.S. banks secretly owned by B.C.C.I. do not fail.
A1  DUKE VS.
EDWARDS
Edwin Edwards has seemingly amassed advantages in the race for governor of Louisiana.
But he acknowledges that the presence of David Duke on the ballot insures that there is nothing ordinary about the race.
A16  Tuesday's elections in Virginia damage Governor Wilder.
A16  A MAN UNDER FIRE
Bill Honig, California's Superintendent of Public Instruction, is at the center of a dispute that could lead to the loss of his official power.
A12  AIR-QUALITY COMPROMISE
Faced with complaints from business that pollution-control regulations were a burden, authorities in Southern California's said they planned to soften their approach to enforcing the rules.
A12  Rostenkowski proposes a tax cut.
A14  Book by Gary Sick makes his case on "October Surprise." A16  Census Bureau issues report on Hispanic Americans.
A17  Critics open a new attack on breast implants.
A28  "Pee-wee Herman" enters no-contest plea.
A12  Law Page B20
Cursed and praised, retiring judge recalls storm.
At birth, a new right: To sue for past injury.
At the Bar Metropolitan Digest, B1 Water Meter Company Indicted
The company doing the bulk of New York City water meter installations was indicted on charges of defrauding the city by performing sloppy work and cheating hundreds of workers, in a scheme investigators said was made possible by city mismanagement.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Sports B11-17  MAGIC JOHNSON HAS AIDS VIRUS
Earvin (Magic) Johnson, one of professional basketball's most enduring stars, said that he had tested positive for the AIDS virus and was retiring immediately from the Los Angeles Lakers at the age of 32.
A1  Basketball: Riley talks about Magic Johnson.
B11  An appreciation of Magic's style.
B11  A message sent to black males.
B12  Johnson's endorsement future in doubt.
B13  Sports world is stunned and shaken.
B13  This time, Knicks beat Orlando.
B13  Nets finally sign Anderson.
B14  Columns: Berkow on Magic Johnson.
B11  Lipsyte on Boom-Boom the actor.
B17  Football: Colts suspend Dickerson.
B14  Bosses don't hassle Handley.
B15  N.F.L.
Matchups B15  Hockey: Muller still feels sting.
B14  Weekend Metropolitan Museum reopens its display of arms and armor.
C1  A series on Valentino and his cult.
C1  For Children C4  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  "Park Your Car in Harvard Yard." C1  Film: At the Movies C8  "Small Time" C11  Music: Voice of the Beehive.
C3  Art: Unusual inspirations C17  2 shows at I.B.M.
Gallery.
C23  The Art Market C23market  Portraits by Chuck Close C24  Restaurants C18  Word and Image: "The Thrill of Fear." C25  Obituaries D19  Gene Tierney, actress  Editorials/Op-Ed  Editorials A26  The health care alarm Chile's chilly idea House of Morgan, doubled John P. MacKenzie: Rights Letters A26  Anthony Lewis: "Your best and worst." A27  A. M. Rosenthal: Anatomy of a scoop.
A27  Anders Aslund: Forget the Soviet "Union." A27  Joseph B. Rose: An unfair share.
A27


Skepticism On Effects Of Rate Cut
The Federal Reserve and other bank regulators are trying to stimulate more bank lending by reducing interest rates and rewriting guidelines for examining real estate loans.
But many bankers say the weakness in the economy will overpower those efforts and bank lending will remain sluggish.
"So long as the public is convinced that we are not out of the recession, I don't think rate reductions are going to have much immediate impact" on demand for loans or bank lending, said Ezekiel S. Ketchum, president of Meridian Bank in Reading, Pa.
"People do not go out and buy a car just because rates are down half a point," he said.
And businesses that do not foresee a sustained increase in demand for their products are not likely to borrow to increase inventories or production.
Bankers Worry About Inflation
While bank profits would benefit by an increase in loan demand, several bankers warned this week that the recent initiatives were worrisome because they could eventually help revive inflation.


The Cop They Call Robber
Until he was charged with the armed robbery of two banks, Detective Allen R. Schott was by all accounts a model policeman and citizen.
At Christmas time he solicited toys, then spent hours gift-wrapping them for poor children.
He gave neighborhood children pony rides during birthday parties.
To friends, he was generous and fun-loving, always the jokester and always ready to do a favor or a good deed.
In his 17 years as a policeman in this sprawling central New Jersey community of almost 39,000, he built an exemplary record, town officials say.


The Land of the Fee? Not Yet, Fans
A plan to televise the Nov. 16 Notre Dame-Penn State game on a pay-per-view basis was scuttled yesterday when ABC Sports, the College Football Association and SET Pay-Per-View agreed that one week was inadequate time to market the contest to potential buyers.
"It's not going to get done," said Mark Mandel, a spokesman for ABC Sports.
An executive of SET, speaking on the condition that he not be identified, said: "It was a wise decision not to pursue it until we can do it right. We were getting real tight on the time frame."


A Light Touch on a Leaden Day in the Bronx


Dollar Up a Bit in New York After Declining in Europe
The dollar was narrowly mixed against other currencies yesterday following a series of losses.
The dollar fell in European trading but recovered in New York dealings.
Analysts said it drew some strength from a variety of factors.


The Voters' Anguish Over Death
Last Tuesday, the people of Washington State faced a legislative proposition unlike any they, or other Americans, had ever seen.
The ballot read: "Shall adult patients who are in a medically terminal condition be permitted to request and receive from a physician aid-in-dying?" The proposition failed, in part because voters felt it was too broadly worded and contained too few safeguards.
That sends useful messages to states where similar legislation is pending: Legal euthanasia is an immensely emotional subject.
Ask questions.
Go slowly.


Rangers Take Over First, but They Aren't Smiling
For the Rangers, the first tie of the season was an unwelcome outcome, a blow to the morale disguised as a point in the standing.
The 3-3 result against the Toronto Maple Leafs last night at Madison Square Garden could have been a 3-2 victory with a little more defensive care or a bit more power-play zest.
The Rangers clambered into sole possession of first place in the Patrick Division for the first time this season, but could have done it with far more grace.


Bridge
In financial terms, a room in the Regency Whist Club at 15 East 67th Street probably holds two world bridge records: It is likely that more money changes hands there each afternoon than in any other game in the world, and it is virtually certain that the total wealth of the players exceeds that of any comparable group anywhere.
Many of the players are multi-millionaires, and one of them, Milton J. Petrie, chairman of Petrie Stores Corporation, is one of America's wealthiest citizens.
In the diagramed deal played there this week the East cards were held by Alan C. (Ace) Greenberg, the chairman of the brokerage house of Bear Stearns.
Jack Dreyfus, founder of the Dreyfus Fund, sat West.
The declarer in four spades was Michael E. Moss, who came close to winning a world title in Geneva a year ago.


Dole Calls Democratic Ideas On Jobless Aid Demagoguery
Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader, today accused Senate Democrats of "partisan demagoguery" in proposing legislation to extend unemployment benefits that would give President Bush three choices on how to pay for it: declaring a budget emergency and increasing the Federal deficit, curbing foreign aid or raising estimated income tax payments.
Mr.
Dole said all three choices were flawed.
But he scoffed at the overall plan as "government by multiple choice."


Beliefs
The prospect of hanging, Samuel Johnson pointed out after visiting a condemned prisoner, concentrates the mind wonderfully.
It seems that the same thing can be said of lethal injections.
In early October, a poll showed that 61 percent of the likely voters in Washington State favored Initiative 119, the ballot measure that would have permitted physicians to help terminally ill patients commit suicide or even kill them at their request.
Only 27 percent were opposed and 12 percent were undecided.
A month later, voters defeated the Initiative by a 54-to-46 margin.


Quotation of the Day
"I think you don't think I think." A COMPUTER PROGRAM, trying to fool a person in Boston.  [ 10:3. ]


Hebert Out for 2 Games
Shoulder injuries will keep New Orleans Saints starting quarterback BOBBY HEBERT out of at least two more games, including Sunday's game against the San Francisco 49ers.
Hebert has a bruised rotator cuff muscle and a sprained shoulder of his right throwing arm, according to Dr.
FRANK JOBE, one of the country's leading authorities on rotator cuff injuries, who examined Hebert in Los Angeles on Thursday.
Coach JIM MORA said Hebert would not be placed on injured reserve. (AP)


Magic Johnson, as President
He has had many great moments during his wondrous basketball career.
But none were as courageous as Magic Johnson's disclosure on Thursday that he had been infected with the AIDS virus.
This was leadership for the nation, just when it was needed.
Mr.
Johnson pledged to work toward ending the spread of the disease.
That pledge shames President Bush, whose silence has allowed this plague to disappear from the national agenda.


She Taught Her Scouts How to Live
The facts are that in the wee hours of Sunday, Oct. 27, Shona Bailey, 21 years old, returned home from a friend's birthday party, taking a cab for safety.
Her nude body was found later the same day in the basement of her apartment building in Harlem.
She had been raped and strangled by a still unidentified assailant.


No Smooth Road Ahead for Tax-Cut Bandwagon
Despite the enormous pressure of a stalled economy and the message from voters this week that they want tax relief, Democratic and Republican lawmakers say the tax-cut bandwagon is going nowhere in Congress this year.
There has been something of a tax-cut frenzy in recent weeks, with dozens of lawmakers advancing an assortment of proposals that their authors vow would revive the economy.
The latest entry comes from Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the most influential tax writer in Congress, who had been said to be resisting moves for a tax cut but who proposed one himself on Thursday.


Sotheby's Posts a Loss
Sotheby's Holdings, the auction concern, said today that it had a pretax loss of $18 million in the third quarter that ended Sept. 30, compared with a loss of $5.4 million in the period in 1990.
Sotheby's said sales were always minimal in the third quarter because of the seasonal nature of the art business.
It said it expects the fourth quarter and the full year to be profitable, although sales and earnings will be lower than last year.


How Savings and Loan Bailout Works
To the Editor:
"Revision of Deals in S.&amp; L. Bailout Drawing Criticism" (front page, Oct. 7) shows a lack of understanding of the Resolution Trust Corporation's pilot portfolio sales strategy, as well as the specific transaction discussed, which involves the sale of hotels and office buildings by the R.T.C. to Patriot American Investors.


Bush Meets With Pope
Greeted by uniformed guards, a line of officials of the Holy See and a chorus of seminarians from the United States singing "God Bless America," President Bush went to the Vatican today for his second audience with Pope John Paul II.
Mr.
Bush, who last visited the Vatican in 1989, described his talks with the Pope as a "major tour d'horizon, touching on all the trouble spots" in the world.


Press Baron Without the Bombast
When the new publisher of The Daily News paid a visit to the paper yesterday morning, this Mr.
Maxwell did not bring his butler, recite a poem to reporters or threaten to fire a subordinate.
He didn't bellow the word "nonsense!" even once.
What 32-year-old Kevin Maxwell did do was rush across the Atlantic on the Concorde yesterday morning to reassure the newspapers' managers, union leaders and employees -- without pomp or fanfare -- that he would not abandon the paper after his rumbustious father's sudden death at sea.


Jets' Gunn Hopes to Make An Impact Against Colts
Although he has been playing quite a bit in recent weeks, Jets rookie Mark Gunn has been a bit of an invisible man on the statistics sheet.
Gunn, the 6-foot-5-inch, 292-pound defensive end and tackle from the University of Pittsburgh, has zeros across the board regarding tackles, assists, quarterback sacks, fumbles forced and recovered, passes defensed and special-teams tackles.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Ashland Oil Inc., Ashland, Ky., said its chemical unit would acquire most of Unocal Corp.'s chemical distribution business.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Concord Camera Corp., Avenel, N.J., said it had received an order in excess of $340,000 for camera products to be distributed in the Soviet Union. *
Delta Air Lines Inc., Atlanta, said its winter schedule includes increased service in nine Florida cities, beginning Dec. 15. *
DSP Technology Inc., Fremont, Calif., a computer-automated measurement and control systems concern, agreed to acquire substantially all the assets and some contractual liabilities of EDI Inc., Detroit, a unit of Eagle-Picher Industries Inc., Cincinnati. *
Marion Merrell Dow Inc., Kansas City, Mo., and Alza Corp., Palo Alto, Calif., a drug delivery systems concern, said Nicoderm, a nicotine transdermal patch for smoking cessation, had received U.S. marketing approval from the F.D.A. *
Newell Co., Freeport, Ill., a home and office products company, bought a 6.1 percent stake in Ekco Group Inc., Nashua, N.H., a home products maker. *
Raytheon Co., Lexington, Mass., said its Electromagnetic Systems division had been awarded a $16.6 million contract to produce six AN/ SLQ-32 systems for the Navy. *
Santa Fe Railway, Schaumberg, Ill., said it would acquire 90 locomotives manufactured by GE Transportation Systems at Erie, Pa. *
Unocal Exploration Corp., Los Angeles, a unit of Unocal Corp., said it had made a significant new natural gas field discovery in the Gulf of Mexico, about 90 miles east of Corpus Christi, Tex. *
Western Digital Corp., Irvine, Calif., announced it had signed a letter of intent to sell its Cork, Ireland, printed circuit board manufacturing facility to the Dover Electronics Co., a unit of Dover Corp.
Terms were not disclosed.


Small Claims Court Offers Both Frustrations and Satisfactions
To the Editor:
"On Winning Big in Small Claims Court" (Consumer's World page, Oct. 19) offers valuable advice on using Small Claims Court.
Some additional information may be helpful.


Fighting to Get on the Perfume Shelf
Even by French standards it was an affair to remember.
The 17th-century Chateau de Vaux-le-Vicomte glowed with the light of candles and fireworks.
There was Champagne and sumptuous food galore.
Barefoot Tahitian dancers and Mexican musicians added exotica, and a handful of film and fashion celebrities provided glamour.
All this to introduce Dune, the 13th perfume created by the House of Dior since 1947, and the first Dior fragrance for women since the big success of Poison in 1985.
The recent party made it clear that despite declining sales and the proliferation of new perfumes worldwide, Dior was not about to let three years of research and a $37 million investment go unnoticed.


State Report on 2 Deaths Assails Harlem Hospital
The State Health Department yesterday cited a litany of medical lapses and administrative failures in the deaths of two elderly patients at Harlem Hospital last month and said that the municipal hospital had "not provided care that meets generally accepted standards of professional practice."
The citations were made in the cases of William C. Chance Jr., a 74-year-old lawyer who bled to death from an ulcer after waiting 18 hours in a hospital emergency room, and Clarence Pompey, 73, a patient who disappeared from his hospital room and was found dead a week later in a hospital steam closet.


Armco Outlay Cut
Armco Inc., the Parsippany, N.J., steelmaker, said it would cut capital spending by 42 percent this year to a total of $40 million.
At the beginning of the year, it had budgeted $70 million for capital projects.
According to a 10-Q filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the company deferred the spending because of the recession.
Last year, Armco reported $85 million in capital spending.
Robert Kent, an Armco corporate vice president, said a plan to acquire Cyclops Industries might be partly responsible for the spending cut.


Sports of The Times; Keeper Of the Flame
Through the pain and confused emotions surrounding Magic Johnson's sudden retirement, I found myself reflecting, for some reason, on the principle of generation and regeneration.
The reflection went back about six summers to a small, stuffy gymnasium on the East Side of Manhattan, where two club basketball teams were squaring off for a game.
Someone excitedly pointed out a frail teen-ager sitting on the end of the bench, looking all of 14 years old.
And I thought, "This is the next great player out of New York City?"


Courtroom Conversation


Review/Pop; From the 40's, The Sounds Of a Favorite
Louis Jordan, whose Tympany Five was one of the most popular musical groups of the 1940's and 50's, has not been mentioned very often since then.
But one person who has drawn inspiration from Jordan for 15 years is the pianist Roy Gerson, whose eight-piece Swingtet has always included some of Jordan's songs in his performances.
Mr.
Gerson, leading his group, Five Guys Named Moe Plus Three, at Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, through Nov. 30, has now put together an entire program of Jordan material.
The fact that a musical about Jordan is a hit in London and is due in the United States in the spring suggests that a Louis Jordan revival may be in the making.


EXECUTIVES
*
Adage Inc., West Chester, Pa., a diversified manufacturer, named Wilbur (Bill) Handley president and chief executive of its subsidiary the Allister Manufacturing Co. *
Chrysler Financial Corp., Highland Park, Mich., a subsidiary of Chrysler Corp., named Thomas J. Osborn to the newly created position of executive vice president-finance.


St. Petersburg Journal; Patriarch's Church Revives, but Will Spirituality?
Standing at the center of the magnificent Cathedral of St.
Isaac on Wednesday night, diamonds and rubies glittering from his miter and staff and with a host of Romanov princes, politicians and worshipers arrayed around him, Patriarch Aleksy II of the Russian Orthodox Church was the image of the church victorious over seven decades of militant atheism.
Not long ago the great domed cathedral was a state museum, the Romanovs were a curse, no Soviet politician would dare step foot in a working church and Patriarch Aleksy was a bishop locked in a running struggle with atheist watchdogs of the State Council of Religious Affairs.


Classical Music in Review
Stephen Drury Pianist Merkin Concert Hall


G.M. Policy: New Engines, Not Repairs
General Motors' new approach to repairing its newest engines is not to fix them at all.
Instead, it is paying dealers to remove engines with problems and replace them with new power plants.
The unusual program, which started in October, covers seven engines in several models of 1992 cars and small trucks -- 10 percent of G.M.'s engine production in North America.
G.M. hopes the program will bolster its image among consumers by reducing complaints about engines that are not fixed properly or promptly.
The auto maker also said the returned engines would allow its engineers to analyze problems and make design or assembly changes.


Public &amp; Private; Believe In Magic
The last time we heard so much about a smile was when those ridiculous buttons surfaced a decade ago, the ones with the happy face and the legend "Have a nice day." Those were phony; Magic Johnson's smile is real, a grin that says feelgood as surely as the rest of him says basketball.
Some basketball players, because of their height and a certain hauteur, seem to demand genuflection.
Magic Johnson always looks to me like a guy you should hug.
That was especially true when he told the world he was infected with the AIDS virus, said he was going to become a national spokesman and flashed the grin nonetheless.
What a man.


S.&amp; P. Cuts Ratings on G.M. and Revises Outlook on Ford
Large and continuing losses at the nation's two largest auto makers prompted the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation today to lower the ratings on the preference and preferred shares of General Motors and revise its ratings outlook to "negative" from "stable" for the bonds and preference shares of Ford.
S.&amp; P. said it had lowered the G.M. ratings by one notch.
It also warned that it might reduce the ratings on $90 billion of the company's debt, the ratings of which were last lowered in February.
The rating on $110 billion worth of Ford debt was affirmed.


Logic Behind Budget Agreement
The 1991 budget agreement, finally approved Oct. 27, 1990, ended one of the most contentious sessions of Congress in years.
Along the way, the House of Representatives rejected a pact on spending and revenue that had been negotiated by President Bush's advisers and top Congressional leaders, and Mr.
Bush was forced to reverse himself on his pledge of "no new taxes."
The end result was supposed to reduce the Federal deficit by about $40 billion in the 1991 fiscal year and nearly $500 billion over five years.
The biggest cuts over the five years came in discretionary spending, especially the military.
The next largest part of deficit reduction to come from tax increases totaling $146.3 billion.
Cuts in entitlement programs like Medicare and increases in user fees were to yield $99 billion over five years.


Interim Athletic Chief Steps Down at U.N.L.V.
The latest in a long series of brushfires for the University of Nevada-Las Vegas athletic department has burned the interim athletic director, DENNIS FINFROCK, who resigned under what he called "the continued bombardment" from supporters of JERRY TARKANIAN, the basketball coach.
Finfrock, reported to be the top choice of a search committee, withdrew his name from consideration for the permanent job.
He will return to his position as director of the campus basketball arena and football stadium.
Finfrock has been a controversial figure in his 14-month tenure as interim director, during which Tarkanian announced his resignation, effective after the coming season.
Tarkanian supporters contend the popular coach's resignation was orchestrated by Finfrock and ROBERT MAXSON, U.N.L.V.'s president.


Welcome to New York, Mr. Maxwell


Drug Therapy Planned As Johnson Is Treated
Although Magic Johnson has none of the symptoms of AIDS, the virus has damaged his immune system to the point where drug treatment is being planned to combat the viral infection itself and to prevent a form of pneumonia that is the most common lethal complication of the disease.
Yesterday, one day after Johnson disclosed that he was infected with the AIDS virus, the Los Angeles Lakers star and his doctors discussed plans to start the standard drug treatment for his condition.


Connecticut Workers Protest Unwanted Furloughs


On Capitol Hill, the Battle for AIDS Funds Heats Up
Magic Johnson's stunning announcement on Thursday that he is infected with the AIDS virus and is quitting professional basketball is energizing lobbying efforts aimed at increasing Government spending on AIDS research and education.
It is also providing political grist for Democrats, who are using the AIDS issue to attack the Bush Administration's domestic policy on health.
Lawmakers have done a political turnaround on the AIDS issue in the last several years, moving from embarrassed hesitancy at voting for spending money to combat the disease to staunch support for Federal aid.
Almost $2 billion in Federal funds were appropriated for AIDS programs for fiscal 1992, up from $5.5 million in fiscal 1982, when such programs were first financed.
Budget Almost Set
The shift resulted from constituent pressures, lobbying efforts and the magnitude of the health-care crisis.
But whether the poignancy of Johnson's disclosure will move the issue further and get Congress to provide more money immediately to fight the epidemic is doubtful.


Players Seeking Changes
Gerry Smith, the head of the Women's Tennis Association, confirmed yesterday that the board of directors had authorized him to explore a restructuring of the women's tour, which is administered by the Women's International Professional Tennis Council.
Smith indicated that his constituency, the players on the Kraft Tour, want a stronger role in the tour's management as well as a more ambitious television and marketing package.
Four voting members each from world tournaments, players (the W.T.A.) and the Grand Slam events (the International Tennis Federation), plus nonvoting representatives from the sponsors, Kraft and Philip Morris make up the council.


Envoy Warns Americans in Haiti to Leave
The United States Ambassador to Haiti warned today that Americans living in Haiti should leave while flights to the United States remain in operation and before tensions worsen.
"We must assume that henceforth those Americans who decide to remain in Haiti do so mindful of the hazards and hardships that they face," the Ambassador, Alvin Adams, said in a statement issued by the State Department.


Johnson's Frankness Continues
Magic Johnson said today that he asked "Why me?" for 5 or 10 minutes after learning he had tested positive for the virus that leads to AIDS, but then decided to go on living his life as fully as possible with no regrets.
In an interview on "The Arsenio Hall Show" taped late this afternoon for broadcast tonight, Johnson suggested he had been exposed to the human immunodeficiency virus through heterosexual sex.


INSIDE
Seoul Urges Atom Arms Ban South Korea's President said his country would no longer have American or other any nuclear weapons on its soil, and called on North Korea not to build a nuclear bomb.
Page 3.
Title Insurers at Risk
Title insurers, which protect American property owners, may not have enough money in reserve to meet a recent surge in claims.
Page 39.


Cordero Suspended
Aqueduct stewards gave jockey ANGEL CORDERO JR. a seven-day suspension for careless riding in the sixth race at Aqueduct on Thursday.
Cordero will be sidelined for a week beginning Monday.
His mount in the race Thursday, Silvaplana, was disqualified from second and placed third for interfering with Way of the World in the stretch. (AP)


OLD CITY TOTTERS IN YUGOSLAV SIEGE
The modern siege by land and sea of this medieval fortress city entered its 39th day today, with Croatian defenders and Yugoslav Army units exchanging fire from cannons, mortars and light arms until after sunset.
The booming percussion instruments of war kept nearly all of Dubrovnik's 58,000 people -- including about 10,000 refugees -- off the streets this afternoon.
Residents huddled in basement shelters or in catacombs below the Old Town's ramparts, which range up to 82 feet high and 19 feet wide.


Day Later, It Remains a Shock Felt Around the World
From his hometown of Lansing, Mich., to the capitals of Europe and Asia and in virtually every home, office, gymnasium and barroom in between, the news that Magic Johnson was infected with the AIDS virus and was retiring from basketball continued to evoke expressions of shock and dismay yesterday.
Fans, athletes, columnists, broadcasters, editorial writers and public figures alike groped for words to register their anguish.


John Jaher, 91, Dies; Top German Publisher
John Jahr, one of Germany's most prominent postwar publishers, died today in Hamburg, his company said.
He was 91 years old.
The company, Gruner &amp; Jahr G.m.b.H., said he died of heart failure.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.50
4.68
7.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.62
4.63
7.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.69
4.68
7.03
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.06
7.06
8.32
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.87
7.91
8.61
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
8.90
9.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.81
6.83
7.59
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Leagues Remain Cautious On Conducting HIV Tests
In the wake of Magic Johnson's announcement that he has the AIDS virus and was retiring as a player, the National Basketball Association yesterday appeared ready to step up its program on providing information on the disease to its players.
But neither the N.B.A. or other professional sports leagues seemed ready to begin a program of mandatory testing for the virus.
In fact, only the National Football League even permits routine testing of players for any sort of drugs or steroids.
Testing in professional basketball, baseball and hockey occurs only when a player has a proven drug history or exhibits drug-use symptoms.


South Korea to Keep Out All Atom Arms
President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea declared for the first time today that his country would no longer possess or store American or any other nuclear weapons on its soil, and called on North Korea to abandon any plans it might have to build a nuclear bomb.
Mr.
Roh's comment, in a speech in Seoul, came after the disclosure in Washington last month that the United States would withdraw all nuclear weapons from South Korea as part of President Bush's ban on tactical nuclear weapons throughout the world.


Government Scolds A.T.&amp;T. on Disruptions
The Federal Communications Commission, using unusually harsh language, said the huge A.T.&amp; T. phone disruption in September resulted from management oversight problems and outdated equipment that was "placed in functionally obsolete locations, and was in a state of general neglect and disrepair."
Richard M. Firestone, chief of the common carrier bureau and the nation's principal phone regulator, said in an interview yesterday, "We decided not to mince words because we are concerned that this will not be an isolated incident."


Guidepost; Last-Ditch Credit
For those with damaged credit or no credit history at all, a secured bank credit card may be a good idea.
Consumers who may not qualify for an ordinary card -- those hurt by the recession, divorce, bankruptcy or layoffs -- can often get a secured Visa or Mastercard issued by a reputable bank.
But the secured cards require a money deposit as collateral.
The higher the deposit, the higher the credit limit.
A secured credit card offers a chance to repair a credit history, or start one, since card behavior is reported to the major credit bureaus.
For a list of issuers of secured credit cards, send $4 to Bankcard Holders of America, 560 Parkway, Herndon, Pa. 22070; telephone (703) 481-1110.
Here are some pointers on secured cards.
Minimum deposit: From $250 to $500, usually earning 4 percent to 5.25 percent interest.
The deposit cannot be withdrawn while the card is held, and the money is kept on deposit for at least 45 days after the account is closed to allow all charges to clear.
Finance charge: Depending on the bank, the rate will range from 19 percent to 22 percent.
Annual fee: $25 to $35
Restrictions: Some banks require applicants to have a checking or savings account, with store and other accounts not seriously overdue, and bankruptcy disputes settled.  (Source: Bank Rate Monitor, North Palm Beach, Fla.)


Small Claims Court Offers Both Frustrations and Satisfactions; Better Enforcement
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 19 article on Small Claims Court neglected enforcement: nearly 50 percent of small claims judgments are uncollected.


Your Money; A Tax Wrinkle For the Year-End
Investors face a new wrinkle in year-end tax planning.
This year, for the first time, people who borrow to invest in the market can deduct the interest on those loans only to the extent they can match it with income from investments.
Either dividends and interest or capital gains on securities count as investment income and can offset what tax law calls investment interest expense.
But margin traders who wind up losing money cannot deduct investment interest costs against wages, salaries and other ordinary income.


Without Proselytizing
To the Editor:
We appreciate the attention you have given the many activities celebrating the Year of Tibet.
However, one point in your Oct. 11 news article needs clarification.


Saudis to Buy 14 More Batteries Of Patriot Missiles From the U.S.
The United States plans to sell 14 more Patriot anti-missile batteries to Saudi Arabia to reinforce its defenses, Pentagon officials said today.
The $3.3 billion sale, if approved by Congress, as expected, would include more than 700 ground-to-air missiles to defend Saudi military bases, oil refineries and government offices against ballistic missiles like the Iraqi Scuds.


Patents; Using Ocean Sounds to Raise Reading Speed
Two inventors in Utah have patented a device that they say helps people read faster by imitating the sound of the ocean.
The device developed by the two, Kirby Cochran of Orem and Harper Nelson of Alpine, consists of a tape player and headphones that play the sound of waves washing up on the beach in a rhythm intended to help people keep their eyes moving systematically across the page.


Smoking Rate Declines to 28%, Survey Says
The number of smokers in the United States has dropped to the lowest level ever measured, and those who do smoke are likely to be less educated or in a troubled marriage, according to a Federal survey.
The survey, reported Thursday by the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, said the smoking rate fell to 28 percent in 1988, down a percentage point from 1987.
That rate includes 31 percent of men, 26 percent of women, 28 percent of whites, 32 percent of blacks and 24 percent Hispanic people.


New Trial for Woman Convicted In Plot Against Daughter's Rival
Wanda Webb Holloway, the Channelview, Tex., woman convicted of trying to hire a killer to improve her daughter's chances to become a junior high school cheerleader, was granted a new trial today.
Judge George Godwin of State District Court ordered the new trial after brief arguments and the presentation of new evidence.
Some of that evidence became known shortly after Mrs.
Holloway's conviction on Sept. 3, when defense lawyers found that one of the jurors should have been disqualifed for jury duty because he was on probation for a drug offense.


Can Machines Think? Humans Match Wits
A group of human judges chosen to represent the Boston man-in-the-street engaged in a three-hour battle of wits with a handful of computer programs today.
The idea was to answer what many scientists and philosophers believe will become the central question of the information age: Can machines think?
It was hard to tell -- harder than one might have, pardon the expression, thought.


Proposal Seeks to Speed Up Federal Approval of Drugs
The Bush Administration will announce a plan next week to speed Government approval of drugs by giving private contractors responsibility to review them in some cases and relying more on foreign studies, White House officials said today.
The plan, developed by Vice President Dan Quayle's Council on Competitiveness, is expected to reduce the time it takes to get some drugs developed by companies and approved by the Food and Drug Administration from about 10 years to 6 years.


Hong Kong Begins to Transport Vietnam Boat People Back Home
A group of 59 Vietnamese boat people, some crying and struggling fiercely against police escorts, were led, pushed, dragged and even bodily carried aboard a chartered transport plane that took off this morning in the first forced repatriation under a new agreement with Hanoi.
Unarmed, uniformed police linked arms and formed two tight cordons along the short path to the plane.
Then other police, also unarmed, went aboard the two buses and began taking the Vietnamese to the plane.


Bulls Sign Sparrow
The Chicago Bulls signed veteran guard RORY SPARROW to a one-year contract and placed 3-point specialist CRAIG HODGES on the injured list.
Hodges, a backup guard, underwent successful surgery on Wednesday to repair torn cartilage in his left knee.
He is expected to be out for four to six weeks. (AP)


Lakers Return to Games, but There Is No Fun
When it was finally over tonight, the Los Angeles Lakers seemed to heave a collective sigh of relief.
But they still weren't over their pain.
They missed Magic Johnson.
It was evident from the way they performed in a 113-85 loss to the Phoenix Suns and visible in their eyes after they had returned to the dressing room.


News Summary
International 2-6  SANCTIONS AGAINST YUGOSLAVIA
Frustrated at its failure to halt Serbian-led attacks on Croatia, the European Community imposed broad economic sanctions on Yugoslavia and urged the United Nations to order an oil embargo.
Page 1  CIVIL WAR BATTERS DUBROVNIK
Dubrovnik, the city on the Adriatic widely recognized as an international cultural treasure, has become a casualty of the civil war that has torn Yugoslavia apart.  1


Another Trick on Poor Women
The White House this week issued a directive concerning the hateful gag rule that the Reagan and Bush Administrations have imposed on family planning clinics.
The rule forbids family planning clinics that get Federal money from even mentioning abortion as an option.
In seeming contrast, the new directive purported to guarantee "free speech and the highest standards of medical care."
Far from being a guarantee, it is just another trick on poor women, one that Senator John Chafee, a member of President Bush's own party, rightly calls "yet another gag."


Reviews/Fashion; From the Inimitable Beene, Fluid, Weightless Grace
The spring fashion openings peaked yesterday with Geoffrey Beene's in the theater of the Equitable Building, north of the garment center.
With his inimitable skill, the designer showed that the proper direction for fashion is forward, not using styles of the past as takeoff points.
It is exhilarating to watch this designer finding new ways to drape cloth on the body and to make clothes as light and nonburdensome as possible.
He is constantly experimenting to find the mood and the shape that express the precise feeling of the time.
Consequently, like a good painter, he helps us look at things around us in a fresh way.


Sentimental Journey
ERIC LINDROS, representing the country of his birth, came to Sweden, the country of his roots, for the first time Friday for two weekend exhibitions as a member of Canada's Olympic hockey team.
"It will be special to play in Sweden because he was born in this country," Lindros said, alluding to his great-grandfather Axel, a rebel labor activist in Sweden, who left his native country in 1910 and settled in Toronto.
Axel Lindros died in Toronto when Eric was 4 years old.


3 International Airlines Plan A New Terminal at Kennedy
The first new terminal for Kennedy International Airport in nearly 30 years has been proposed by a consortium of three of the biggest international airlines, Lufthansa German Airlines, Japan Air Lines and Air France, airline and airport officials said yesterday.
The expansion comes as Kennedy is trying to maintain its pre-eminence as the country's largest international gateway at a time when rivals like Newark International Airport have taken away some traffic and when domestic airlines have added international flights at their own hubs.


Agent for Johnson Says Advertisers Aren't Bolting
Swept up in a wave of public support for Magic Johnson, executives at advertising agencies and at companies that have endorsement relationships with the basketball star spent yesterday considering what was once inconceivable: how to use a celebrity who has tested positive for the AIDS virus as a spokesman.
"All of his endorsers -- every one of them -- have thrown in their support," Lon Rosen, the agent for the Los Angeles Lakers guard, said yesterday.
"Every one of them have said that they want him to remain part of their stables, that they want to work with him in the future."


Experts Say It's Time To Get Flu Protection
The nation's influenza watchers are forecasting a worse-than-usual flu season as a virus associated with high death rates makes sporadic appearances around the country.
Experts at the Federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta are urging flu shots for everyone who is in danger of developing serious complications from the flu.
A flu shot is also recommended for health-care professionals and people who live with those in the high-risk group.


A Tax-Cut Push, But Going Where?
With the nation's economy apparently stalled, Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill have in recent weeks rushed to advance rival proposals that they say would revive the economy.
Several of the plans involve a tax cut, primarily for the middle class, to stimulate spending, but lawmakers in both parties say there is only a remote possibility that any tax cut plan could be approved before the end of the year.


Suffolk Republicans Foiled On a Post-Election Tax Rise
"High-tax Halpin" may soon fade away, but his ghost lives on in the Suffolk County Legislature.
Only days after Patrick G. Halpin, a Democrat, was swept from office as Suffolk County Executive in a wave of discontent over high taxes and economic worries, the Republican leaders of the County Legislature tried, and failed, today to push through a $42 million property-tax increase.


Quick Round of Raises Follows Bridgeport Mayor's Loss
Just hours after she lost her bid for re-election, Mayor Mary C. Moran put through a pay raise for 280 city workers and said the city, which filed for bankruptcy in June, would pick up part of their health insurance costs.
But the employees may not enjoy the going-away present for long, because the new Mayor takes office on Monday and could immediately rescind the actions.


Ernst Replies to S.E.C. Suit
Ernst &amp; Young, the accounting firm that has been under attack because of loans its partners had from audit clients, filed court papers late Thursday, arguing that it should not be barred from accepting such loans since its internal policies now prohibit them.
The argument was among those the firm made in response to a lawsuit brought in June by the Securities and Exchange Commission over business dealings many of the firm's partners had with the Republicbank Corporation, a former Texas banking company, and the Cullum Companies, a supermarket chain.


Heavy Bags Lead to Arrest
A man who collects bus fare for the city bus system was arrested after the authorities found his truck loaded with 408 pounds of coins they said were stolen from fare boxes.
They said the fare collecter, Rex Esguerra, rigged the vacuum hoses that transfer the coins from the boxes to a vault so that some coins would fall on the floor.


Defense Rests in Trial
The prosecution and defense rested in the trial of a Dallas man accused in an aggravated robbery during which STEVE PALERMO, an American League umpire, was shot.
Army Pvt.
KEVIN BIVINS testified Thursday that he shot Palermo and TERENCE MANN, a former Southern Methodist University football player, after Mann opened fire.


G.O.P. Pledges Tax Cuts But Not Big or Quick Ones
The newly elected Republicans descended on the State House this week to proclaim loudly and clearly that they carried a very big axe -- the overwhelming will of the electorate to cut taxes.
"The voters finally had their say on the Governor's $2.8 billion tax package," said the Assembly Republican leader, Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian, who will become Speaker when the new majority takes over in January.
"The people want the Legislature to cut their taxes and reduce the size of government."


Family of 10 Found Dead in Chicago; Carbon Monoxide Suspected
A couple and their eight children were found dead late today, their bodies scattered throughout their small house on the city's Southwest Side.
The police said it appeared that the family died of carbon monoxide poisoning.
Investigators said they believed that the deadly gas seeped into the house through a crack in the furnace flue.
A neighbor said he saw repairmen working at the house last week, but the police said that the furnace was only two years old and that they did not know if it had a history of trouble.


Observer; Will He? Won't He? Will He?
Cuomo variations for horn blowers on a cartoon by Doug Marlette:
To run for President or not to run for President.
That is the question with which Geraldo Rivera wrestles day and night.
No longer, he says, is he content merely to wrestle with rich and famous North American females.
Now in his maturity Geraldo seems ready to put aside gossip-worthy but boyish things and move onto the great stage of history.


Is Ski Business Healthy? Check the Snowfall
By last spring, the ski industry looked like a recreational version of the savings and loan industry.
The number of people skiing was down, there had been poor-to-terrible snowfalls on the East and West coasts and the recession had hit everywhere.
Rumors spread that ski areas were closing and dismantling lifts.
All of the above is true, but over the summer, managers at many ski areas appeared to ignore these problems and plunged ahead with new projects.
Whitetail, a new ski area in Pennsylvania, was completed and is scheduled to open in December.
Seventeen areas across the country built 24 new lifts, major snowmaking projects were installed at 20 resorts.
A number of areas, including Sunday River, Me., Okemo, Vt., and Keystone and Beaver Creek, Colo., expanded skiing terrain to adjacent mountains.


China Jails Street Protesters
Five organizers of a horn-blowing, traffic-snarling taxi drivers' protest in the northwestern Chinese region of Xinjiang were sent to labor camps for one to three years, an official report said today.
The drivers were protesting the high proportion of their fares taken by the city authorities in the territory's capital of Urumqi "and other issues," the official Xinjiang Daily said.


Anderson Is In, 2 Are Out, and Fitch Is Beside Himself
What should have been a joyous event for the Nets today as they formally announced the signing of their No. 1 draft choice turned into a sideshow that featured Coach Bill Fitch chastising ownership for disrupting the team in order to satisfy the contract demands of Kenny Anderson.
"Our ownership made a horrible decision," Fitch said.
"I'm ticked. I want to win. You can't win if you're not going to be able to control your own basketball team."


Police to Begin Solo Patrols With Lieutenants
The New York City Police Department must go to arbitration to determine whether sergeants can participate in a new program that will put one officer instead of two in patrol cars, the State Supreme Court ruled yesterday.
But the court said that the department could use lieutenants in the program, which is to begin on Monday.
Supreme Court Justice Stanley Sklar issued a preliminary injunction supporting a petition brought by the Sergeants Benevolent Association to exempt sergeants from the program pending arbitration, but denied a similar application by the Lieutenants Benevolent Association.
Union officials said the sergeants' contract contained training and other requirements which were not included in the lieutenants' contract.


When the Doctor Also Owns the Lab
To the Editor:
"A Plausible Revolution in Health" (editorial, Oct. 29) admirably points out how the Government stands in the way of cost-effective medical care.
However, to get a grip on this country's out-of-control health care costs, we must go beyond the sensible remedies you propose.


Maxwell's Body Flown To Israel
The body of Robert Maxwell, the British publisher, was flown from the Canary Islands today to Israel for burial in Jerusalem amid continuing questions about his mysterious death at sea this week.
While family associates and lawyers had earlier insisted that they were not satisfied with a judge's verdict that Mr.
Maxwell, who was 68 years old, died "a natural death," probably from a heart attack, today his widow, Elizabeth, said her husband's death had not been clarified.


A Change of Violettas
The soprano Cheryl Studer, who was to have appeared on Thursday in the Metropolitan Opera's first production this season of "La Traviata," has canceled her performance because of a throat infection.
She is to be replaced in the role of Violetta by Marilyn Mims.
The rest of the cast remains unchanged.
Information: (212) 362-6000.


3 Ancient Gold Tassels Are Returned to Berlin
Three gold tassels that experts believe are part of the Schliemann treasure from ancient Troy have quietly been returned to a Berlin museum, said a specialist who arranged the transfer.
The tassels are just an inch or two long but are thought by art experts to provide a clue to the whereabouts of the rest of the treasure, which disappeared from Germany in the final days of World War II.
The pieces are reported to have been taken by an American soldier.


Dinkins Selects Panel to Review City's Hospitals
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday named the members of a commission charged with conducting a "head to toe" review of the city hospitals.
The panel includes prominent doctors and lawyers but no one from the front lines of the hospitals themselves.
Union leaders representing doctors and hospital workers questioned whether the 18-member commission could impartially scrutinize contracts between medical schools and the municipal hospitals, known as "affiliate agreements," which some critics say are at the heart of the hospitals' problems.
Some of the new commissioners have ties to medical schools that have multimillion-dollar contracts with the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League


U.S. Approves $150,000 Deal To End Homeless Man's Suits
A $150,000 settlement between Morristown, N.J., and its well-known homeless citizen, Richard Kreimer, was approved without hitch today in Federal District Court here, guaranteeing him a sudden fortune and sparing the town the cost of defending itself against a lawsuit that he had filed.
"I would say I'm very happy," Mr.
Kreimer said after lawyers resolved a last-minute impediment to the agreement.


Blacks See Old Hate Behind Duke's New Strength
State Representative David Duke stared directly into the camera and asked the voters of Louisiana to give him a chance.
Albert Joseph, one of those voters watching the smooth performance on a grainy television set here, shook his head no.
"Six thousand white people from around here voted for Duke," said Mr.
Joseph, a 61-year-old black businessman who has lived most of his life in this small, semi-rural town about 25 miles from New Orleans.
"I'm not just worried about David Duke. I know where he's coming from.


AIDS and Heterosexuals
Most heterosexuals who carry the AIDS virus do not learn of it until severely ill.
Page 32.
Although Magic Johnson has no AIDS symptoms, drug treatment is planned. Page 33.


When AIDS Taps Hero, His 'Children' Feel Pain
Childhood ended for Jamal Davis on Thursday.
It stopped abruptly for Mack George and Sharaz Hayes, too.
Troy Frazier rushed to the bathroom to hide his tears.
Teen-age life will go on for each of them, and for tens of thousands of other youngsters -- black, white and Hispanic -- in schoolyards and classrooms across the country.
But it will go on with a difference because Magic has "the virus."


New Paint, New Cars, Acid Rain: Often, They Don't Mix
Acid rain, already blamed for killing lakes and trees, has found another target -- the paint of some late-model cars.
The problem is a result of both increasing pollution and the widespread use in recent years of a high-gloss car paint technology known as clear coat.
The finish, which creates a mirrorlike sheen, is used on most cars today.
Auto producers and paint companies say the finish is particularly susceptible to marring by acid rain and other pollutants.


Title Insurers' Low Reserves Stir Worry
The nation's title insurance industry, which provides protection to millions of American property owners, may not have enough money in reserve to meet a recent surge in claims.
As a result, some industry executives and experts predict that many title insurers will be weakened in coming years, and they fear what would happen if one of the big ones had serious problems or even failed.
In an industry so concentrated that six insurers handle three-fourths of the nation's properties, the fallout could be substantial.


Review/Opera; 'Brigadoon' Is Back Early (After Five Years, in Fact)
In one of the final scenes of the Lerner and Loewe musical "Brigadoon," Tommy Albright, a jaded and bored New Yorker, sits in a bar, unable to listen to the jabbering of his fiancee.
Nearly every mundane phrase out of her mouth sends him into reverie, dreaming of heather on the hill and Brigadoon, the 18th-century village that rises out of the mists once a century.
On Thursday night, when the New York City Opera revived its 1986 production of "Brigadoon," every time Albright was reminded of that village the scrim behind the bar became transparent and characters from the magical village sang hokey fragments of their hit tunes.
His fiancee said ,"Come to me," and Albright stared into space as behind him Michele McBride's Fiona MacLaren sang, "Come to me." The fiancee said, "Let's go home," and David Eisler's Charlie Dalrymple appeared, standing on a high rock, dressed in a kilt and Highland regalia, singing, "Go home, go home, go home with bonnie Jean."


November Chill Hints of What's to Come


For Heterosexuals, Diagnosis of AIDS Is Often Unmercifully Late
Lee and Lois W. first became ill last Christmas.
He had a nagging cough that he could not shake and had been losing weight.
She was hospitalized with severe anemia.
Although Lee's doctor at first dismissed the possibility of AIDS, he finally ordered a test.
The results were a thunderbolt.


Hold the Phone! (If It's Cordless) And Watch What You Say. Eavesdroppers Are Tuning In.
Bill Moore lives in radio land.
Not the glib, golden-throated world of high-powered disk jockeys and flashing on-the-air signs, but a world with the kind of juicy, everyday conversation that keeps Larry King and Bernard Meltzer and Ruth Westheimer going for hours: husbands romancing girlfriends on the sly, parents complaining about no-good teen-agers, teen-agers complaining about too-strict parents, desperate junkies pleading with dealers.
It sounds like everyday conversation because that is exactly what it is.
The seven squawking radio receivers in the basement of Mr.
Moore's house in Newington, Conn., bring in phone calls made on cordless telephones.
Or he can zero in on baby monitors that parents install to keep tabs on their infants.
Or if one of his radios lands on the right frequency in its automatic sweep across the radio spectrum, he can hear what people with cellular telephones are saying, loud and clear.


Tainting by Tritium Found Near Weapons Plants
Failures in handling tritium, a radioactive gas used to fuel nuclear weapons, have spread traces of contamination on land and in water outside of nuclear weapons plants and laboratories in seven states, the Energy Department said today.
The department said that workers and citizens had been accidentally exposed, but that the levels of tritium they absorbed were a fraction of the Federal safety limit for radiation and were not considered harmful.


Debt Payments Offset Profits For Maxwell's U.S. Units
The Maxwell Communication Corporation's American operations have performed solidly since 1988, when most of them were acquired for about $3.3 billion in a splurge of buying.
But the debt incurred to acquire them at what many analysts now see as highly inflated prices has undermined the company.


Gaston Monnerville, Foe of de Gaulle, 94
Gaston Monnerville, President of the French Senate from 1948 to 1968 and a political foe of Charles de Gaulle, died Thursday at his Paris home.
He was 94 years old.
His death, after a lengthy illness, was announced today in the National Assembly.
Prime Minister Edith Cresson praised Mr.
Monnerville today as a "man of courage, a humanist and a Resistance member."


Classical Music in Review
The New Jersey Symphony Carnegie Hall


Whither Hemlines? In Short, Even Retailers Aren't Sure
The European and American designers' spring previews have left retailers with no clear direction about where hemlines are supposed to fall.
Many store executives seem irritated by the confusion on the modeling runways -- and all the talk in fashion stories -- of short and long styles.
But merchants also seem somewhat relieved that they can avoid the financial risk of trying to market a sudden shift in fashion.
As a result, most are stocking short skirts, long dresses and a healthy inventory of pants, which have become the only sure-fire option when hemlines are in flux.


Don't Rush to Cut Jail Spending
For once, New York City's troubled jail system provides some good news: Chronic crowding suddenly seems to be receding.
As a result, City Hall is thinking of deferring further jail construction.
That idea ought to be approached with caution.
Last spring, the jail population hit a record 22,615, and officials predicted an explosion to 24,000 by fall.
Instead, the population stabilized, then began to decline.
Today, it's below 22,000.


No Illusions Going In, Hostetler Maintains
With all the problems and frustrations and disappointments the Giants have created this season, Jeff Hostetler, their quarterback, has kept his poise on and off the field.
It was almost as if he expected all this.
"We're coming off the Super Bowl," he said.
"We're coming off a quarterback competition. It's in New York. It's my first year starting.


Paris Flights Hit by Delays In Strike by Air Traffic Staff
A strike by air traffic technicians compounded by computer failures provoked cancellations and long delays today for flights to and from Paris.
Air traffic controllers at Orly and Roissy-Charles de Gaulle airports were reduced to using rudimentary hand signals after the computers failed during the morning.
No technician was available to get them working.


Review/Dance; A Fluid Study in Serenity
What made "Sanddial" pleasant to watch was its unhurried pace.
One had time to savor even the slightest gesture in this hourlong dance that Nadine Helstroffer presented Thursday night at the Washington Square Church.
But the work's lack of urgency was also its greatest weakness.
It soon became hard to care about anything that happened.
Susanne Poulin's lighting designs made the space a shadowy realm.
And the performing area was dominated by a sculpture by Alastair Noble that resembled an enormous hourglass, from which sand poured onto the floor.


Review/Pop; Fats Domino's Old Tricks Made New
It happened near the end of the show, the moment many in the audience had been waiting for.
Fats Domino, during "When the Saints Go Marching In," began propelling his piano across stage using his stomach as a blunt instrument and thumping the piano -- on the downbeat, naturally.
The band and the audience cracked up and it wasn't the first time.
The show, at the Bottom Line on Wednesday night, was meant to promote a new four-C.D. retrospective of his work titled "They Call Me the Fat Man." But it was a living advertisement for joyous anarchy.


India, Too, Was Shocked, by Sale of Bride, 10
To the Editor:
"New Delhi Journal: Tearful Bride, Just 10, Touches India" (Oct. 21), describing the rescue of Ameena, a 10-year-old Muslim child bride, from a 60-year-old Saudi Arabian aboard an Indian airliner, draws the wrong conclusions.


Big Deficit Is Reported By T.W.A.
Trans World Airlines, one of the nation's most troubled air carriers, said yesterday that because of the recession and the Persian Gulf war its third-quarter losses more than tripled.
T.W.A. said it lost $51.3 million, on revenues of $1.01 billion, compared with a loss of $14.7 million, on revenues of $1.34 billion, for the period in 1990.


Court Approves Russ Togs Loan
A judge said yesterday that Russ Togs Inc., the New York clothing maker that filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy court protection Thursday, could use a $5.5 million bank loan to finance its day-to-day operations while reorganizing its debts.
Judge Prudence Abrams approved the loan from the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company in United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of N.Y.
She scheduled another hearing on Russ Togs for Nov. 21.
The loan is considered debtor-in-possession financing, which means it is senior to Russ Togs' other debts.
Manufacturers Hanover is also the lead bank for Russ Togs' $63 million bank loan.
Russ Togs, which makes the Diane Von Furstenberg and other lines, filed for protection from creditors after banks demanded that their loans be repaid and suppliers refused to ship fabrics.
On the New York Stock Exchange, Russ Togs shares gained 3/16 each yesterday, closing at $1.125.


Now Starting for Notre Dame's Defense: Confidence
Self-assurance cannot be measured in the statistical analysis of a football team, but Rod Smith, the perceptive senior cornerback at Notre Dame, has made an encouraging evaluation.
Smith has had a close-up look at the evolution of a Fighting Irish defensive unit that has been forced to overcome injuries, a substantial change in personnel and the suspension of one of its best players.
And he has seen the gradual development of a confidence that will be essential for the Irish to compete for an unofficial national championship.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge receipt of or return articles unless they are accompanied by a self-addressed envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Two Chamber Concerts
The premiere of Aaron Kernis's "Symphony in Waves" is to take place at a pair of concerts by the New York Chamber Symphony at 8 tonight and at 3 P.M. tomorrow at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
Gerard Schwarz is to conduct the orchestra in a program that also includes Beethoven's "Emperor" Concerto, with the pianist Shura Cherkassky, and Webern's arrangement of Five German Dances by Schubert.
Tickets are $30 and $25.
Information: (212) 415-5440.


Hogs and Pork Bellies Up On Possible Sales to Soviets
Hog and pork belly futures rose yesterday on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange after the National Pork Producers Council said the Soviet Union was seeking 30,000 metric tons of American pork.
Live hogs for December delivery surged 1.32 cents, to 42.27 cents a pound; February frozen pork bellies rose 1.38 cents, to 41.75 cents a pound; December live cattle rose 0.17 cent, to 74.22 cents a pound, and November feeder cattle fell 0.30 cent, to 83.27 cents a pound.


Finns Haven't Decided To Join Europe Yet
To the Editor:
"Europeans in Accord to Create Vastly Expanded Trading Bloc' (front page, Oct. 23), describing formation of the European Economic Area, misinterprets Finland's policy on full membership in the European Community. Finland has not applied for community membership, nor has it decided to apply next spring. Rather, the Finnish Government has simply stated that next spring it will make a decision. A positive one is by no means inevitable.


5,000 Firefighters Protest Cuts and Seek Chief's Ouster
Frustrated over stalled union contract talks, 5,000 New York City firefighters took to the streets yesterday, marching across the Brooklyn Bridge to City Hall where they protested recent budget and staff cuts and called for the removal of Fire Commissioner Carlos A. Rivera.
Chanting "Rivera must go!" the firefighters staged an orderly but emotional rally in City Hall Park, where they demanded that the city restore the cuts and immediately begin contract negotiations.


American University Hit by Bombing
A bomb believed to have been set off by pro-Iranian Muslim fundamentalists demolished the main building of the American University of Beirut early today, the 125th anniversary of the founding of the school.
One person was killed and eight others hurt by the explosion, the police said.


Dow Off 8.49, to 3,045.62, in Late Sales
Blue-chip issues fell in active late trading yesterday, but the broad market moved up, as it had all week.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 3,045.62, down 8.49 for the day and 10.73 for the week.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 183.3 million shares, down from 206.9 million on Thursday, as the composite fell by 0.32 to close at 216.82.
Gaining issues outpaced losers by 896 to 736.


CHRONICLE
The President of Hungary is coming to town to see the world premiere of an Off Broadway play -- his own -- at the Riverside Shakespeare Company's theater at 316 East 91st Street.
ARPAD GONCZ, who was a writer and translator before he became President, wrote "Iron Bars" in the late 1960's after serving six years in prison following the uprising of 1956.
The darkly comic tale, set in a fictional country, asks, "What is freedom?" he said in a telephone chat.


Gephardt Assails Bush's Foreign Policy as Weak
Seeking to broaden the 1992 campaign debate, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House majority leader, said today that President Bush's foreign policy amounted to little more than defending the status quo and failed to protect American economic interests.
Mr.
Gephardt, a Missouri Democrat, told reporters today that his party's Presidential hopefuls should not be fooled by Mr.
Bush's reputation for foreign policy success and should attack him for failing to "do more than tidy up after the cold war."


Store Arson Tied to Greed Instead of Hate
When a convenience store owned by an Arab-American exploded in flames last January on the first night of the Persian Gulf war, investigators suspected an anti-Arab hate crime.
Now, after a nine-month inquiry, the owner has been charged with an arson scheme intended to collect about $120,000 in insurance money.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Senate vote reversing the ban on abortion counseling in federally financed family planning clinics misstated Senator John Chafee's position on abortion.
He favors legal abortion.


Corrections
The Market Place column of Business Day on Tuesday, about the outlook for Volkswagen, misstated the value of the company's American depository receipts, or A.D.R.
Each A.D.R. is the equivalent of one-fifth of a German Volkswagen share.
Because of an editing error, the column also misidentified the bank that issues the A.D.R.'s.
It is Morgan Guaranty Trust.


Times Square Redevelopers Seek Delay in Project
Bereft of tenants and facing a glutted market, the developers of the huge Times Square Center office complex have raised the possibility of postponing the already long-delayed project.
In response, New York State officials strongly suggested that the answer lies right under the nose of one developer -- the Prudential Insurance Company of America -- whose Manhattan-based Prudential Securities subsidiary is shopping around for a great deal of space.


This Time, Supplies for Chernobyl Relief May Fly
Fifteen days ago, the Rev.
Paul S. Moore and his wife, Sharon, were ready to realize a charitable dream.
A 150-ton mountain of medical supplies, which they had collected to help the children of Byelorussia poisoned by the Chernobyl nuclear disaster, was ready for pickup.
But there was a problem.
The Soviet plane scheduled to land at Stewart International Airport in Newburgh, N.Y., on Oct. 25 to gather the supplies from CitiHope International -- a group Mr.
Moore founded last year in Andes, N.Y. -- never showed up.


An Ax More Versatile Than Bunyan's
A multipurpose tool designed 35 years ago by a California lumberman for his own use is being mass-produced today for outdoor-recreation enthusiasts as well.
The Max, so named to indicate its multiple uses, has interchangeable steel parts.
The 36-inch-long tool is an ax that with attachments in place also becomes a shovel, pick, rake, hoe, mattock or sledgehammer.
It is recommended for hunters, fishermen, campers, snowmobilers, or anyone who drives or walks into rough terrain.


Charlotte Moorman, 58, Is Dead; A Cellist in Avant-Garde Works
Charlotte Moorman, the cellist, avant-gardist and performance artist who won notoriety for her arrest by the New York City police in 1967 for playing the cello nude from the waist up, died yesterday in Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 58 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of cancer, which she had been fighting since 1979, said a friend, Barbara Moore.


NATO Summit Meeting Ends With Warning to Soviet Republics Over Nuclear Arms
The Western alliance ended a two-day summit meeting here today with a warning to the Soviet Union and its restive republics to bring their nuclear arsenals under central control, observe international disarmament agreements and curb the spread of conventional forces.
The warning reflected what Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany described as a sense that the Soviet Union's disintegration created an "explosive situation" as conventional and nuclear weapons slipped outside of Moscow's control.


Francis Schanck, 84, Investment Executive
Francis R. Schanck, a former partner with the investment banking firm of Bacon, Whipple &amp; Company of Chicago, died Nov. 1.
He was 84 years old and lived in Hinsdale, a suburb of Chicago.
The cause of death was prostate cancer, said his son, J. Thomas Schanck.


Stanley Newhouse, Insurance Executive, 81
Stanley Newhouse, an insurance executive and running advocate, died on Thursday at White Plains Hospital Center.
He was 81 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


Building an Audience for Broadway
Twenty New York City high school students sat attentively in the Martin Beck Theater after a performance the other night, firing questions at the cast of "Grand Hotel: The Musical." They asked how many performances the show had had (more than 800), what the columns on the stage were made of (Plexiglas), and where the actresses' microphones were hidden (in their wigs).
Then John Schneider, who stars as the Baron, posed a fateful question: "Do you find it more exciting to see a show on stage than on TV?"


Classical Music in Review
Maria Tipo Pianist Metropolitan Museum of Art


Can Starks Give the Knicks More Than One Great Game?
If John Starks can regularly give the Knicks half as much as he did Thursday night, he will have a successful season.
When the Knicks play the Charlotte Hornets tonight at Madison Square Garden, Starks will be coming off the finest game of his career.
On Thursday night, he scored a career-high 30 points and tied his career high for assists, 9, in New York's 128-100 romp over the Orlando Magic.
Starks could do no wrong, making long-range jump shots, throwing no-look passes and making athletic moves to the basket.


Review/Dance; A Message For Today In Blackface
Whether performed by blacks or by whites in blackface, minstrel shows perpetuated racial stereotypes.
No wonder they embarrass us today.
Yet the best minstrel show routines must have had gusto.
Otherwise, such entertainments would not have been popular from the 19th century into the early years of this century.
Donald Byrd choreographically examined this theatrical form in "The Minstrel Show," the witty and provocative new work that Donald Byrd/ The Group presented on Wednesday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater (219 West 19th Street).
Everyone in the cast was in grotesque blackface at least some of the time.
Nevertheless, even as one cringed at the cliches that Mr.
Byrd resurrected to make satirical points, one had to applaud his imaginative use of them.


Magic, Now and Forever
I first met Earvin Johnson as he was racing me down a basketball court.
Magic had the ball, and I was running backward on defense -- not an appropriate time for an introduction.
As he faked one way and passed another I saw both the ball and my ego pass by me on the basketball court.
After his teammate scored Magic flashed that signature smile that told me there was something special in this player.


Note Sale Activities Questioned
Concerned about the performance of primary dealers at a disappointing auction of three-year Treasury notes earlier this week, Representative Edward J. Markey, chairman of the House Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Finance, has asked all 39 primary dealers to provide information on the firms' actions at that sale.
Mr.
Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat, whose committee is looking into illegal practices in the government securities market and the need for legislative reform, asked dealers to provide information on a number of points relating to the auction on Tuesday.


Reforms Lag In Awarding of Contracts
Two years after they were proposed, New York City has failed to carry out many reforms of its beleaguered $5.5 billion-a-year contracting system that were designed in part to prevent scandals of the sort now consuming the city's $290 million water meter installation program.
The problems with the meter program came into focus Thursday with the indictments of its biggest contractor for fraud and massive labor law violations.
The city's Environmental Protection Commissioner, Albert F. Appleton, said yesterday that the city could not remove the company unless it was convicted.


No Headline
METRO DIGEST ALREADY WORRYING ABOUT '92
Just days after the 1991 elections, members of Congress from the New York region are already looking warily toward '92, wondering how they can keep the elections' powerful calls for change from turning them out of office, too.
Page 28.
NEW YORK CITY NEW TERMINAL PLANNED AT KENNEDY
The first new terminal for Kennedy International Airport in nearly 30 years has been proposed by a consortium of three of the biggest international airlines, Lufthansa, Japan Air Lines and Air France.
Page 1.
REELING FROM THE NEWS ABOUT MAGIC
In New York, and around the nation, young people struggled to absorb a numbing new equation, the one connecting their greatest hero, Magic Johnson, with the unspeakable disease, AIDS.
Frightened adolescents jammed telephone hot lines and student health offices.
Classrooms turned into tear-filled rap sessions.
Clinics reeled from the crush.
Page 1.
FIREFIGHTERS PROTEST LABOR POLICY
Frustrated over stalled contract talks, about 5,000 firefighters marched to City Hall, where they protested budget cuts and called for the removal of the Fire Commissioner.
Page 27.
JUDGE DELAYS SINGLE-SERGEANT PATROLS
A police plan to begin some one-sergeant patrols was delayed as a judge ordered the city to submit the plan to arbitration.
Page 27.
SUPPORT FOR THE DAILY NEWS
The new publisher of The Daily News rushed across the Atlantic to reassure the newspapers' managers, union leaders and employees that he would not abandon the paper after his father's sudden death at sea.
Page 27.
State criticizes Harlem Hospital. Page 27.
Dinkins appoints hospitals panel. Page 27. REGION CHARITY ON TOP OF CHARITY
A charity has come to the rescue of $1.5 million in supplies for the Soviet Union that have been stranded in a warehouse at Stewart Airport in Orange County because the Soviets could not afford to fly them home.
Page 29.
GOING SLOWLY IN TRENTON
The newly elected Republicans descended on the State House in Trenton this week to proclaim loudly and clearly that they carried a very big ax -- the overwhelming mandate to cut taxes.
But a second, softer, message was equally clear: The tax cuts will not be big, they will not be soon and they will not be easy.
Page 29.
GOING SLOWLY IN SUFFOLK
Fearful of a voter backlash of the sort that defeated County Executive Patrick G. Halpin, the Suffolk Legislature approved a $1.4 billion budget that raised a few fees but held the line on property taxes.
Page 29.
LAME-DUCK LARGESSE IN BRIDGEPORT
Mayor Mary C. Moran of Bridgeport, defeated in Tuesday's election, has ordered pay raises and other benefits for about 280 city workers that would cost the financially strapped city more than $159,000.
Page 29.
Judge approves $150,000 payment to homeless New Jersey man. Page 29.
About New York 26
Fashion 30


Classical Music in Review
The Prague Symphony Carnegie Hall


Doubts on Japan Rewiring
The chief of the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation, which rivals A.T.&amp;T. for leadership as the world's largest telephone company, expressed doubts yesterday about his company's plans to wire Japan's 45 million households with advanced fiber optics, the most ambitious such plan in the world.
The company plans to spend $60 billion over the next 25 years to bring advanced fiber optics to all of the households in Japan, about half as many as in the United States.


Holiday on Monday
Veterans Day will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  PARADE: Begins at 9 A.M. on Fifth Avenue at 39th Street and proceeds south on Fifth Avenue to 24th Street, ending around noon.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and Special Delivery only.
Post offices will be closed with the exception of the emergency window at the Main Post Office, 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Option to close.
PARKING: Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION: No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Open.
TRANSPORTATION: Regular weekday service.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Local option.
TRANSPORTATION: Regular weekday service.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Regular weekday schedules.
TRAFFIC ALERT
The Brooklyn-bound lanes of the Brooklyn Bridge will be closed for repairs until 3 P.M.
Monday.


Bikini Ad Prompts a Sexual Harassment Suit
Five female employees of a Stroh brewery here sued the company today, saying that its television advertisements featuring women cavorting in bikinis had created a workplace climate tolerant of sexual harassment.
The suit, accusing male workers and supervisors of a pattern of physical and verbal abuse dating from 1985, was filed in Ramsey County Court against the Detroit beer maker, which produces Stroh's, Old Milwaukee Beer and other brands.


Ruling on Typewriter Trade
The Commerce Department ruled today that a Japanese company had not evaded steep United States duties on certain electric typewriters imported from Japan.
The typewriter industry has become a test area for American trade laws because of a bitter legal battle between Brother Industries (USA) Inc., the American subsidiary of a Japanese company, and the Smith Corona Corporation, which is based in New Canaan, Conn., and is 48 percent owned by Hanson P.L.C. of Britain.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A new terminal has been proposed for Kennedy Airport by a consortium of three large international airlines, Lufthansa, Japan Air Lines and Air France, airline and airport officials said.
The expansion comes as Kennedy is trying to maintain its pre-eminence as the country's largest international gateway.  [ Page 1. ]


It's Beginning to Look a Lot Like Dec. 26
It's never too early to go holiday shopping, and there is an especially good reason not to wait this year.
Many department stores around the country have already posted Christmas sale prices on all kinds of merchandise, including clothing, housewares and home furnishings.
And for people who hope to find lower prices after Christmas on things that they need for themselves, rather than for gifts, the experts say the bargains may not be any better then.


David Novick, Analyst On Racing, Dies at 85
David Novick, an economist who was an outspoken analyst on the horse-racing industry, died Tuesday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Bethlehem, Pa.
He was 85 years old and lived in Santa Monica, Calif.
He died of complications after a stroke, said his nephew, Roger Levin of Bethlehem, with whom he had been staying.


Court Officer Kills Her Attacker, Police Say
An off-duty court officer from Manhattan Criminal Court last night shot and killed a man who attacked her with a knife in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, the police said.
The officer, Sonya McDougal, 30 years old, was walking on Cambridge Place just after 8 P.M. when the man slashed her on the hand and face.
She then shot him twice in the chest, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


EUROPEAN NATIONS DECLARE SANCTIONS AGAINST BELGRADE
Frustrated at its continuing failure to halt Serbian-led attacks on Croatia, the 12-nation European Community placed broad economic sanctions on Yugoslavia today and urged the United Nations Security Council to order an oil embargo in the hope of cutting off fuel for the conflict.
Conferring on the fringes of a two-day NATO summit meeting, community foreign ministers also said that a peace conference being mediated by Lord Carrington of Britain had been put in jeopardy by "fighting and indiscriminate bloodshed" taking place in violation of repeated cease-fires.


Review/Dance; Some Cagey Wrestling With Trouble
Judith Ren-Lay offered a look at the ills of the world in "Undercurrent Events," presented on Thursday and running through Nov. 17 at Performance Space 122 (150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street).
It was a curiously unbalanced-feeling piece, though, with strong visuals and a less compelling text and delivery.
Ms.
Ren-Lay, a former member of Gus Solomons' company who has been presenting her own work for the last decade, has one of those perennially young baby faces and she kept the tone of the evening surprisingly light and flat.
A program quote suggested that Ms.
Ren-Lay intended to feint her way cagily through a series of small wrestling matches with such issues as violence, the abridgement of abortion rights, garbage and, presumptuously, the reading habits of the working class.


Canadien Streak Ends As Richer Scores Two
In a game that had the ingredients and the atmosphere of the playoffs, the Devils matched Montreal's remarkable team defense step for step tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena and then went one step further.
The result was a 3-2 triumph for the New Jersey, and it ended Montreal's winning streak at nine games.
A delighted crowd of 13,507 fans stood and cheered as the Devils heroically killed two penalties in the last four minutes.


In Voters' Wake, Reading the Message
A few miles north of Representative Robert E. Andrews's district, jubilant New Jersey Republicans are still celebrating the landslide in which they captured both houses of the State Legislature for the first time in 20 years.
A few miles west, across the Delaware River, Democrats are toasting Harris Wofford, a one-time college administrator with an anti-Bush message, who trounced former Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, a confidant of the President, to become the first Pennsylvania Democrat to win a Senate seat in 23 years.


1990 Gun Deaths Top Auto Fatalities in Texas
In Texas, deaths from gun injuries outnumbered deaths from automobile accidents last year for the first time since such records were computerized in 1964, according to a new study by a research team from the Texas Department of Health.
The study, based on a review of death certificates from 1985 to 1990, showed that 3,443 people were killed by guns in Texas last year, compared to 3,309 killed by automobile accidents.
Results of the study were published in the November issue of Texas Medicine, a publication of the Texas Medical Association.


Bush Returns the Democrats' Fire, Pointing to Success Against Iraqis
President Bush paused between a summit session of the Atlantic alliance and economic talks in the Netherlands to renew his increasingly defensive battle with Congress today.
He charged that if it had been left up to the Democrats, America would be sitting "fat, dumb and happy with Saddam Hussein maybe in Saudi Arabia."
Mr.
Bush began a news conference among the meticulously trimmed hedgerows of Villa Taverna, the American Ambassador's residence here, seeming determined to focus on his role as a head of state who holds a predominant position in Western military and political councils.


Court Upholds a Welfare Cutoff by Michigan
A state appeals court today declined to restore benefits under Michigan's general assistance welfare program, which until last month had provided aid to 83,000 residents of the state who are poor, able-bodied and without children.
The unanimous decision, issued by a three-judge panel of the Michigan Court of Appeals, is expected to prompt further evictions of thousands of poor tenants.
Thousands have already been turned out since the state ended the general assistance program on Oct. 1, the start of Michigan's fiscal year.


CURRENCY MARKETS: German Official's Remarks Help Dollar to Move Higher
The dollar moved upward yesterday, once again influenced by apparent interest rate trends.
Gold prices were mixed.


Harold K. Wolfson, Real-Estate Executive, 75
Harold K. Wolfson, a retired hotel and real-estate executive, died on Thursday at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
He was 75 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from a coronary bypass operation, his family said.


RESULTS PLUS TENNIS  Seles Wins in a Rout  Top-seeded Monica Seles, third-seeded Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere and No. 6 Lori McNeil cruised in straight sets last night into the semifinals of the Virginia Slims of California in Oakland, Calif. Seles beat Linda Harvey-Wild, 6-0, 6-2; McNeil ended the upset streak of Stephanie Rehe, 7-6 (7-2), 6-2, and Maleeva-Fragniere beat seventh-seeded Amy Frazier, 6-3, 6-2. The Seles match was marked by baseline power and brevity as the 17-year-old Yugoslav beat her American opponent in 43 minutes. As the match progressed, Seles added pace to her serve, at times exceeding 100 miles an hour. (AP) Chang in Semifinals: Two Americans, top-seeded Michael Chang and third-seeded Richey Reneberg, will meet today in the semifinals of the Diet Pepsi Indoor tournament in Birmingham, England. Chang advanced when Ronald Agenor of Haiti, trailing by 4-2 in the first set, retired during their match. In another quarterfinal, Reneberg beat Wayne Ferreira of South Africa, 6-4, 6-4. Sixth-seeded Thierry Champion of France beat No. 4 MaliVai Washington of the United States, 6-4, 6-4, and will next face a countryman, Guillaume Raoux, who beat Tom Nijssen of the Netherlands, 6-7 (4-7), 7-5, 6-3. (AP) GOLF  3 Share Lead in Japan  Colleen Walker of the United States, Liselotte Neumann of Sweden and Tatsuko Ohsako of Japan shot two-under-par 70's yesterday in the rain to share the first-round lead in the L.P.G.A.'s year-ending Mazda Japan Classic in Ohtsu. Walker, who entered the tournament 11th on the tour's money list with $289,246 in earnings, had five birdies and three bogeys on the 6,524-yard, par-72 Seta Golf Club course in central Japan. Two other Americans, Elaine Crosby and Dottie Mochrie, opened with 71's. (AP) Australia Edges U.S.: Craig Parry took advantage of Tom Purtzer's bogeys on the final two holes yesterday as the Australian PGA team beat the United States PGA Tour team by 7-5 in the second round of the Four Tours championship in Adelaide, Australia. Purtzer began the 17th hole with a two-stroke lead, but his bogeys and Parry's birdie at the 17th and par at the 18th gave the Australian a 71-72 victory on the 7,000-yard, par-73 Royal Adelaide course. Europe and Japan tied at 6-6 in the other second-round match. The European team leads the tournament with 14 points, followed by the United States with 13, Australia with 11 and Japan with 10. (AP) COLLEGE FOOTBALL  William Paterson Wins  Al White, wh


Corrections
Articles between last Nov. 14 and yesterday about the killing of a gay man in Queens rendered the name of one defendant incorrectly.
His lawyer said yesterday that it is Erik Brown.


Jack Katzen, 70, Dies; Ex-Pentagon Official
Jack Katzen, a former Pentagon official and defense industry executive, died on Oct. 28 while vacationing on Lan Tau Island in Hong Kong.
He was 70 years old and lived in Greenwich, Conn.
Mr. Katzen's death was apparently caused by a heart attack, a doctor at the scene said.


Condom Distribution Defended
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez said yesterday that the ordeal of the basketball star Magic Johnson affirms the wisdom of New York City's plan to make condoms available to high school students within a few weeks.
"What people are realizing is that we're not making this up," the Chancellor said at a news conference.


From 3 Designers, a Lighthearted View of Spring
Up with wit, down with dull.
Byron Lars possesses the kind of irrepressible good humor that just bubbles through his clothes.
He specializes in taking common fashion themes and making them special with his shapes.


Story Shifted In Stabbing Of Gay Man
Under brisk and pointed questioning by a defense lawyer, a Queens man admitted yesterday that his courtroom tale of having killed a gay man included major details that he did not originally give to the police.
The new details incriminate two friends in the killing far more than the original account did.


Mentally Ill Homeless Are on Rise
The number of mentally ill homeless people has increased 7 percent since the start of last year, according to the estimates of 21 cities around the nation.
The United States Conference of Mayors, which surveyed the cities and announced the results today, said the cities attributed the increase in part to cuts in residential psychiatric-care programs.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about William H. Shames, an inventor and author, misstated his birthplace.
It was the Bronx.


Philippine Flood Deaths Put at 5,500


Pension Agency's Accounting Systems Criticized
The Federal agency that insures most private employee pension plans, already running a multibillion-dollar deficit, is unable to audit its books, a Congressional study has found.
The disarray in accounting systems at the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation ranges from a two-year breakdown in a premium-processing computer system, corrected in 1990, to its inability now to identify unpaid, overpaid or underpaid insurance premiums, the oversight subcommittee of the House Ways and Means Committee said in a report issued Thursday.


CHRONICLE
When the likes of DOROTHY PARKER, ROBERT BENCHLEY and ALEXANDER WOOLLCOTT were holding forth at their roundtable at the Algonquin, AL HIRSCHFELD would sometimes be there, too, joining in the talk, listening to the barbed exhanges and, certainly, observing.
He later immortalized the crew with his deft lines and squiggles, just as he captured Broadway luminaries and others.
"People would save their stories for the luncheon and try to startle or amuse," the 88-year-old artist recalled the other day.
"I was fascinated by this entourage."


First Chicago Names Next Chief Executive
Richard L. Thomas, a longtime executive at the First National Bank of Chicago, was yesterday named chairman and chief executive of the bank and its parent company, the First Chicago Corporation, effective Jan. 1.
Mr.
Thomas, who is 60 years old, will replace Barry F. Sullivan, who announced at the end of October that he planned to retire.
Mr.
Sullivan, who is also 60, has been the company's top officer since 1980, when he was hired from the Chase Manhattan Corporation, while Mr.
Thomas remained president of the bank and its holding company.


India, Too, Was Shocked, by Sale of Bride, 10; Law Exempts Muslims
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 21 "New Delhi Journal" on Ameena, the tearful 10-year-old bride, misses a few important points.


Walesa Picks Former Mentor To Establish a New Government
Calling on Poles to set aside their differences, President Lech Walesa today asked Bronislaw Geremek, once his mentor within the Solidarity movement and more recently his critic, to form Poland's next government.
Mr.
Geremek belongs to the Democratic Union, a party led by a group of Mr.
Walesa's former advisers within the labor union who have more recently been among his most bitter political foes.
The party finished first with a scant 12 percent of the seats after campaigning for basic continuation of Poland's pioneering economic reforms.


Shifts at Kodak Include No. 2 Imaging Position
The Eastman Kodak Company redrew the organization chart of its picture-taking operations yesterday and handed the responsibility for developing its important electronic imaging products to William F. Fowble.
Mr.
Fowble, who is 53, will run the Imagine Development unit of the company's new Imaging Group, which includes the old Photographic Products, Commercial Imagine and International groups.
He will also serve as second in command to Leo J. Thomas, the president of the Imaging Group.


Patents; Rearranging The Dimples On Golf Balls
The man who may well qualify as the world's leading expert on golf ball mathematics has patented a specially dimpled ball that he says travels farther than other balls and yet conforms with official standards.
The new ball is the latest in a series developed by William Gobush, head of aerodynamic research at the Titleist golf ball division of the Acushnet Company in New Bedford, Mass.
Titleist makes about 40 percent of the golf balls sold in the United States, and Mr.
Gobush, a mathematician, has devoted the last 17 years to the task of figuring out the best geometric patterns for arranging dimples on a ball's surface.


Goldman Sees No Crisis In Its Maxwell Loans
Responding to rumors of an imminent showdown between the Maxwell family publishing empire and Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the American investment firm issued assurances today that it would not precipitate a financial crisis for the Maxwells by calling in loans or selling shares held as collateral.
In a telephone interview from New York, a Goldman, Sachs spokesman said that the loans were "more than adequately secured" and that the family had not been asked to increase the collateral.
"We're not going to take any precipitative action," the spokesman said.


U.N. Presses for $300 Million To Begin Moves in Cambodia
In an effort to speed up a permanent solution to the Cambodian civil war, the United Nations is pressing the United States and the other permanent Security Council members for an immediate payment of $200 million to $300 million to cover start-up costs for a $1 billion-plus peacekeeping and election-monitoring operation there next year.
The United Nations wants the money now so that it can start building housing and buying supplies for the thousands of troops and civilian administrators it will be sending to Cambodia to disarm the country's warring factions, take over its administration and organize free and fair elections.


Merry Christmas to All, and to All, 'Do It Right!'
SORRY to sound like Scrooge, grumbly and cantankerous when I should be out caroling or shopping or otherwise making merry, but I don't like the fact that the holiday season now begins around Halloween.
One day the stores are full of ghoulish orange-and-black Halloween masks.
The next day, the shelves are crammed with candy canes and shiny ornaments.
This crass stretching-out cheapens my own personal season.
I call it my own personal season because, well, it is: When Santa came down my parents' chimney one Christmas Eve in the mid-1950's, the stork was not far behind.
I was born the next morning.
Having my own personal season has turned me into a one-person standards-and-practices department, determined to see that the holidays are celebrated the way they were meant to be celebrated.
As a child, I was finicky about department-store Santas: They had to have their cottony beards on straight.
The wispy coronas under their red stocking caps had to look just right, too.
Now I bray about too-skinny Christmas trees and too-lavish decorations (yards jam-packed from one fence post to the other with a sleigh
and
a Nativity scene
and
a dozen red-nosed reindeer
and
scads of fake snow).


Winter Bridal For Alicia Macri
Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore W. Macri of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alicia Beth Macri, to Douglas Alan Lindgren, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan C. Lindgren of Belmont, Calif.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Macri, 26 years old, is an assistant vice president in private banking at Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a vice president of the Carol Publishing Group, a book publisher in New York.
Her mother, Joan Macri, is the director of development at New York Downtown Hospital.


A Nice Stadium, In Any Event
To the Sports Editor:
An important element in "Trials Face a Hurdle Named David Duke," (The Times, Nov. 6) about the 1992 New Orleans Olympic track and field trials and David Duke's gubernatorial candidacy has been omitted.


Tech Notes; Seatbelts With Comfort
Only 59 percent of all Americans wear seat belts, according to the Federal Government.
A major reason is that people find them uncomfortable.
Mercedes-Benz claims to have addressed this problem in its 1992 S-class cars.
The "dual-level retractor system" uses two springs to apply tension to the belt.
An electromagnet is used to switch between the springs at the base of the door pillar.
When the belt is unbuckled or the ignition is off, the belt is pulled relatively tight by the stronger spring.
When the belt is buckled and the engine is running, a weaker spring is engaged to ease the belt's pull against the wearer.


Style Makers; Neal and Sally Leister, Pennant Purveyors
After seeing an exhibit on the Negro Leagues at the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y., Neal Leister thought of reproducing team pennants.
Easier said than done.
Finding the originals has been difficult, Mr.
Leister said, and little information is readily available on the Negro Leagues, the teams on which blacks played from the the 1920's through the late 50's before they could enter the major leagues.


Slippery Synonym
To the Editor:
John J. O'Connor expresses well-intended concern over the dubious depiction of blacks on today's TV programs.
However, his description of the portrayal of two silly characters on the show "True Colors" as being "sometimes made to seem positively retarded" is appalling.
Equating mental retardation with "dimwitted or ridiculous" behavior is remarkably narrow-minded, especially in an article that decries cultural stereotypes.


Political Talk
What's-His-Name Is Ahead
How do you spell McEneny?


Winter Bridal For Miss Amster
Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Amster of New City, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Lynn Amster to Benjamin Joseph Young, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham Young of Purchase, N.Y.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Amster, 26 years old, is an account executive at Lobsenz Stevens, a New York public relations concern.
She graduated from the State University at Albany.
Her father is an associate professor of business at Iona College.
Her mother, Arlene Amster, is an account executive at Dun &amp; Bradstreet in New York.
Mr.
Young, 24, is an associate at Glaves &amp; Associates, a real-estate financial services firm in Wayne, N.J.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
His father is the president of O. B. Dyers, a textile corporation in Reading, Pa.


Mutual Funds; The Rich Have Blind Spots, Too
Even wealthy investors seem to have a blind spot when they are buying fixed-income investments.
More than 80 percent of the wealthy investors taking part in a recent survey said that when they bought fixed-income investments, they looked solely at yield and ignored the total return.
This finding emerged in a study by Russ Alan Price and Richard K. Weingarten of 298 investors with more than $1 million each in liquid assets.
The study is part of a research report called "Marketing Mutual Funds," which will be published in February by Renaissance Inc., a financial services research group in Carmel, Ind.


Wide-Eyed in the Big City
CITY LIMITS
Memories of a Small-Town Boy. By Terry Teachout. 204 pp. New York: Poseidon Press. $19.


U.N. Refugee Chief Seeking Help From the Gulf Nations
The United Nations official charged with caring for the world's 17 million refugees hopes to persuade Saudi Arabia and other Persian Gulf states to help pay the soaring costs of repatriating some of them in exchange for undertaking to resettle some 35,000 Iraqi prisoners of war and political exiles who refused to return home after the Persian Gulf war.
The Iraqis, who include over 14,000 Shiite muslims who fled after President Saddam Hussein's army crushed their unsuccessful uprising earlier this year, are currently living in camps in Saudi Arabia organized by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, who is trying to resettle them in Iran and other Muslim countries.


Bugner on Bugner
There is nothing sweet about the sweet science to the former British and European heavyweight champion JOE BUGNER, especially when it comes to his son fighting.
JOE BUGNER JR. is scheduled to meet DAVID JULES in a heavyweight fight in London this week.
"I would rather he was a dustman or a road sweeper than a professional boxer," said the elder Bugner, who lost a world title fight to Muhammad Ali in 1975.


Style Makers; Paul Wrangle, Silversmith
In his 19 years as a silversmith, Paul Wrangle has made everything from teapots and tumblers to chess sets and small airplanes.
Earlier this year, Mr.
Wrangle, a master silversmith at Asprey of London, helped make three cups that were presented by the Queen to winners of the Ascot races.
When Ringo Starr wanted a silver chess set made, he went to Mr.
Wrangle.
The former Beatle had designed each piece in the shape of an uplifted hand.
The knight wore a gauntlet, the bishop a bishop's ring.
The lowly pawn held his hand in a fist.


Anne L. Keith Wed in Virginia
Anne Langhorne Keith, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert N. Slawson of Annapolis, Md., and Martin L. Keith of Alexandria, Va., was married yesterday to William Tomphson Cocke 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cocke 3d of Sewanee, Tenn.
The Rev.
Geoffrey Michael St.
John Hoare officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Alexandria.
Mrs.
Cocke, 27 years old, is the deputy executive director of TCIA, a trucking trade association in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Hogan &amp; Hartson in Washington.
The bridegroom, 31, graduated from Washington and Lee University and received a master's degree in foreign affairs from Virginia.
He is a communication editor in the news office at Washington and Lee.
His father is an English professor at the University of the South.


Forecasting the Hungriest Soviet Winter in Years
Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan drew a laugh at a recent Congressional hearing when he told of seeing potatoes and onions in the Soviet Union being stored together in the same sealed boxes, so that they would not only spoil quickly but also smell bad.
The disorganization and waste of Soviet agriculture have long appalled visiting foreigners.
Worsening the problems this year are regional droughts, the fragmentation of the Soviet Union and half-hearted efforts to establish a market economy.
The result, some American officials increasingly fear, is that this winter's food problems may be the worst in decades.


An Asia Hand Returns; His Flag Stays at Home
Sixteen years after Ambassador John Gunther Dean fled Phnom Penh with the American flag clutched tightly under his arm, just days before the city fell to the Khmer Rouge, the United States has begun the return to Cambodia.
Two American diplomats and a small support staff left this week to reopen a United States mission in the Cambodian capital, which is now preparing for the installation next week of a new coalition government under United Nations supervision.


Those Sumptuous Russian-Flavored Storybooks
Russian culture is, traditionally, exuberantly child-oriented and unabashedly kitschy.
This combination makes for rich offerings on the children's book front, since kitsch at its best is only the glorious overrichness and brightness of childhood taste.
The sentimental morality that led the Russians to Communism in the first place -- many of the Revolution's progenitors saw Marxism as a fair system imposed on an unfair world -- has a certain eloquence in books for children, a context in which idealism for its own sake is laudable rather than foolish.
While poets, philosophers and conceptual artists have been doing work, since the demise of the Iron Curtain, that breaks radically with the ideological restraints imposed by Stalin and Brezhnev, many illustrators of children's books, like ballet dancers and other performing artists, are doing just what they did so admirably in the days of the dictators.
Though our eyes were ever on the
grands jetes
of the Bolshoi stars, we have only recently, in our enthusiasm for Russia, noticed the tradition of sumptuous illustration that has long existed there.
It is our openness, more than theirs, that has brought such work here.


Baedeker
To the Editor: Karl Meyer's article on Baedeker guides was most enter taining and informative and brings to mind the extensive use my wife and I made of our 1914 Baedeker on Russia when in 1984 we visited 16 places there, ranging from cities in the Caucasus to St.
Petersburg.
I had bought the Baedeker in the 1960's for, I believe, $100.
We are so fond of it that, rather than risk harm coming to it in the Soviet Union, I photocopied relevant sections and some of the maps, all of which were lighter to carry anyway.
We were able to get around St.
Petersburg and Tsarskoye Selo (now Pushkin) without any Intourist guides at all, and our drivers were enthralled by the Baedeker maps.
Fortunately, I speak some Russian.
ROBERT G. KLECKNER JR.
New York, N.Y.


Chess
On her 21st birthday, on Oct. 30, Xie Jun of China was able to celebratethe women's world championship she won the day before in Manila.
Xie scored 8 1/2-6 1/2 to defeat 31-year-old Maya Chiburdanidze of the Soviet Republic of Georgia, who had held sway without interruption since 1978.
Moreover, Ms.
Xie's triumph was the first by a non-Soviet woman in 64 years of title play.
It did not come about without a stubborn struggle.
Although Ms.
Xie was the first to win a game -- No. 3 in the 16-game series -- she then lost twice, falling behind.
It was not until the ninth game that she evened the score and began her drive to the top.
Considering the relatively small amount of chess activity in China, her achievement is amazing.


The Orthodox Church Gains Power in a Post-Marxist World
For many Americans, Eastern Orthodox Christianity, with its bearded bishops and solemn rituals, its Byzantine iconography and ornate churches, is the very model of an ancient, otherworldly rite.
But for all its traditionalism, Orthodoxy has become an important new force in Christianity as East and West stumble into the post-Communist era.
After decades of persecution, Orthodox Christianity has emerged in much of the former Communist world as an alternative, though by no means the only one, to a badly discredited Marxism.
From Russia to Romania, Orthodox churches are being called upon to serve as sources of moral teaching and national identity.


Action Now or Next Year? Bush's Advisers Are Split Over Campaign Strategy
The results of last week's elections exposed weaknesses in President Bush's still emerging campaign and highlighted divisions among his advisers over how to handle Mr.
Bush's unofficial candidacy.
On the broadest level, White House strategists say they still envision a plan that blames Congress for the country's ills and portrays President Bush as concerned about domestic issues.
But the specifics are another matter.
After the Republicans' embarrassing defeat in the Pennsylvania Senate race, Administration officials and party leaders said privately that the immediate reaction was little more than a frenzy of finger-pointing.


Ms. Elfenbein to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Elfenbein of Mamaroneck, N.Y., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter Ruth Elfenbein and Jeffrey Steinberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Steinberg of Short Hills, N.J.
Ms.
Elfenbein, 24 years old, is a rehabilitation counselor at the White Plains branch of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
She graduated from Brandeis University, as did her fiance, and received masters degrees in psychology and counseling psychology from Columbia University.
Mr.
Steinberg, 26, is an associate with the law firm of Connell, Foley &amp; Geiser in Roseland, N.J.
He has a J.D. from Fordham University.


Dances, Dreidels, Trees, Candles and More, All for the Young
THE sheer number of holiday activities -- for Thanksgiving, Hanukkah, Christmas, Kwanzaa or New Year's -- available to families in New York City this year makes orderly scheduling a gargantuan task.
The proliferation of Kwanzaa events alone, based on the African-American celebration that focuses on seven moral principles, will crowd calendars from Dec. 26 to Jan. 1.
Here is a guide to some of the goings-on, from the most innovative to the most traditional, from encountering "angels" at the Cloisters to videotaping New Year's resolutions at the Children's Museum of Manhattan.
ALL AGES November
GREEN CORN DANCES,a workshop with a performance by Chin, an American Indian dancer, and his two daughters, Snowflower and Star.
With audience participation and talks about Indians' Thanksgiving traditions.
Nov. 29 at 1 and 3 P.M. at the Children's Museum of Manhattan, 212 West 83d Street.
Workshop: $1.
Museum admission: $4.
Information: (212) 721-1234.
December
MENORAH LIGHTING, a formal candle-lighting ceremony with a rabbi officiating, followed by a sing-along concert and light refreshments.
Dec. 2 at 3 P.M. in the lobby of the Bronx Museum of the Arts, 1040 Grand Concourse, at East 161st Street, South Bronx.
Free.
Information: (212) 681-1000.
"THE NUTCRACKER," presented by the New York City Ballet, featuring a huge Christmas tree, human-size mice, the land of dancing sweets and a cast that includes 50 students from the School of American Ballet.
At the New York State Theater from Dec. 4 to Jan. 5; performances daily except Christmas Eve, Christmas Day and New Year's Day.
Tickets: $10 to $58.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
Reservations: (212) 307-4100 (Ticketmaster).
"CHRISTMAS AT CLEAR COMFORT," an open house at the home of Alice Austen, a turn-of-the-century documentary photographer, to view traditional holiday decorations and seasonal refreshments.
Dec. 7 and 8 from noon to 5 P.M. at the Alice Austen House, 2 Hylan Boulevard, Rosebank, S.I.
Free.
Information: (718) 816-4506.
OLD-FASHIONED CHRISTMAS TREE, the 15th annual event featuring a tree decorated with rare antique and vintage ornaments, including German glass balls, American paper cutouts, Santas in blue or yellow coats, and photographs of Christmas trees.
At the Gotham Book Mart and Gallery, 41 West 47th Street, Manhattan, Dec. 7 to Jan. 4 (closed Christmas Day).
Mondays through Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Dec. 8, 15 and 22 from noon to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 719-4448.
"A GIFT OF LIGHT," a festival of songs, storytelling, drama and dance, with audience participation, to celebrate Hanukkah.
Dec. 8 at 2 P.M. at the 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
Tickets: $10.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
"YOU'RE A GOOD MAN, CHARLIE BROWN," a musical about the "Peanuts" characters, adapted from the Broadway show of the same name.
Produced by On Stage Productions.
Dec. 13 to Jan. 19 at 7 P.M. on Fridays, 3 and 7 P.M. on Saturdays, and 3 P.M. on Sundays.
Tickets: $10 for adults; $8 for children.
Information: (212) 666-1716.
KWANZAA CELEBRATION, featuring a crafts fair, food and family entertainment.
Dec. 14 from 10 A.M. to 10 P.M. at the Langston Hughes Library and Cultural Center, 102-09 Northern Boulevard, Corona, Queens.
Admission is free; food and crafts are for sale.
Information: (718) 651-1100.
PRE-KWANZAA FABRIC WORKSHOP, at which children may prepare for the seven-day African-American holiday by making indigo scarves and decorative wall hangings.
Dec. 14 at 2 P.M. at the Studio Museum in Harlem, 144 West 125th Street, Manhattan.
Fee: $7.
Reservations: (212) 864-4500.
VICTORIAN HOLIDAY REVELS, in which families may visit the candle-lighted village in Richmondtown Restoration; featuring freshly baked goods and "villagers" in 19th-century dress.
Dec. 26 to 29 from noon to 7 P.M. at Richmondtown Restoration, 441 Clarke Avenue, Richmondtown, S.I.
Admission: adults, $4; children 6 and older, $2.50.
Information: (718) 351-1611.
"PRIDE AND JOY," a concert by the children's gospel choir of the same name, with the Harlem-based Martin Luther King Jr.
Ensemble Movement.
Dec. 21 at 1 and 2 P.M. at the Children's Museum of Manhattan, 212 West 83d Street.
Free with museum admission of $4.
Information: (212) 721-1234.
FARMHOUSE TOUR, to visit and view the farmhouse decorated for the holidays, enjoy refreshments and sit by an open fire.
Dec. 26 to 29 from noon to 4 P.M. at the Queens County Farm Museum, 73-50 Little Neck Parkway, Floral Park.
Free.
Information: (718) 347-3276.
January
THREE KINGS DAY PARADE, the 15th annual parade based on the celebration of the Epiphany, featuring live animals and community residents dressed in costumes.
Sponsored by the El Museo del Barrio, 1230 Fifth Avenue, at 104th Street, Manhattan.
On Jan. 6 at 11 A.M. at the museum.
Free.
Information: (212) 831-7272. 3 AND UP November
"A GREAT MIRACLE HAPPENED THERE," a workshop in which children ages 3 and 4 can learn about Hanukkah through storytelling, singing, crafts and a question-and-answer period.
Nov. 17 at 10:30 and 11:30 A.M. at the Jewish Museum at the New-York Historical Society, Central Park West at 77th Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $5 for members; $7 for nonmembers.
Registration: (212) 399-3368.
"HOLIDAY MAGIC," a workshop at which children ages 4 and up can create Christmas cards based on 19th-century Victorian cards culled from the Staten Island Historical Society Collection.
Nov. 23 from 10 A.M. to noon at the Richmondtown Restoration, 441 Clarke Avenue, Richmondtown, S.I.
Fee: children, $5 for members and $6 for nonmembers; free for accompanying adults.
Information: (718) 351-1611.
THANKSGIVING STORY HOUR, in which children 3 to 6 years old will taste American Indian foods and tell stories.
Nov. 24 at 12:30 P.M. at Eeyore's Books for Children, 2212 Broadway, at 79th Street, Manhattan, (212) 362-0634, and at 2 P.M. at Eeyore's, 25 East 83d Street, Manhattan, (212) 988-3404.
Free.
December
"MAGIC DREIDEL," a performance by the Grumbling Gryphons of Connecticut, featuring audience participation.
Children will help tell the story of Hanukkah, sing, act out the story and make props.
For ages 4 to 12.
Dec. 1 at noon at the Henry Street Settlement, Louis Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $3 for adults; $2.50 for children.
Reservations: (212) 598-0400.
HANUKKAH STORY HOUR, for ages 3 to 6.
Andrea Katz will tell stories focusing on the menorah.
At Eeyore's Books for Children.
Dec. 1 at 11 A.M. at the store at 2212 Broadway, at 79th Street, Manhattan (212) 362-0634, and at 12:30 P.M. at the store at 25 East 83d Street, Manhattan (212) 988-3404.
Free.
"THE MIRACLE OF HANUKKAH," a performance by Eva Grayzel, an actress and singer, who will ask the audience to participate in re-enacting the Hanukkah story.
Dec. 3 at 11 A.M. and 1 P.M. at the Jewish Museum at the New-York Historical Society, Central Park West at 77th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $5 for members; $7 for nonmembers.
Information: (212) 399-3368.
"DANCES OF LIGHT," with Mark De Garmo and Dancers, who will tell the story of Hanukkah and convey the holiday spirit through music, verse and dance.
Audience participation.
For ages 4 and up.
Dec. 8 at 11 A.M. and 1 P.M. at the Jewish Museum at the New-York Historical Society, Central Park West at 77th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $5 for members and $7 for nonmembers.
Information: (212) 399-3368.
FAMILY HANUKKAH CELEBRATION, featuring the Good Clean Fun Improvisation Company from Leonia, N.J., in a musical about the Hanukkah traditions and the first Feast of Lights, with songs in Yiddish, Hebrew and English.
For ages 4 to 10.
Dec. 8 at 11 A.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $7.
Information: (212) 362-8060.
"THE CATS: GETTING READY FOR CHRISTMAS," an original Christmas story set in a back alley that unites four cats who discover the true meaning of the holiday through songs and dances.
For ages 4 to 10.
On Dec. 14 at 1 P.M. at the Triplex Theater, 199 Chambers Street, TriBeCa.
Tickets: $7.
Information: (212) 618-1980.
"ARTNAMENTS," a workshop in which children ages 4 and up will create paper ornaments for Christmas trees.
With a tour of "Las Casitas: An Urban Cultural Alternative," an exhibition based on a Puerto Rican tradition of informal cultural activities in homes. take place.
Dec. 15 at 2 P.M. at the Bronx Museum of the Arts, 1040 Grand Concourse, at East 161st Street, South Bronx.
Workshop is free; museum admission is also free on Sundays.
Information: (212) 681-1000.
"THE NUTCRACKER," a one-hour version especially for younger children, presented by the New York Theater Ballet.
Dec. 21 to 23 and Dec. 28 to 30 at 1 and 3:30 P.M. at Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $15 for adults; $12.50 for children.
Information: (212) 679-0401.
"GIFTS FROM THE HEART," a family workshop to make "simple, small and special" gifts for the holidays.
Dec. 23 from 1:30 to 4:30 P.M. at the Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston.
Workshop: $5, including museum admission.
Information: (718) 273-2060.
CHRISTMAS CELEBRATIONS AND DECORATIONS IN THE MIDDLE AGES, a workshop in which children ages 4 to 12 will go on a gallery tour and then make pomanders, clove-studded apples or oranges meant to scent drawers or closets.
Dec. 26 at 1 P.M. at the Cloisters, Fort Tryon Park, Washington Heights, Manhattan.
Free with museum admission: $6 for adults; free for children under 12 accompanied by an adult.
Information: (212) 923-3700, extension 159.
"DON'T THROW IT OUT," a family workshop at which participants may recycle holiday gift wrap into hats, puppets, sculpture and other objects.
Dec. 26 and 27 from 1:30 to 4:30 P.M. at the Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston.
Workshop: $5, including museum admission.
Information: (718) 273-2060.
"THE COLOR GREEN," a workshop in which children ages 4 to 12 will look for the color green -- a symbol of hope, regeneration and fertility -- in evergreen plants, tapestries and medieval treasures in various galleries and then take part in a related art project.
Dec. 27 at 1 P.M. at the Cloisters, Fort Tryon Park, Washington Heights, Manhattan.
Free with museum admission: $6 for adults; free for children under 12 accompanied by an adult.
Information: (212) 923-3700, extension 159.
"ANGELS," a workshop in which children ages 4 to 12 can encounter inhabitants of the celestial realm by taking gallery tours and participating in an art-related project.
Dec. 28 at 1 P.M. at the Cloisters, Fort Tryon Park, Washington Heights, Manhattan.
Free with museum admission: $6 for adults; free for children under 12 accompanied by an adult.
Information: (212) 923-3700, extension 159.
"NUTCRACKER AND THE MOUSE KING," an original musical adaptation based on the "Nutcracker" story, with song, dance and a sword duel; produced by the Interborough Repertory Theater of Brooklyn.
Dec. 28 and 29 at 2 P.M. at the Henry Street Settlement, Louis Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $3 for adults; $2.50 for children.
Reservations: (212) 598-0400.
KWANZAA, a workshop at which children ages 4 and up will be told the history and purpose of the African-American holiday and make various related symbols like the hinara, a candleholder.
Dec. 30 and 31 from 11 A.M. to 2 P.M.
On Dec. 31, a party with African-American music and food will begin at 2 P.M.
At the Bronx Museum of the Arts, 1040 Grand Concourse, at East 161st Street, South Bronx.
Free.
Information: (212) 681-1000. 5 AND UP November
SCHAREN KNIPPEN, a workshop for ages 6 to 12 on the art of Dutch paper cutting, which will include making designs of snowflakes and other holiday symbols.
Participants will work with designs based on work done more than 100 years ago by Abigail Lefferts Lloyd, a descendant of the Lefferts family.
Nov. 16 at 1 P.M. at the Lefferts Homestead Double Parlor, Prospect Park, on Flatbush Avenue near Empire Boulevard, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Free.
Registration: (718) 965-6505.
THANKSGIVING CRAFTS HOURS, at which children ages 5 to 12 may hear related stories and afterward make Thanksgiving crafts like paper-bag turkeys.
Nov. 22 at 4 P.M. at the Queens Borough Public Library, Broadway branch, 40-20 Broadway, Long Island City, (718) 721-2462, and Nov. 25 and 26 at 4 P.M. at the Queens Borough Public Library Central Library, 89-11 Merrick Boulevard, Jamaica, (718) 990-0767.
Free.
"YOUR PLACE AT THE TABLE," a gallery tour in the Brooklyn Museum's decorative-arts and period rooms for children ages 6 and up, followed by a workshop on Thanksgiving table settings.
Nov. 23 at 3 P.M. at the museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, Crown Heights.
Free with museum admission of $4 for adults, free for children under age 12 accompanied by an adult.
Information: (718) 638-5000.
"GREAT GOURDS," a workshop for children ages 5 to 10 and an accompanying adult to learn about gourds, including how they are preserved, how to decorate them in the tradition of American folk artisans and how to create a Thanksgiving dinner-table centerpiece.
With snacks made from gourds.
Nov. 24 from 1 to 3 P.M. at the New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park, the Bronx.
Fee: $20 for members; $22 for nonmembers, covering one adult and one child; $6 for each additional child.
Registration: (212) 220-8982.
"WHAT DO HANUKKAH LAMPS AND POTATO PANCAKES HAVE IN COMMON?" A workshop for ages 5 to 7.
Nov. 24 at 10:30 and 11:30 A.M. at the Jewish Museum at the New-York Historical Society, Central Park West at 77th Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $5 for members; $7 for nonmembers.
Registration: (212) 399-3368.
December
"THE HANUKKAH STORY," a concert with traditional Yiddish, Israeli and Sephardic music sung by the Western Wind Ensemble.
The actor Theodore Bikel will narrate Hanukkah stories.
Dec. 1 at 3 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $18 for adults; $10 for children.
Information: (212) 362-8719.
PRE-KWANZAA CARD-MAKING WORKSHOP, at which children ages 6 to 12 may make personalized holiday cards using printing, collage, drawing and painting techniques.
Dec. 7 at 2 P.M. at the Studio Museum in Harlem, 144 West 125th Street, Manhattan.
Fee: $7 a person.
Reservations: (212) 864-4500.
CHILDREN'S CONCERT, presented by the Brooklyn Conservatory of Music, featuring holiday music sung by the children's chorus.
Dec. 7 at 1:30 P.M. at the Conservatory's Queens branch, 140-26 Franklin Avenue, Flushing.
Free.
Information: (718) 461-8910.
"AMAHL AND THE NIGHT VISITORS," the annual presentation of the 1951 opera by Gian Carlo Menotti, featuring live birds and animals, a chorus and solo singers, and the Little Orchestra Society.
Dec. 7 at 11 A.M., 1 and 3 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
Tickets: $15 to $28.
Information: (212) 704-2100.
LEFFERTS HOMESTEAD WINTER FESTIVAL, a multi-cultural celebration of the season, with African-American doll-making (materials provided), Dutch olekoeks (fried pancakes), candle-making, American Indian dances and tales, and an appearance by St.
Nicholas.
Dec. 8 from 1 to 4 P.M. at the Lefferts Homestead, Prospect Park, Flatbush Avenue near Empire Boulevard, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Free.
Information: (718) 965-6505.
CHRISTMAS REVELS, a program of drama, dancing and singing focused on the winter solstice, with audience participation; featuring the New York Revels.
Dec. 13 at 8 P.M., Dec. 14 at 3 and 8 P.M., and Dec. 15 at 1 and 5 P.M. at Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $15 to $30; half-price under age 12.
Information: (212) 864-5400.
"THE LAND BELOW," a new jazz musical about children who take a subway on Christmas Eve and end up going on an underground adventure, meeting a rat artist and museum mummies.
By Tada, the children's theater company.
At the Tada Theater, 120 West 28th Street, Manhattan.
Dec. 13 to Jan. 19 at 7:30 P.M. on Fridays and 1 and 3:30 P.M. on Saturdays and Sundays, with additional holiday shows.
Admission: $7 for adults; $5 for children.
Information: (212) 627-1732.
HOLIDAY STORIES, with wreath-making and storytelling on the origins of holiday customs in America and other countries.
Dec. 14 from 2 to 4 P.M. at the Gateway National Recreation Area, Breezy Point district, Fort Tilden, Queens, near Jacob Riis Park.
Free.
Reservations: (718) 474-4600.
KWANZAA WORKSHOP, at which children may learn about Kwanzaa's seven principles and make gifts from decorated fabrics with traditional African colors and designs.
Dec. 26 at 1 and 3 P.M. at the Children's Museum of Manhattan, 212 West 83d Street.
Workshop fee: $1.
Museum admission: $4.
Information: (212) 721-1234.
ARMENIAN CHRISTMAS PERFORMANCE, at which children from the Holy Martyrs Armenian Day School in Queens will demonstrate, through song, dance and drama, how Armenians around the world celebrate Christmas.
Dec. 15 at 1 and 3 P.M. at the Children's Museum of Manhattan, 212 West 83d Street.
Free with museum admission of $4.
Information: (212) 721-1234.
HOLIDAY CONCERT, with Hinantillan, an Andean folkloric ensemble.
Dec. 15 at 2 P.M. at the Brooklyn Conservatory of Music, 58 Seventh Avenue, Park Slope.
Tickets: $6 for adults; $4 for children.
Information: (718) 622-3300.
KWANZAA CELEBRATION, with music, poetry and dance presented by Waliyaya, a New York-based ethno-musicologist, teacher, poet and musician.
Dec. 15 at 2:30 P.M. at the Brooklyn Children's Museum, 145 Brooklyn Avenue, at St.
Marks Place, Crown Heights.
Admission: $3.
Information: (718) 735-4400.
"MERRY CHRISTMAS, AMELIA BEDELIA," and other stories, including Maurice Sendak's "Chicken Soup With Rice." Musicals produced by Maximillion Productions for Theaterworks/USA.
Dec. 15, 22, 28 and 29 at 12:30 P.M. at the Promenade Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 677-5959.
ANDEAN CHRISTMAS CONCERT, featuring Pepe Santana, a musician from Ecuador, who will perform using indigenous instruments like the antara, a flutelike cane.
Dec. 21 from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. at the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of the American Indian, Broadway at 155th Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $3 for adults, $2 for under age 7.
Information: (212) 283-2420.
"FANTASTIC FOOD FESTIVAL," teaching about the science of foods, particularly those eaten during the holidays.
Dec. 26 to 31 at the New York Hall of Science, 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
Admission: $3.50 for adults, $2.50 for children.
Information: (718) 699-0005. 7 AND UP November
"THANKSGIVING CENTERPIECES," a workshop at which children and adults may create Thanksgiving centerpieces using dried flowers, reeds, nuts and berries.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Nov. 23 at 1 P.M. at Van Cortlandt Park Visitors' Center, 242d Street and Broadway, the Bronx.
Free.
Reservations: (212) 548-7070.
"HANUKKAH CONNECTION," for children ages 7 to 12 with developmental or learning disabilities, featuring Hanukkah storytelling, arts and crafts, games, songs and cooking of traditional potato latkes; with or without adults.
At the Central Queens Y.M. and Y.W.H.A., 67-09 108th Street, Forest Hills, Queens.
Nov. 24 from 10:45 A.M. to 12:15 P.M.
Fee: $4 for members; $8 for nonmembers.
Registration: (718) 268-5011.
"A WOODLAND THANKSGIVING," for children and adults to learn how American Indians gave thanks to the Great Spirit for blessings on the natural world.
With storytelling, a forest hike and craftmaking.
Nov. 24 at 2 P.M.
Meet at High Rock Park in the Greenbelt, Nevada Avenue parking lot, Egbertville, S.I.
Free.
Information: (718) 667-6042.
December
"EDIBLE ORNAMENTS," a workshop to teach about winter survival strategies used by certain birds and other animals.
Participants may then create edible ornaments to hang outdoors for the creatures.
Dec. 1 at 2 P.M.
Meet at High Rock Park in the Greenbelt, Nevada Avenue parking lot, Egbertville, S.I.
Free.
Registration: (718) 667-6042.
"A CANDLELIGHT CHRISTMAS," a tour of the the 18th-century Van Cortlandt House by candlelight, with a narration of the St.
Nicholas legend and the 12 days of Christmas by the Urban Park Rangers.
Dec. 7 at 7 P.M. at the Van Cortlandt House, Van Cortlandt Park, entrance at 242d Street and Broadway, the Bronx.
Free.
Information: (212) 548-7070.
"A PINETUM CHRISTMAS," an annual holiday celebration in the Arthur Ross Pinetum, an evergreen plantation in Central Park from about West 81st Street to West 85th Street.
Participants may learn about pines, hang traditional tree decorations and sing carols.
Dec. 15 at 2 P.M.
Meet at 81st Street and Central Park West.
Free.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
CHRISTMAS CABARET, featuring "Kid Santa Claus," a story about the escapades of Santa's daughter, in a cabaret format.
A benefit for New York's Theater Hall of Fame.
Dec. 21 and 22 from 1 to 3:30 P.M. at the Russian Tea Room, 150 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $75, including lunch, the show and souvenirs.
Information: (212) 757-8187.
"A DYCKMAN CHRISTMAS." How Colonial families celebrated Christmas at Manhattan's oldest farmhouse.
Dec. 22 at 1 P.M. at the Dyckman House, 204th Street and Broadway, Manhattan.
Free.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
"FOREVER GREEN," a search for evergreen trees and shrubs to learn how these hardy plants retain their leaves throughout the year.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Dec. 29 at 2 P.M. at the Prospect Park Boathouse, Prospect Park, entrance at Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Free.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
"WHAT'S YOUR NEW YEAR'S RESOLUTION?" A Media Center drop-in activity.
Children 8 years old and up will share and videotape their New Year's resolutions.
Free with museum admission of $4.
Dec. 29 from 1:45 to 3:15 P.M. at the Children's Museum of Manhattan, 212 West 83d Street.
Information: (212) 721-1234.


A Case of Heavy-Footed Gumshoes
The managers of the Trans Alaska Pipeline assured themselves in 1990 that a reasonable response to the loss of confidential company documents was an aggressive internal investigation.
Last week, a stream of witnesses and a pile of subpoenaed documents portrayed for a Congressional committee a much more troubling outcome.
The secret investigation by the Alyeska Pipeline Service Company had escalated into a nationwide hunt for critics of the Alaskan oil industry, skirting propriety, perhaps violating laws, and targeting for a brief period a prominent Congressman.


U.S. and Soviets Give Palestinians Protection
Washington and Moscow have given diplomatic protection to Palestinian peace negotiators to ease their return home to Israeli-occupied areas, a Palestinian official said today.
Hanan Ashrawi, spokeswoman of the Palestinian delegation to Arab-Israeli peace talks, said United States and Soviet representatives would meet the team when they cross the Jordan river bridge to the Israeli-occupied West Bank Sunday.


Karen Dukess, Writer, Is Wed
Karen Fran Dukess, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Carleton Dukess of Larchmont, N.Y., was married last evening in Rye, N.Y., to Steven Edward Liesman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin L. Liesman of Bradenton, Fla.
Rabbi Jon R. Haddon officiated at the Manursing Island Club.
Ms.
Dukess, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, is a freelance writer.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and has a master's in journalism from Columbia University, as does her husband.
Her father is a lawyer and real-estate investor in New York.
Her mother, Mona Dukess, is an artist.
Mr.
Liesman, 28, is a business writer for The St.
Petersburg Times in Florida.
He graduated from the State University at Buffalo.
His mother, Bernice Liesman, is a retired mathematics teacher for the New York City public schools.
His father, who is also retired, was a women's clothing sales representative in New York.


Atlanta
Braves fans have put away their tomahawks for the winter.
The uproar over the sequel to "Gone With the Wind" has died down.
The 1996 Summer Olympics are still five years away.
It seems as if Atlanta has been in the grip of one fever or another nonstop for the past year.
If you're overcome by any lingering vapors and find yourself doing the Tomahawk Chop, no one is likely to mind.
But now that things seem to be calming down a bit, it's worth remembering that what really makes Atlanta special is the amazingly lush forest, lovely neighborhoods, and inviting parks and open space that really define the city.
Even though the leaf season is past its peak, the inviting early November weather make this a perfect, understated time to explore the city and its surroundings.


'Camelot's' Melodious Score, Revisited
OF "Camelot," someone once remarked, "You walk out whistling the scenery." And given its original inordinate length, this is the show that was dubbed the "Gotterdammerung" of musicals -- without the laughs.
There's even a near-immolation scene toward the end, except that Lancelot appears just in time to rescue Guenevere from the stake.
Over the decades since the 1960 Broadway premiere, Lerner and Loewe's variations on the legend of King Arthur no longer invited irreverence.
A secure beneficiary of time's benevolence, the musical triumphed over detractors who dismissed it as a disappointing follow-up to "My Fair Lady" and even attended to some of its own flaws.


HOLIDAYS
Here is a sampling of holiday events, including parades, fairs, Santa visits, tree lightings and holiday windows, in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Tomorrow
VETERANS' DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue, from 24th to 39th Street, Manhattan; sponsored by the American Legion. 9 A.M.
Monday


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  NORTH KOREAN NUCLEAR PROGRAM
Growing evidence about a mysterious nuclear complex is heightening concerns that North Korea may be closer to producing a crude nuclear weapon than anyone thought just a year ago.
Page 1
Agreements against the spread of nuclear weapons show flaws.  10  BUSH ORDERS YUGOSLAV SANCTIONS
Hoping to pressure Yugoslav republics to stop their civil war, President Bush said the United States would order economic sanctions against Belgrade and call on the United Nations to impose an oil embargo.  1
Some economists and diplomats doubt sanctions will work.  16  HEAD OF K.G.B.
PLANS CUTBACKS  The new chairman of the Soviet intelligence and security agency said the number of agents abroad should be cut at least by half.  3  VIOLENCE AT A SOUTH AFRICAN MINE
New violence linked to a two-day national strike earlier in the week erupted at a gold mine in South Africa, leaving 22 mine workers dead and 51 others injured.  7  HONG KONG TO CONTINUE EXPULSIONS
Hong Kong officials said they would continue repatriation flights like the one on which 59 boat people were forcibly returned to Vietnam.  11  FUNDING RESETTLEMENT OF REFUGEES
The United Nations official charged with caring for the world's 17 million refugees hopes to persuade wealthy Persian Gulf states to help pay the costs of resettlement.  14
Food is plentiful in Iraq for those who can pay for it.  14  PRIVATIZATION IN CZECHOSLOVAKIA
In a program to privatize the pillars of Czechoslovakia's economy, citizens are buying $30 books of coupons convertible into shares.  17
Nicaragua is seeking to mollify former contras who have rearmed.  9
A book by a Chinese emigre in New York is the talk of Beijing.  13  National 22-38  DUKE, THEN AND NOW
David Duke, a white supremacist and anti-Semite for most of his adult life, stands a good chance of being elected governor of Louisiana next Saturday.  1
The elections of Tuesday exposed weaknesses for Bush.  26 A PROMISE AT RISK
California, the state with the largest system of higher education, may no longer be able to afford a longtime implied promise: a high-quality and low-cost public college education for every resident who wants one.  1
Tuskegee University opened a huge fund drive.  36  FOR SALE: HUMAN EGGS
Some medical centers have begun offering infertile couples a new but very expensive option: lists of healthy young women who, for a fee, will provide eggs that can be fertilized and then implanted in an infertile woman's womb.  1  A SMALL BUT FORMIDABLE FOE
Many California farmers are besieged by the poinsettia variety of sweet potato whitefly, whose damaging appetite may soon be reflected in higher produce prices.  22  NO TO BARE-BONES POLICIES
A major push by health insurers to provide affordable coverage for millions of uninsured workers is running into unexpected trouble: Employers are not buying.  22  TOUGH TIMES AT THE CAPITOL
New analysis: It has been a tough few weeks for Congressional committees, and little wonder.
Committees and their bills are treated with less deference on the floor than in the past.
Junior lawmakers now act as if their votes and opinions count for as much as those of chairmen.  23
In private, Democrats expressed fears on bad-check inquiry.  24
Marijuana plot tied to Noriega.  29  Regional 39-53  ROHATYN REJECTS PLAN
The chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, Felix Rohatyn bluntly urges Mayor Dinkins to abandon the long-term fiscal plan the Mayor unveiled last week.
It would count on using $1 billion in M.A.C. funds to avoid property-tax increases. 1  CONFUSION OVER DINKINS TRIP
There is more confusion than curiosity over the Mayor David N. Dinkins's visit to Johannesburg next week, concerning which few details have been released.  42  S.I.
BANK FAILS
The Community National Bank and Trust Company, one of Staten Island largest banks, has been declared insolvent.
Most of its deposits were sold to Chemical Bank.
At its main branch, customers expressed surprise and resignation.  47  Obituaries
Yves Montand, actor 52
Eleanor Pollock Hughes, editor of magazines 53  Arts/Reviews 73
Uta Hagen self-revises. Campus Life 59-60
Life Style 61  Fashion 64-65  Pastimes 74-75  Weddings 69-72


POP-JAZZ
Here is a sampling of arts and entertainment events in New York City during the holiday season, compiled by New York Times critics, writers and contributors.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Nov. 14
DEWEY REDMAN.
A tenor saxophonist who mixes the Texas tenor tradition with the legacy of Ornette Coleman, appearing with the group he helped found in the 1970's, Old and New Dreams, which also features Don Cherry, Ed Blackwell and Charlie Haden.
Also playing will be Geri Allen, Cameron Brown, Charles Eubanks, Paul Motian and Joshua Redman.
Alice Tully Hall, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 and $30.
Information: (212) 875-5299.
Nov. 15
BATAK OF NORTH SUMATRA.
From the Festival of Indonesia, a rare American performance by 15 musicians representing three Sumatran tribes.
Kathryn Bache Miller Theater, Broadway and 116th Street, Manhattan. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15 and $18.
Information: (212) 854-7799.
Nov. 16
FRANK SINATRA.
A definitive American pop singer.
Madison Square Garden, Seventh Avenue at 33d Street, Manhattan. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35 and $50.
Information: (212) 465-6741.
Nov. 29
SHELLY HIRSCH.
Free-associative vocal improvisations that ricochet all over the world.
Dance Theater Workshop, 219 West 19th Street, Manhattan. 8 P.M.
Also Nov. 30 at 8 P.M. and Dec. 1 at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $12.
Information: (212) 691-6500.
Dec. 6
LOUNGE LIZARDS, AND BOBBY PREVITE AND EMPTY SUITS.
Post-modern jazz: the Lounge Lizards by turns raucous and minimalist, Bobby Previte muscular and introspective.
Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $18.
Information: (212) 840-2824.
Dec. 20 to 21
ISRAEL (CACHAO) LOPEZ.
The Cuban bassist, a mainspring for great salsa, leads his own 18-piece Latin-jazz band.
Lehman Center for the Performing Arts, Lehman College, Bedford Park Boulevard and Goulden Avenue, Bedford Park, the Bronx. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $20.
Information: (212) 960-8833.
Also on Dec. 21 at Alice Tully Hall, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 and $30.
Information: (212) 875-5299.


Jets Say It's No Big Deal To Be the 'Big Favorites'
Bruce Coslet, the Jets' head coach, can only hope his charges ignore the tag of "big favorites" this afternoon when they meet the Indianapolis Colts at Giants Stadium.
The 0-9 Colts have been doing everything they can to encourage their opponents' overconfidence this season.
Indianapolis has scored only four touchdowns in 1991.
Jets wide receiver Rob Moore has that many by himself, and Jets running back Brad Baxter has two more than that.


Time Stands Still as Mill's Gears Turn
JIMMY DICK, 13 years old, poured 50 pounds of white corn kernels into a hopper at the Clarks Falls Gristmill.
Then he headed outside to pry open the head gate, letting water from the mill pond flow into the race.
As the water rushed toward a turbine beneath the wooden mill building, Jimmy's father, James, opened a second gate.
"The pressure of the water coming into the casing around the turbine turns it," Mr.
Dick explained.
Soon a gentle rumbling sound filled the air, as the turbine turned one giant granite millstone against another, to grind the corn into meal.


CAMPUS LIFE: Tufts; Gay Group Stages Rally to Demand More Student Aid
Protesting under the banner "Rally For Action: A Call For Equality," hundreds of Tufts University students and faculty members gathered last Monday at the campus administration building for a demonstration supporting demands and concerns of gay and bisexual students at the university.
The Tufts Lesbian, Gay and Bisexual Community, a group to which most gay and bisexual students belong, recently submitted a list of demands to the administration, asking the university to finance a full-time administrator for the group, to provide a residential space for gay and bisexual students, and to develop gay studies courses, of which there are now none.


Baedeker
To the Editor: I worked for our State Department in Germany from the beginning of the Allied High Commission (1949-1954) and so lived on the Rhine, Bad Godesberg, for four years, after a year in Frankfurt.
In a Chicago bookstore in 1958 I found "The Rhine From Rotterdam to Constance," published in 1892.


Sunday Outing; House Where the Legacy Of Van Buren Lives On
The first governor of New York to run for the Presidency, Martin Van Buren, was elected the eighth President of the United States in 1836.
He was first President who was born an American citizen and, perhaps, the first to be defeated for re-election by a slick public relations campaign.


Business Diary/November 3-8
COMPANIES The Market Get Jittery Over Maxwell's U.S. Holdings


Thayer Tolles Has Wedding
Thayer Coolidge Tolles, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bryant F. Tolles Jr. of Wilmington, Del., was married yesterday in Andover, Mass., to Paul Jonathan Mickel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Mickel of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The Rev.
James A. Diamond performed the Episcopal ceremony at Cochran Chapel at Phillips Academy.
Mrs.
Mickel, 26 years old, is a research assistant at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.
She graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in art history from the University of Delaware, where her father is a history professor.
Her mother, Carolyn Mickel, is the director of corporation and foundation support at Haverford College.
Mr.
Mickel, 27, is a commercial insurance underwriter for Chubb &amp; Son in Uniondale, L.I.
He graduated from Hamilton College.
His father is the curator of ferns at the New York Botanical Garden and is an adjunct professor of botany at the City University of New York.


Amid Cuts, California Is Curtailing College Dreams
For 30 years now, Californians have had an implied promise from their state government: a high-quality and low-cost public college education for every resident who wanted it.
It was a promise the prosperous fast-growing state seldom had much trouble fulfilling.
But suddenly the state that operates the largest system of higher education in the nation may no longer be able to honor that promise.


Palestinians, in Talks, Reflect a New Reality
Whatever else may result from the evolving and still murky Middle East peace process, the Palestinian self-adjustment to the real world must be put near the top of the list.
When Act One closed in Madrid last Monday, it was clear that a new consensus had taken hold among Palestinians.
In Ramallah, six miles north of Jerusalem, and in other corners of the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, people are saying they are ready to accept a period of autonomy under continued Israeli domination as a necessary first step toward the goal of an independent state.


SKATING
Here is a list of ice-skating rinks now in operation or scheduled to open soon for the season in New York City.
Dates, prices and hours are subject to change.
ABE STARK ICE-SKATING RINK, West 19th Street between Surf Avenue and the Boardwalk, Coney Island, Brooklyn.
Indoor ice-skating sessions: Fridays, 3:30 to 6 P.M.; Saturdays, 12:30 to 4:30 P.M., and Sundays, noon to 4 P.M.; closed Mondays to Thursdays.
Admission: $3.50 on Fridays, $5 on weekends; skate rentals, $3 weekdays, $3.50 on weekends.
Lessons available.
Information: (718) 946-6536.


Making a Difference; . . . Mr. Skates Digs In
Ronald L. Skates tries to keep the edge out of his voice when he responds to questions about his past.
"I know I sound defensive," said the chief executive and president of the Data General Corporation, "but an accounting background is a big help in a turnaround." And a turnaround is precisely what Data General, a once-high-flying maker of minicomputers, needed when Mr.
Skates took over in late 1989.
Last week, the company, based in Westboro, Mass., reported its fourth straight quarter of profitability after five years of decline.
Chastened after the excesses of the 1980's, more and more troubled companies are bringing in finance types who will help them slash and burn their way back into the black -- but who frequently lack the vision thing.


Conservatives Defeated in 2 British Districts
Voters in Britain turned Conservatives out of office in two districts this week, including a lopsided defeat in eastern Scotland that buoyed the hopes of rival political leaders there pressing for Scottish home rule.
The Conservative losses came in special elections on Thursday convened to fill vacant seats in the House of Commons.
In a third contest, the Labor Party easily held on to a traditionally pro-Labor district in central England.


Encountering the Modern in Medieval Japan
The brightly colored birds that frolic at the bottom of the Muromachi-period painted screen are life-size and breathtakingly realistic, the plants they play among so accurate a botanist could undoubtedly name every one.
But the little stream that swirls nearby is a series of sinuous patterns and cresting lines, more a dynamic diagram of water than a description.
The effortless juxtaposition of nature and artifice is noted, and the eye moves on.
The stream is only about eight waves across -- a bird's-hop wide, or so it seems, until the opposite shore comes into focus.
That shore is populated by men and animals no larger than the birds: wading fishermen, travelers and, beyond, warriors on galloping horses.
The notion that people and animals are one and equally important within nature's scheme is vividly conveyed.
But the visual drama of this work stems from the sudden shift in space and scale: the stream expands into a river of considerable sweep, and the seemingly flat gold-leaf surface of the screen is transformed into a panoramic vista of immense space and distance.
What started out as a ground-level, worm-eye's view of the garden floor ends up as a dynamic genre scene picturing different aspects of everyday life.


Martin Scorsese Ventures Back To 'Cape Fear'
When Gregory Peck, playing the upright lawyer Sam Bowden in the 1962 thriller "Cape Fear," proclaims the ex-con Max Cady a "shocking degenerate," Robert Mitchum, playing Cady, simply laughs.
With sociopathic glee he has stalked the Bowdens, a stalwart husband, white-gloved wife and innocent daughter who represent an early-60's vision of clean-cut American life.
"I must say I hoped that Max would've killed them," observes Martin Scorsese, who has just remade "Cape Fear" in his own turbulent fashion, one that has absolutely nothing to do with the earlier film's white-picket-fence world.


Jill L. Peyton Wed in Teaneck
Jill Lori Peyton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel M. Peyton of South Orange, N.J., was married last evening to Alexander Grinberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gedalio Grinberg of New York.
Rabbi Barry Green performed the ceremony at Loews Glenpointe Hotel in Teaneck, N.J.
Mrs.
Grinberg, 30 years old, graduated from Tulane University and is an account executive at Tracy Evans Ltd., a New York clothing manufacturer.
Her father is the chairman of the Cresmont Management Group in Wayne, N.J., a diversified company with interests that include managing automobile dealerships and distributing Gerald Genta Watches.


No Place to Call Home
MONKEY ISLAND
By Paula Fox.  151 pp. New York: A Richard Jackson Book/Orchard Books.
FLY AWAY HOME
By Eve Bunting.
Illustrated by Ronald Himler.  32 pp.
New York: Clarion Books. $13.95. (Ages 5 to 9)
MR. BOW TIE
Written and illustrated by Karen Barbour.
Unpaged.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $13.95. (Ages 4 to 8)


SEDUCING THESE MEN
Today, people are not "seduced" into spending more than $15,000 for a car by slick, 30-second television commercials ("Seducing These Men" by Randall Rothenberg, Oct. 20).
Subaru hopes to entice current purchasers of the Honda Accord and the Toyota Camry.
It cannot do this overnight, using a slick advertising campaign.
The whole process with Subaru and the competing advertising agencies seems a bit absurd.
Catchy slogans may sell sneakers, but they are not going to sell me a car that costs more than one-third of of my annual salary.


Robin Quinn to Wed
Alan H. Quinn of Deland, Fla., and Mrs.
Robert Ney of Somerville, N.J., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Robin Ann Quinn, and Kevin Jay Kaplan, the son of Vivian Schneider of Tenafly, N.J.
Miss Quinn and Mr.
Kaplan are both 26 years old and graduates of Syracuse University.
She is the director of operations at Ultimar Creations, a jewelry manufacturer in New York.
Mr.
Kaplan owns the New Jersey Trading Corporation, a food importer and exporter, in Tenafly.


Tracking Speeders on the Sprain Brook
JULY 2, 1991: Three people are killed and two are injured in a Sprain Brook State Parkway crash.
A car traveling north on the highway is struck from behind, crosses the median and collides head on with southbound vehicle, bursting into flames.
Rush-hour traffic is snarled more than four hours.
November 1991: The July 2 accident is still under investigation, and no final determination of cause has been established.
But some of the most common factors contributing to previous accidents on the parkway, police say, have been excessive speed, following too closely and unsafe lane changes.


Boot Camp for M.D.'s
LEARNING TO PLAY GOD
The Coming of Age of a Young Doctor.
By Robert Marion. 267 pp.
New York: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $18.95.


Sports of The Times; Handley Not Earning Any Style Points
THE morning after the Giants' retreat from their 30-7 embarrassment in Philadelphia last Monday night, Ray Handley was asked if it were time for him to use a "locker-room tirade" to inspire his players, as some coaches do.
"Who are these coaches?" Handley asked.


Answering The Mail
Q.
Rain is filling the sunken well around the outside of my basement window, and
water runs under the window on to the basement floor.
Also, there is a crack in the concrete basement wall under this window.
Would digging out the bottom of the window well and filling it with gravel help?
And is there a danger of the basement wall's collapsing?
A.
I doubt that there is any danger of the basement wall's collapsing, even if it does have a crack in it.
Digging out the bottom of the well to a depth of at least 12 inches and filling it with gravel will help if the soil drains well.
If not, you will also have to lay underground drain tile to carry the water at least 10 feet away from the bottom of the window well.
Otherwise, the crack in the wall may allow water to seep into the basement, even if it is not doing this now.
Sealing the edges of the window with foam or rubber weatherstripping also will help keep out the water.


BEST SELLERS: November 10, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
2
4
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
3
3
12
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
4
4
6
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
5
5
2
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) A diplomat, returning to his native Gloucestershire, finds that his past life in horse racing may help save others.
6
7
9
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate a balloon accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force.
7 *
8
2
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $22.50.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide and herself.
8
6
3
ALL THE WEYRS OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $20.) A new volume in the science fiction series "The Dragonriders of Pern."
9
13
3
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $22.) A lawyer returns to her estranged family to attend a funeral and finds new understanding and love.
10
9
35
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
11
14
4
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Macmillan, $21.95.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.
12
10
7
THE DECEIVER, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $22.50.) Sam McCready recalls his years in the British secret service. (LP)
13 *
12
4
HARLOT'S GHOST, by Norman Mailer. (Random House, $30.) World events of the past few decades as seen by three Yankee aristocrats who work for the C.I.A.
14 *
11
85
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
15
1
REUNION, by Michael Jan Friedman. (Pocket, $19.) The U.S.S.
Enterprise crew undertakes to stop a war in outer space; a "Star Trek" novel.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
2
2
8
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
3
1
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (Zondervan/HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel, with his view of the Iran-contra affair.
4
3
11
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces. (LP)
5 *
7
2
THE NEW WORLD ORDER, by Pat Robertson. (Word Publishing, $17.99.) A clergyman discusses the significance of the changes now taking place around the globe.
6
4
4
CRUEL DOUBT, by Joe McGinniss. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The ordeal of a North Carolina woman whose son was accused of planning the murder of herself and her husband.
7
6
51
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
8
1
CHILDHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Putnam, $14.95.) The entertainer recalls his boyhood and reflects on the ways of today's kids.
9
10
21
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
10 *
11
7
J.
EDGAR HOOVER, by Curt Gentry. (Norton, $29.95.) The career of the longtime Director of the F.B.I.
11
9
26
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
12 *
8
2
SAVAGE INEQUALITIES, by Jonathan Kozol. (Crown, $20.) The current crisis in the nation's inner-city public schools, with suggestions for coping with it.
13 *
13
2
PRAIRYERTH, by William Least Heat-Moon. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A close look at the people and mores, past and present, of Chase County, Kansas.
14 *
1
DANCE WHILE YOU CAN, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress examines her feelings about her family relationships, aging and her own future.
15
5
8
LA TOYA, by La Toya Jackson with Patricia Romanowski. (Dutton, $19.95.) Growing up in a leading show business family.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
13
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
2
93
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a fellow named Waldo.
3
3
35
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find Waldo as he travels from ancient Egypt to today.
4
4
52
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
5
2
THE CARBOHYDRATE ADDICT'S DIET, by Rachael F. Heller and Richard F. Heller. (Dutton, $19.95.) Ways to cope with an addiction to carbohydrate-rich food.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
MAUS: A Survivor's Tale II.
And Here My Troubles Began, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) In a style derived from the comic book but transformed into an original and authentic form of pictorial literature, Mr.
Spiegelman continues his inquiry into the incommunicable, the story of his parents' lives in the Holocaust.
ORWELL: The Authorized Biography, by Michael Shelden. (HarperCollins, $25.) This life of Orwell furnishes new details of the career of a writer the influence of whose honesty and decency has been far greater than his literary accomplishments.
PRAYING FOR SHEETROCK, by Melissa Fay Greene. (Addison-Wesley, $21.95.) An exciting book, reported intimately and extensively, about a black community in rural Georgia that rose from passivity to civil-rights militancy and subsided again to calm over the last decade and a half.
THE GOLDIN BOYS: Stories, by Joseph Epstein. (Norton, $19.95.) The first book of fiction by this notable essayist is made of beautifully realized short stories, set mostly in Chicago and among Jews, rich in the experience of families, lovers and money.
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $23.) The perils of family and property, the difficulty of being a daughter, inform this novel in which an Iowan divides his farm among his children.
THE DESTRUCTIVE WAR: William Tecumseh Sherman, Stonewall Jackson, and the Americans, by Charles Royster. (Knopf, $30.) A fresh narration of the Civil War, arguing that the conflict's devastating violence was inherent from the beginning.
DAUGHTERS, by Paule Marshall. (Atheneum, $19.95.) This brave, intelligent, ambitious novel examines black people's lives in the United States and on a Caribbean island, and calls for revisions.


Campaign to Stress The Needs of Children
THE Campaign for Kids, a countywide effort on behalf of children, is set to begin Friday at noon at a public meeting at the White Plains Public Library.
Organized by the Westchester Children's Association and sponsored by the Westchester Council on Crime and Delinquency, its chief goal is to make the needs of children visible and of top importance in the county.
Although the effort has been endorsed by a long list of organizations dedicated to children's welfare, it is intended as a grass-roots campaign to increase governmental and community support for youth services, said Barbara E. Dunkel, chairwoman of the Westchester Council on Crime and Delinquency, a private group.


What Really Goes On in There
CONSCIOUSNESS EXPLAINED
By Daniel C. Dennett. Illustrated. 511 pp. Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $27.95.


MOMMY OLDEST
I was pleased to read Laura Cunningham's Hers column "Mommy Oldest" (Oct. 6).
Several years ago, I too made the decision to leave the world of high-tech fertility treatment, with its discouraging statistics and invasive procedures, to face the challenges of adoption.
It was an immediate relief.
Even before I knew what country my child would come from, I felt connected to a real child, whom I loved.
This was only partly because the chances of success are so much greater with adoption than with medical treatment.
It's not like switching from one procedure to another, where the statistics are better.
It involves a recognition that parenthood, not pregnancy, is the ultimate goal.
When I was pursuing medical treatment, I felt isolated and preoccupied; when I was working on adopting a child, I felt active, energetic and focused on the outside world.


Social Events
Bush Address on Asia
Nov. 12 -- President Bush is to deliver an address on United States-Asia relations at the annual black-tie benefit of the Asia Society at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The evening starts with cocktails at 6 and will be followed by the President's address at 7:30, then dinner and entertainment by several Asian groups.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 288-6400, extension 235.


It's Not Too Late to Plant Some Bulbs
THE usual deadline for planting bulbs has passed.
Supposedly all bulbs should be in the ground by Election Day.
But this fall has been mild.
Many vegetables, like tomatoes and squash, and annuals like vincas and impatiens, seemed to last forever.
Lawns were still being mowed.
This sort of weather provided a sense of ennui that the planting chores could be delayed for another day or two.
And so the bulbs sat unplanted in the toolshed, garage or garden center's bins.
But as any gardener knows, winter is on its way.
Bulbs are better in the ground now, even at this late date, than left in the garage or toolshed, where they will eventually freeze or rot, or both.
Even if the blanket of leaves has to be pushed aside for the planting efforts, it is better that it be done, and done quickly.
Remember the basic bulb-planting rule: well-drained soil and a level base for the bulbs, so water does not sit under them.


Focus: Sacramento, Calif.; A Transit-Oriented Approach to Suburbia
FOUR busloads of California city plan ners about 180 of them -- recently traveled to a flat, windy plain 11 miles south of this city to tour Laguna West, which has been touted as the next evolutionary stage of the American suburb.
While home building has just started at the 1,000-acre subdivision, the planners could see the outlines: a designated site for a transit station, surrounded by land soon to be filled with stores, commercial buildings and a day-care center, all within walking distance of about 3,400 planned homes .


Ms. Siciliano Weds
Carol Ann Siciliano, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sam P. Siciliano of Shrewsbury, N.J., was married yesterday in Alexandria, Va., to the Rev.
Kevin Lewis Ogle, a son of Lois J. McKee of Kahoka, Mo., and the late Dr.
Lewis W. Ogle.
The Rev.
Stephen Gentle performed the ceremony at the First Christian Church.
Ms.
Siciliano, who is 32 years old and is keeping her name, is a lawyer for the Environmental Protection Agency in Washington.
She graduated from Princeton University and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Mr.
Ogle, 31, is the interim pastor of the Garfield Memorial Christian Church in McLean, Va.
He graduated from Coe College, where he was a member of Phi Beta Kappa, and received a Master of Divinity degree from Vanderbilt University.


Giving the Bathroom A More-Elegant Look
REPLACING a shower curtain with a glass or plastic door is fairly easy and adds elegance to an otherwise ordinary-looking bathroom.
The sliding doors described here are designed to fit rectangular tubs or shower stalls set between two end walls.
Hinged doors for these and other styles of tubs and stalls are also available.
Shower-door kits generally consist of glass door panels, strips of metal or plastic channel that have to be cut and fastened to form a frame; hardware, sometimes including a special tool like drill bits, and towel bars or other accessories.


POSTINGS: For Preservationists; Coping With the Council
How can preservation groups, like the Friends of the Upper East Side Historic District, work to advance their agendas with New York's new City Council, which has new powers in landmarking and land use?
The group hopes to find some answers Wednesday evening at a discussion it will sponsor at the Urban Center with past and present Council members and seasoned Council-watchers.


Tales From the Dark Side, Spun by a Reluctant Outlaw
Machismo is Ice Cube's meal ticket.
He has been talking tough since he first appeared with N.W.A., the Compton, Calif., group that put gangster rap on the charts with its foul-mouthed tales of gunslinging, sex, dope-dealing and hatred for the police.
After he left N.W.A. in late 1989, the group turned into a pandering self-parody while Ice Cube took on a veneer of political consciousness for his first solo album, the million-selling "AmeriKKKa's Most Wanted." Produced by Chuck D. of Public Enemy, the album presented Ice Cube's tales of ghetto violence as front-line reports on the status of the young black male as an "endangered species."
With his role in the recent film "Boyz N the Hood" as a brooding, reluctant gang member, and an elegy for victims of violence called "Dead Homiez" released as a single between albums, Ice Cube (whose real name is O'Shea Jackson) seemed to be recanting the outlaw persona he had created for himself.
The packaging of his new album, "Death Certificate" (Priority 57155; all three formats), urges young blacks to join the Nation of Islam and shows Ice Cube reading a newspaper with the headline "Unite or Perish."


Small Businesses Focus On Drugs in Workplace
MORE than 100 representatives of small businesses and nonprofit organizations gathered here recently to discuss ways of preventing drug abuse in the workplace, which costs American business $60 billion a year.
Although 70 percent of large companies, those with more than 500 employees, have programs to combat drug abuse, fewer than 33 percent of small businesses have any kind of program.
But 73 percent of all employees work for small companies.


Kimono Rebellions
UNMAPPED TERRITORIES
New Women's Fiction From Japan.
Edited and translated by Yukiko Tanaka. 163 pp.
Seattle: Women in Translation, 3131 Western Avenue, Suite 410, Seattle, Wash. 98121.
Paper, $10.95.
JAPANESE WOMEN WRITERS
Twentieth Century Short Fiction.
Edited and translated by Noriko Mizuta Lippit and Kyoko Iriye Selden. 285 pp.
Armonk, N.Y.: An East Gate Book/M.
E.
Sharpe Inc.
Cloth, $39.95.
Paper, $14.95.


Results Plus
TENNIS Wowing 'em in Moscow Andrei Cherkasov, the local favorite, will defend his title against Jakob Hlasek of Switzerland today in Moscow in the championship of the Kremlin Cup.
A crowd of more than 10,000 Muscovites cheered loudly yesterday as the 21-year-old Cherkasov beat Marco Gorriz of Spain, 6-3, 6-4.
Cherkasov is from the Russian city of Ufa.
Hlasek defeated Cherkasov's doubles partner, eighth-seeded Aleksandr Volkov, 6-4, 6-2, in the other semifinal match at Moscow's Olympic Stadium.
Volkov and Cherkasov will play Eric Jelen and Carl-Uwe Steeb of Germany today for the doubles title. (AP)


Sluggers Show Increase in Production for '91
When major league hitters erupted in an unprecedented orgy of home runs in 1987, Frank Thomas, Albert Belle, Juan Gonzalez, Greg Vaughn and Jay Buhner did not participate.
They did this year, though, and they are a major part of the reason that this year hitters produced the most home runs in the majors since that record-setting season.
Thomas (Chicago White Sox), Belle (Cleveland), Gonzalez (Texas), Vaughn (Milwaukee) and Buhner (Seattle) all play in the American League, where the increase in home runs was dramatic enough to produce a major league increase despite a drop in the National League output.
They were among 31 players who hit 25 or more home runs, which was also the most since 1987 and exceeded last year's group by nine.


Giving the Bathroom A More-Elegant Look
REPLACING a shower curtain with a glass or plastic door is fairly easy and adds elegance to an otherwise ordinary-looking bathroom.
The sliding doors described here are designed to fit rectangular tubs or shower stalls set between two end walls.
Hinged doors for these and other styles of tubs and stalls are also available.
Shower-door kits generally consist of glass door panels, strips of metal or plastic channel that have to be cut and fastened to form a frame; hardware, sometimes including a special tool like drill bits, and towel bars or other accessories.


Will Airlines Permit Infant Safety Seats? Yes and No
PARENTS who want to place infants in safety seats for airplane trips are not getting any serious Government backing.
With proposed Federal Aviation Administration steps in limbo, some Members of Congress are trying to help, but results may be a long time coming.
In the meantime, parents report that the battle to use the seats must be fought anew with each air trip.
The most confusing situation is found on foreign airlines, and American legislation would not alter their rules, though it might influence them.
Air France, for example, permits parents to bring aboard an infant safety seat -- what the parents already use in a car.
But, Air France does not permit parents to strap their children into the seat when the need is greatest.
The line says the seats are "subject to safety rules which require that the infant be held in the arms of a passenger . . . during takeoff/landing/periods of turbulence." These periods, as every airline briefing demonstrates, are times of greatest danger.
The National Transportation Safety Board has been pressing for a rule requiring that all occupants of an airplane be restrained during takeoff, landing and turbulent conditions, including children under 2.


Demystifying Exports From Canton and Points East
Once sketchily documented, the treasures made in China for export to the West in the 18th and 19th century are now less of a mystery.
In the last 20 years, the Canton silversmiths have been identified, the furniture analyzed and the paintings catalogued by China-trade scholars, museum curators and dealers.
They have chronicled how Canton -- and later Shanghai and Hong Kong -- flourished, producing exotic wares for Western use that also served as ballast on the hundreds of ships bound with cargos of tea and silk for European and American ports.
At the forefront of this continuing search for historical data is Carl L. Crossman, an art dealer and writer from Danvers, Mass.
Mr.
Crossman recently expanded his absorbing and anecdotal 1972 book, "The China Trade," into a comprehensive study of the field.
Now titled "The Decorative Arts of the China Trade," it was published this month by the Antique Collectors Club ($89.50).


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Commack 135,000
2 West Farms Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300.
Coram 141,000
21 Goodwin Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year- old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,900.
East Northport 231,500
84 Holly Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 25-year-old high ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $4,700.
Farmingdale 185,000
46 County Line Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, new high ranch; dining room, skylights, cathedral ceilings, 1-car garage; estimated taxes $5,000.
Mineola 230,000
353 Foch Boulevard  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.
Williston Park 175,000
105 Harvard Street, 4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath 60-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $2,500.
OTHER AREAS Chappaqua, N.Y. 240,000
316 Quaker Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 64-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, covered porch, taxes $4,759.
Avon, Conn. 187,000
96 Moravia Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; central vacuum, new roof, 1 acre; taxes $2,697.
Lakewood, N.J. 109,900
771 Coral Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 4-year-old ranch; eat-in-kitchen, full basement, deck, fenced yard; taxes $2,815.


Jodi Nussbaum, Editor, Wed
Jodi Merril Nussbaum, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel N. Nussbaum of Roslyn Harbor, L.I., and Michael Solomon, a son of Stephen Solomon of Merrick, L.I., and Beverly Cerron of Bayside, Queens, were married last evening by Rabbi Joseph Sternstein at the Glen Head (L.I.) Country Club.
Mrs.
Solomon, 23 years old, is a production editor at Faulkner &amp; Gray, a technical publisher in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is an executive vice president of HHL Financial Services, a healthcare financial management company in Great Neck, L.I.
Her mother, Bette Nussbaum, owns Bette B. Antique Jewelry in Roslyn, L.I.
Mr.
Solomon, 26, is an associate at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
He graduated from the State University at Albany.
His father is an executive vice president at the Howard J. Rubenstein public-relations concern in New York.


Seeking


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Chappaqua, N.Y. 240,000
316 Quaker Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 64-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, covered porch, taxes $4,759.
Hartsdale, N.Y. 237,500
17 Hillcrest View  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; stone fireplace, Florida room, terraced gardens; taxes $5,983.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 550,000
63 Crow Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; family room, Jacuzzi, deck, pond, 1.6 acres; taxes $11,025.
Avon, Conn. 187,000
96 Moravia Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; central vacuum, new roof, 1 acre; taxes $2,697.
Stamford, Conn. 375,000
83 West Hill Circle  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; playroom, family room new kitchen, 0.67 acre; taxes $4,032.
Stratford, Conn. 132,000
345 Third Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 39-year-old ranch; finished basement, within private beach community; taxes $1,787.
OTHER AREAS Coram, L.I. 141,000
21 Goodwin Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year- old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,900.
East Northport, L.I. 231,500
84 Holly Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 25-year-old high ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $4,700.
Mahwah, N.J. 318,000
16 Judith Court  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; h/w floors, fireplace, deck; taxes $3,541.


Dubrovnik Shelled
Yugoslav federal forces pounded this medieval fortress city today from the mountains above it, fired from ships in the Adriatic and attacked it by air.
The attacks began at 7:45 A.M. and continued into the late afternoon, with the small force of Croatian defenders responding with artillery and small- arms fire.
The Yugoslav soldiers fired mortar shells into the new harbor of Gruz, setting a yacht on fire.


Double Duty


Arthur Miller's 'Price' Is Revived in Norwalk
AMONG the plays of Arthur Miller "The Price" (1968) holds a nebulous place, nowhere near the summit or the nadir of his considerable oeuvre, yet not steadily ensconced midway either.
Every now and again the play resurfaces in one regional theater or another, not as evidence of endurance, but almost as if in search of reappraisal, real status and critical consensus.
No one is going to pretend that the Rainbow Theater production in Norwalk will establish a niche for "The Price" once and for all.
A revival scheduled for May by the Roundabout Theater, now situated on Broadway, with Eli Wallach as star and John Tillinger as director, will provide yet another chance.


CAROLING HEADLINE&gt;Making a Joyful Noise, Alone or Allied
I'M not alone.
Not long ago, drifting through the floorboards of my apartment were the unmistakable strains of Vince Guraldi's theme for "A Charlie Brown Christmas." And it wasn't even Halloween yet.
I love Christmas.
And the part of Christmas I love most is the music.
I am strictly forbidden by more Grinch-like family members from playing anything from my cherished collection of holiday records until at least the day after Thanksgiving, and preferably not until December.
After that, jingle bells rock, "The Nutcracker" dances, and Santa Claus is coming to town.


From Life to Art and Back Again
When Scott McPherson set out to write "Marvin's Room" several years ago, he couldn't have known how closely -- eerily, in fact -- it would come to mirror his own life.
How could he?


The Untouchable


Janice Geller and Kevin Ryan Wed
Janice Geller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham W. Geller of New York, and Kevin James Ryan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Ryan of Birmingham, Mich., were married yesterday by the Rev.
Julie Strope, a Presbyterian minister, at the couple's home in Pittsboro, N.C.
Ms.
Geller, who is 37 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Bennington College and is a psychotherapist in Pittsboro.
Her father is an architect in New York.
Her mother, Marion Geller, is a playwright and office manager in her husband's firm.


Gobi Diary: A Sedimental Journey
Early morning in the Gobi Des ert, and the summer sun is already baking hot.
There can be no thought of stealing another wink of sleep.
The tent is stifling.
The sleeping bag, so snug in the cool of night, is now unbearable.
I emerge into the daylight, blinking and stretching, and see the other tents, the trucks parked at the center of the campsite and the ashes of last night's fire.
So it has not been a dream, being in the Gobi.
I lift my eyes to the stark terrain beyond the camp and take in the dark ridge of ancient lava to the north and, across the parched plain to the southwest, the pink bluffs, mounds and deep gullies of the badlands.
"That's dinosaur country," Malcolm McKenna, the senior scientist in our party, had said of those badlands when we arrived here a couple of days ago.
His attention was drawn to the reddish layers of mudstone and sandstone glowing in sunlight.
These are sediments of stream beds, once soft, moist and deep enough to entomb entire skeletons of creatures that lived long ago in the age of the great reptiles.


For Miami Next Week, 'Time to Walk the Walk'
As the University of Miami players reached their Orange Bowl locker room today after dispatching West Virginia, 27-3, to set up a showdown of unbeatens next Saturday against Florida State, wide receiver Lamar Thomas grabbed a pen and scribbled on a towel, "FSU It's Time."
Then Thomas hung it up for all to see, as his teammates were busy jumping around and practicing their tomahawk chop, the gesture that Florida State's partisans use when the Seminoles are on the move.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Oct. 26  MANHATTAN Fort Washington 101,000
900 West 190th Street  (Cabrini Terrace)  3-bedroom. 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; part-time doorman, dining ell, two exposures; maintenance $605, includes gas heat, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Simone Song Properties)  Greenwich Village 1,687,500
25 West 11th Street  6-bedroom, 5-bath, single-family, 5-story, Greek-Revival town house; maid's room, dining room, butler's pantry, rear garden, 20- by 103-ft. lot; taxes $8,865 (Brokers: Kingman Associates-Ambrose Mar-Elia)  SoHo 400,000
19 Greene Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, 13-ft. ceilings, cast-iron columns, 10-ft. windows; maintenance $890, no tax deduction (Broker: Bascom &amp; Sears)  Upper East Side 415,000
200 East 61st Street  (Savoy)  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 899-sq.-ft. condo in a 5-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, valet service, dining area, marble baths, terrace, health club; common charge $560, taxes $1,200 (Broker: Thompson-Kane Realty)  Upper East Side 1.2 million
755 Park Avenue (72d St.)  3-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, fireplace; maintenance $2,500, 34% tax-deductible (Brokers: William B. May- Ambrose Mar-Elia)  BRONX  Riverdale 168,000
5665 Post Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 1-car garage, 30- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $1,851 (Broker: Trebach Realty)  Soundview 250,000
565 White Plains Road  2-family, attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; hospitality suite on ground floor; 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Ditmas Park 200,000
404 Stratford Road  3-family, detached, frame house; 3 bedrooms on second floor; 2 bedrooms on third floor; 1 bedroom in ground floor unit; dining room on second and third floors; 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each; 40- 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,450 (Broker: Dwork &amp; Korn)  Park Slope 395,000
119 Lincoln Place  4-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, 4-story, attached brownstone; dining room, eat-in kitchen, study, 2 fireplaces, rear garden, 16.4- by 141-ft. lot; taxes $1,292 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Real Estate)  QUEENS  College Point 190,000
25-61 126th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, family room, 1-car garage, 22- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Forest Hills 500,000
71-15 Juno Street  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick and stucco house; dining room, breakfast room, fireplace, 2-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,822 (Broker: Wood Sage Real Estate)  Jackson Heights 170,000
24-30 88th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Elms Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Grymes Hill 157,500
26 Bertha Place  2-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, Dutch colonial; dining room, fireplace, detached, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,535 (Broker: Rand Properties)  Richmondtown 177,000
197 Amber Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached ranch; dining area, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 42- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)


Auto Insurance: Do the Fixes Need Fixing?
EVEN as many motorists watch their insurance premiums drop in the wake of Gov.
Jim Florio's sweeping transformation of the state's automobile insurance laws, some insurance industry experts and legislators say the Governor's plan is already following in the footsteps of previous unsuccessful attempts to rescue the state's ailing automobile insurance system.
In the last year, for example, three independent studies have predicted that the Market Transition Facility, the successor to the debt-ridden Joint Underwriting Association, is inexorably sliding into its own multimillion-dollar deficit.


A Transit-Oriented Approach to Suburbia
Four busloads of California city planners about 180 of them -- recently traveled to a flat, windy plain 11 miles south of this city to tour Laguna West, which has been touted as the next evolutionary stage of the American suburb.
While home building has just started at the 1,000-acre subdivision, the planners could see the outlines: a designated site for a transit station, surrounded by land soon to be filled with stores, commercial buildings and a day-care center, all within walking distance of about 3,400 planned homes .


Direct Flights To South Africa
South African Airways has resumed direct service between Johannesburg and Kennedy International Airport in New York after five years of routing North American passsengers via European airports.
The United States lifted its economic sanctions against South Africa last July.
The new service, which began Nov. 3, makes the one-way flight in about 17 hours, reducing travel time between the United States and South Africa by almost half.
Two weekly flights are now in operation, and a third is to be added on Dec. 4.
All flights make a stop in the Cape Verde Islands off West Africa.


Youth in the Bronx Is Killed After Shopping Plaza Fight
A 17-year-old boy taking a shortcut through the back of a shopping plaza near his home in the South Bronx was shot in the head and killed on Friday, and the police said yesterday that they were investigating a security guard as a suspect in the shooting.
A cousin of the victim, Hassan Bey, said Mr.
Bey was shot by the guard after he challenged him to a fistfight at the shopping plaza in the Bronx.
The police declined to comment on that version of what happened, saying the case was still under investigation.


Lisa Gutwillig to Wed Brian Fee Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Schoenthaler of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Schoenthaler's daughter Lisa Anne Gutwillig to Brian Edmund Fee Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian E. Fee of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Gutwillig, 25 years old, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is the manager of Hollywood Inc., a women's clothing store in Scarsdale.
Her stepfather is a vice president of the Apex Oil Company in New York.
Her mother, Linda Schoenthaler, owns Financial Decisions Inc., a financial and benefits consulting concern in New York.
Mr.
Fee, 27, graduated from Hobart College.
He is a bartender at Rosie McCann's restaurant in Hartsdale, N.Y., and an assistant football coach at Archbishop Stepinac High School in White Plains.
His father is a partner at Sands, Bernardo &amp; Fee, an insurance company in Briarcliff Manor.
His mother, Maureen Fee, is a customer service representative at the company.


The Show Goes On
Like many performers, Holly Hughes fights hard to overcome rejection.
When the chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, John E. Fronhmayer, overruled his agency's panel of theater experts last year and rejected a grant to the sexually explicit performance artist, Ms.
Hughes sued the agency.
She also filed an application for one of this year's grants, saying that her art "challenges assumptions about identity and gender," and asserting that her work has been misunderstood because of Mr.
Frohnmayer's veto and because of unnamed members of Congress who "equated homosexuality with obscenity." Last week Mr.
Frohnmayer announced that Ms.
Hughes would receive an $8,000 grant for this year.
Tim Miller, another sexually explicit performance artist whose grant was also vetoed last year, and who joined with Ms.
Hughes and two others to sue the agency, also received an $8,000 grant.
The lawsuit by the artists will continue.


Cuttings; Forcing Bulbs: Brightening Winter's Gloom
Fall has hardly settled in, and Walt Fisher has flowers on the brain.
Tulips, hyacinths, daffodils, muscari, iris, crocus, oxalis.
How to get them all blooming to perfection at 10 A.M. 17 weeks from now, on March 7.
That's judging day for blooming bulbs at the Philadelphia Flower Show, la creme de la creme of shows this side of the Atlantic.
Mr.
Fisher, a retired A.T.&amp;T. executive who lives in Bryn Mawr, Pa., has been exhibiting his exquisitely timed bulbs since 1979.
The man has shoe boxes full of blue ribbons and best of shows.


What Those Catalogues Say, What Those Catalogues Mean
IF "we need a little Christmas, right this very minute," as Angela Lansbury and the rest of the cast of "Mame" once implored, might it be suggested that we need a little counterbalance to Christmas as well?
Far be it from me to demand less Tiny Tim and more Scrooge, or less George Bailey and more Mr.
Potter.
No, what I believe is necessary is an antidote to the strident commercial impulses that accompany the holiday season.


For a Bash of Heroic Proportions, Experts Will Supply the Heroes
IN November and December, New York City becomes a small town, and the urge to entertain is contagious.
Doors open wider to friends, relatives and business associates, and guest lists expand wildly as even nodding acquaintances are asked to drop in.
But that doesn't mean you have to settle for shrimp on toothpicks or a platter of meatballs with drinks.
In this town, everything from delicate canapes glistening with beads of caviar to nine-foot hero sandwiches laden with lusty cold cuts is available, for pickup or delivery.
From the simple supper to the lavish, multi-course feast, a host of shops, restaurants and caterers is only a phone call or a fax away.


Making a Difference; Cleanup Duty in Oakland
George D. O'Brien tested his management skills as commander of the U.S.S.
Carl Vinson, one of the Navy's five front-line nuclear aircraft carriers.
Now, as chairman of the infrastructure group of ICF Kaiser Engineers Inc., he faces another daunting management task: coordinating the cleanup of the fire-ravaged Oakland hills.
"We have a fairly unremarkable event -- the removal of debris from burned-out homesites -- with a series of complications," said Mr.
O'Brien.


'Season of the Sun'
To the Editor:
I was pleased to see "Season of the Sun" appear in the No. 6 slot on the Oct. 13 paperback best-seller list.
The short description of the novel was, however, just a bit of a shocker: "A historical romance about a Yorkshire belle and a Norwegian landowner." This doesn't sound uninteresting, but on the other hand, neither does it sound like my novel, in which an Irish girl who lives in the Danelaw and a Viking from Norway are the featured characters.
A Yorkshire belle and a Norwegian landowner -- maybe next time.
CATHERINE COULTER  Hill Valley, Calif.


CAMPUS LIFE: Syracuse; Art Professor Sculptures Object to Go Very Fast
Jerome Malinowski, a Syracuse University art professor, is using urethane to sculpture something that art museums will never see.
He wants to build a better bobsled.
Bobsled building appeals to Professor Malinowski's skills as a designer and his sensibilities as an artist.
"There's an efficiency, a beauty and an esthetic," he said in a recent interview, as he showed off his newest model, shaped to resemble a dolphin.


Potent New Pest Hits California, Harming Crops
In 30 years of farming the Imperial Valley, Ben C. Abatti and his brother Tony have fought every kind of natural and economic foe, but nothing like the poinsettia sweet potato whitefly.
Mr.
Abatti has just finished plowing under his entire melon crop, turned into pitiful shriveled and rotted fruits by the tiny but voracious creature.
And, farm experts say, the misfortune of farmers like Mr.
Abatti will soon translate into shortages and higher prices in markets as far away as New York in the Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays.


Must Democrats Shift Signals on Blacks to Win the Presidency?
In 1964, President Lyndon Johnson confided to a young aide, Bill Moyers, that by signing the Civil Rights Bill into law he had "delivered the South to the Republican Party for a long time to come." In a sense Johnson got it wrong; there are still more registered Democrats in the South than there are Republicans.
But some political analysts now think that if L.B.J. had substituted the words "the white vote" for "the South," he would have been right on target.
The bill, the most far-reaching civil rights measure ever passed by Congress, has been credited with greatly reducing discrimination and helping to create a viable black middle class.
But juxtaposed with this progress are the fortunes of the Democratic Party, which, except for the election of Jimmy Carter in 1976, has been shut out of the White House since 1968.


A Cult Figure Survives Overkill at the Modern
The most disquieting thing about "Tadao Ando," the exhibition of this gifted architect's work at the Museum of Modern Art (through Dec. 31), is that the architect designed it himself.
It's not that one is surprised to learn that Mr.
Ando is so versatile.
It's that this lavish installation seems, in subtle but important ways, to undermine the messages that Mr.
Ando's actual architecture has for us.
Tadao Ando, a 50-year-old native of Osaka, has become one of the most celebrated figures in Japanese architecture in the last decade and almost a cult figure among students and young architects in the United States, despite the fact that he has never designed a building outside of Japan.
His reputation comes partly from an unusual career path -- he never attended a school of architecture, and taught himself to design after traveling through Europe and the United States.
But it comes most of all from his work, which is an extraordinary and profound meditation on abstract form, physical space and light.


The Silent Hazard: Lead in the Home
TWO years ago, when C. Douglas Taylor, a banker, and his wife, Frances, were expecting their first child, they began to worry about the safety of their home.
"We had bought a very nice co-op apartment in a 1930's building in Larchmont," Mr.
Taylor said.
"Some renovation work had already been done. But because it was an old building, the chances were that lead paint, once believed to be the best and the most durable on the market, had been used."


A Rule My Party Could Gag On
The "gag rule" a Department of Health and Human Services regulation that prohibits federally financed clinics from giving pregnant women complete information on medical options, including abortion -- is bad policy and bad politics.
Many Republicans, including a number on the pro-life side, oppose this regulation.
So do the American Medical Association and almost 80 percent of the American people.
The gag rule violates the honesty between government and citizens in a free society.
When a woman with an unintended pregnancy comes to a clinic and asks what her choices are, she deserves to be told the truth about all of them, including abortion.


Tennessee Rallies To Stun The Irish
Just when Notre Dame's national-championship hopes might have been preserved by the legend of the unknown kicker, they suddenly vanished today in the fading sunlight of Notre Dame Stadium.
The Tennessee Volunteers, having overcome a 24-point deficit, withstood one last breathtaking Fighting Irish drive and survived what would have been an instant, and permanent, part of Notre Dame lore: The sudden appearance of Rob Leonard, a sophomore walk-on replacing injured Craig Hentrich, for a 27-yard field-goal attempt on the last play of the game.


Camera
The eyes of children are probably the most important eyes anywhere.
When fascinated by their environment, by toys and images, and when stimulated by light, action and color, young eyes start learning patterns that last a lifetime.
Photographers and publishers of books and magazines now realize that excellent photography is not for adults only.
Tana Hoban, for example, spends much of her time taking pictures for the eyes of children 3 to 5 years old.
Her photography in some 50 books is intended to teach such basic principles as directions, size and color.
They teach children to observe before they can read or write.


Soviets to Cut Foreign Spy Staff by 50%
The new chairman of the Soviet intelligence and security agency, appointed two months ago to reform one of the world's most feared organizations, said today that the number of Soviet agents working abroad should be cut at least by half, and that the number of people directly answerable to him would be reduced by more than 90 percent.
"I know our intelligence activity should be cut sharply," the official, Vadim V. Bakatin, said in an interview in the agency's imposing gray headquarters off Lubyanka Square.
"This is a budget question. We don't have the possibility to support an enormous apparatus."


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Wednesday
Producer price index, percent change
0.1
0.2
Auto sales, annual rate, millions
6.2
6.4
Thursday
Initial jobless claims, thousands
420
425
Retail sales, percent change
0.7
0.0
Consumer price index, percent change
0.4
0.3
Friday
Industrial production, percent change
0.1
0.2
Capacity utilization
79.7
79.5
Business inventories, percent change
-0.1
0.2
Monday: Veterans day, public holiday *
British retail sales Tuesday: German Government decides on taxing interest income Wednesday: World agriculture production *
Report on bankruptcies, Japan  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Pushing the Envelope at Boeing
The rear flap of an airplane wing is going through its paces on a computer screen in response to instructions keyed in by Lawrence D. Smith, a design engineer at the Boeing Company.
At his command, the flap unfolds from a fully stowed position to maximum extension.
Hydraulic lines and bundles of wiring can also be seen on the screen, so that Mr.
Smith and other architects of Boeing's new 777 widebody plane can be sure that no two items are being designed to occupy the same place at the same time.
There is no going back to the drawing board for Boeing engineers; there are no more drawing boards.
Nor are there any drawings, in the conventional sense.
All the design and engineering for the 777, scheduled for delivery in May 1995, is being done on computer screens, making it the first fully "paperless" airliner.


Gissing Remembered
To the Editor:
As a journalist who has made his living as a freelance writer on and off for the past 15 years, I was thrilled to see George Packer's essay on George Gissing and his florid masterpiece, "New Grub Street." When I first read the book about seven years ago, I was astonished at its immediacy: the novel's depiction of Victorian hacks grubbing for a living in a commercialized literary atmosphere seemed, in its emotional intensity, to mirror the experiences I was having.
Far from being a relic, "New Grub Street" spoke to me of universal attitudes and frustrations.
Like Mr.
Packer, I began recommending it to other writers as the ultimate cautionary tale.


Y.M.C.A.'s Are Fading as Stopovers for Travelers on a Budget
In the better old days, a half-century ago, servicemen and raw country youths used to line up in the vast hall and out onto West 34th Street to get a room in the William Sloane House, one of the biggest and most popular hostels in the city.
Today, the gloomy, cavernous lobby of the Sloane House Y.M.C.A., is usually empty.
Only 20 percent of the 1,400 rooms are occupied, and six of the 14 floors have been closed off.


Johnson Gains 323 Yards in Harvard Victory
Harvard's Matt Johnson set an Ivy League record for rushing yardage in one game, gaining 323 on 30 carries today in the Crimson's 35-29 victory over Brown.
Harvard improved to 3-4-1 over all and 3-1-1 in the Ivy League, while Brown fell to 0-8 and 0-5 in the Ivy.


Susan Sanford and Miles Svikhart Are to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Edgar Sanford of Plymouth, Minn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Leslie Sanford, to Miles Leopold Svikhart, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford M. Svikhart of Rumson, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Sanford, 25 years old, graduated from Indiana University and is the manager of the Banana Republic store in Alexandria, Va.
Her father is president of Price/Log Publications, a hardware trade publication in Plymouth.
Her mother, Evelyn, is an account executive for Carlson Marketing Group, a travel incentive company, in Minneapolis.
Mr.
Svikhard, 28, is a regional salesman for Electronic Data Systems in Herndon, Va., and graduated from Lynchburg College.
His father is a retired senior vice president of the Bank of New York.


Jason Brandt to Wed Miss Vimond
Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund G. Vimond Jr. of Bedminster, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cynthia Dene Vimond, to Jason Brandt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jesse E. Brandt of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Vimond, 26 years old, graduated from Skidmore College and is an administrator at Sotheby's in New York.
Her father is the principal of Edmund Vimond Associates, a business consulting firm in Far Hills, N.J.
Her mother, Pamela Vimond, is a broker at Ned Ward Realtors in New Vernon, N.J.


One Spectacle After Another
GLASSES
Who Needs 'Em?
Written and illustrated by Lane Smith.
Unpaged.
New York: Viking. $13.95. (Ages 3 to 8)


Rutgers Celebrates 225th Anniversary
EXACTLY 225 years ago today, the last colonial governor of New Jersey, William Franklin, granted a royal charter establishing Queen's College, which was later to become Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey.
From its roots as a training ground for a few young men interested in the Dutch Reformed ministry, it has blossomed into the star of New Jersey's public higher education system.
It graduates more than 9,000 students annually in nearly 100 different fields and is fast closing in on its quest to be recognized as a leading public research university.


Answering The Mail
Q.
Rain is filling the sunken well around the outside of my basement window, and
water runs under the window on to the basement floor.
Also, there is a crack in the concrete basement wall under this window.
Would digging out the bottom of the window well and filling it with gravel help?
And is there a danger of the basement wall's collapsing?
A.
I doubt that there is any danger of the basement wall's collapsing, even if it does have a crack in it.
Digging out the bottom of the well to a depth of at least 12 inches and filling it with gravel will help if the soil drains well.
If not, you will also have to lay underground drain tile to carry the water at least 10 feet away from the bottom of the window well.
Otherwise, the crack in the wall may allow water to seep into the basement, even if it is not doing this now.
Sealing the edges of the window with foam or rubber weatherstripping also will help keep out the water.


MARIJUANA SCHEME LINKED TO NORIEGA
Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega is being tried here on charges of trafficking in cocaine, not marijuana.
But in some of the most compelling testimony in his trial, now in its third month, an American drug dealer testified this week that he was the deposed Panamanian dictator's partner in a scheme to smuggle hundreds of tons of marijuana into the United States.
Steven Kalish, a 38-year-old convicted marijuana trafficker, said he first met General Noriega in September 1983 when he was looking for "a safe haven" in which to launder $10 million in drug money.
Mr.
Kalish said that the man he always called "Tony," Mr.
Noriega, soon gave enthusiastic approval to a plan to ship 200 tons of marijuana from a Panamanian port.


New Haven Gets Second Thai Restaurant
A NEW restaurant called Cha-Da Thai has doubled New Haven's supply of Thai restaurants just by opening its doors.
Considering the city's rich cultural diversity, it is no surprise to find another ethnic dining establishment in the city center, down the street from the Yale Art Gallery and Yale Repertory Theater.
Anyone long acquainted with New Haven will immediately recognize Cha-Da Thai's cellar premises as the site of the Old Heidelberg, a landmark for several generations.
The configuration remains much the same, with a bar (with a few tables) to the left of the entrance and the larger dining room on the right.
At the entrance are several glittery, golden Siamese dance headdresses (known as cha-da, hence the restaurant name) used as wall decorations.
Less festive are the black pressed-tin ceiling, plywood-panel walls painted gray-black, and cardinal-red plastic booths and banquettes, all of which are more reminiscent of an old-style Italian restaurant than a new Thai one.


Some Shortcuts for Birds Chinese Style
ONE of the most attractive sights on a dinner table is a perfectly roasted bird with a crisp, bronzed skin.
The experts at cooking birds that turn out this way, of course, are the Chinese.
Pay a visit to Chinatown and you will see rows of glistening lacquered ducks hanging in shop windows, the perfect dish to serve on a day when you don't feel like cooking.
You can buy them ready to eat for as little as $10 each and take them home, along with a supply of pancakes, scallions, cucumbers and hoisin sauce, to eat in the Peking style.
Making a Peking duck the traditional way is a complicated process that will tempt few cooks to try at home.
Air is pumped under the skin through an opening at the neck so that it puffs up like a balloon (you can do this yourself by blowing through your mouth).
The ducks, which have their heads on, are hung on a hook, scalded with boiling water, coated with a syrupy mixture made with sugar and honey, before being left to dry in a cool, drafty place for several hours.
Then their cavities are filled with water and the birds are hung in an oven to roast.


Talking: Flood Bills; What's Insured, What's Not
THE storm that sent 30-foot waves crashing into the coast from New Jersey to Maine 10 days ago has left many homehowners in a quandary concerning insurance claims.
Virtually all the damage resulted from flooding -- either from waves directly hitting a house or from higher-than-normal tides.
Insurance agents warn that, except for minor harm to roofs caused by gusting winds, such damage is not covered by regular homeowner policies.


SEDUCING THESE MEN
The contest for Subaru's advertising account was not so much about the ad agencies' trying to seduce the executives of Subaru as it was about "the Subarus" trying to find a hired gun to seduce the American consumer.
In these tough times, no one can fault an advertising agency for trying to land an account, even if it is a foreign manufacturer trying to win market share from its American counterparts.
However, the agency known for its ads for the "Crafted with Pride in the U.S.A. Council" should at least have seen some irony (if not an overt conflict of interest) in competing for Subaru's business.
ROBERT J. YAES
Lexington, Ky.


Lakers Are Adjusting to a Double Loss
Magic Johnson was the heart of the Los Angeles Lakers for a dozen years, and on Friday night, the Lakers understandably played as if their heart wasn't in the game.
Johnson, who announced Thursday that he is retiring after testing positive for the virus that causes AIDS, wasn't with the Lakers on Friday night when they lost to the Suns, 113-85.


Players, Temptation And AIDS
One of the first things Walt Frazier noticed upon his return to professional basketball three years ago as a broadcaster for the New York Knicks was the proliferation of young women attending the games.
A great star of the 1960's and the 1970's, and an admitted champion partyer of his era, Frazier said he quickly realized how times had changed.
"In my day, you at least had to go to parties and you had to have a rap to pick up women," said Frazier, who retired from the National Basketball Association in 1979.
"Now you see them lining up against the wall after the game. The stars just take their pick and the other guys get the leftovers.


A Nameless Storm, But a Devastation


Bulldogs, Now Tied for 5th, Offer No Excuses
The proceedings at the Cornell-Yale game today were best exemplified when Ramon Watkins, a 175-pound cornerback, came up to tackle Chris Kouri, Yale's big power runner who seeks out collisions.
Kouri's attempts to run through Watkins never worked and neither did anything else the Bulldogs tried as Cornell won this Ivy League contest in an astonishing rout, 31-6.


How the Not-So-Merry Can Beat The Blahs and Blues
ARE you tense and irritable? Craving chocolate, or perhaps a copy of "Final Exit"?
The holidays have arrived.


Making a Difference; The Auction Man at Treasury
For many years, auctions of Government debt had the feel of a cozy pas de deux as Treasury officials maintained a close relationship with a select group of securities houses and banks chosen to broker the sales of billions of dollars worth of bills, notes and bonds.
But the music stopped in August, when Salomon Brothers admitted that earlier this year it had submitted false and inflated bids at several auctions.
The scandal unleashed fierce criticism and promises of reform, and last week the first series of changes was put to the test, as the Treasury sold $38 billion worth of notes and bonds under revised bidding rules.


Lynn Stenzler To Be Married
Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Stenzler of Fair Lawn, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Robin Lynn Stenzler to Dr.
James Robert Post, the son of Dr.
Arthur Post and Paula Post of Merrick, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Stenzler, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Florida.
She is a computer software trainer at Crawford &amp; Company, insurance claims adjusters and risk management specialists, in Atlanta.
Her father, a pharmacist, owns Saddle Brook Pharmacy in Saddle Brook, N.J.


Young Women Offer To Sell Their Eggs To Infertile Couples
A handful of medical centers have begun offering infertile couples a new but very expensive option in their quest for a baby of their own.
They are providing lists of healthy young women who, for a fee, will provide eggs that can be fertilized in the laboratory and implanted in the infertile woman's womb.
Although the first programs that offered eggs provided by strangers began in 1987, they were until recently limited endeavors.
But as word has spread among doctors and infertile women that egg donors are an option, the programs have suddenly blossomed.


PHOTOGRAPHY
Here is a sampling of arts and entertainment events in New York City during the holiday season, compiled by New York Times critics, writers and contributors.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
"ANNIE LEIBOVITZ PHOTOGRAPHS: 1970-1990," International Center of Photography, 1130 Fifth Avenue, at 94th Street, Manhattan.
This diverse 20-year survey will include the photographer's well-known celebrity portraits as well as early photojournalism and even family pictures.
Through Dec. 1, Hours: Tuesdays from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays to Sundays from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $3.50 ($2 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 860-1777.
"PLEASURES AND TERRORS OF DOMESTIC COMFORT," Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
A look at 150 pictures by 60 photographers, from both the documentary and the post-modern sides of the fence, about life on the home front.
Through Dec. 31.
Hours: Thursdays from 11 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; Fridays to Tuesdays from 11 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.; closed Wednesdays.
Admission: $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free for those under 16.) Information: (212) 708-9480.
Nov. 19
"DIANE ARBUS: THE UNTITLED SERIES," Robert Miller Gallery, 41 East 57th Street, Manhattan.
A series of 28 photographs taken in 1970 and 1971, most of them not shown before.
Through Dec. 28.
Hours: Tuesdays to Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Sundays and Mondays.
Information: (212) 980-5454.
Nov. 24
"THE LEGACY OF W. EUGENE SMITH: 12 PHOTOGRAPHERS IN THE HUMANISTIC TRADITION," International Center of Photography Midtown, 1133 Avenue of the Americas, at 43d Street, Manhattan.
Sixty vintage prints by Smith and 15 prints each by past recipients of the annual grant for humanistic photography named in his honor, including Sebastiao Salgado and Graciela Iturbide.
Through Jan. 19.
Hours: Tuesdays from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays to Sundays from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $3.50 ($2 for students and the elderly.) Information: (212) 768-4682.
Nov. 26
O.
WINSTON LINK, James Danziger Gallery, 415 West Broadway, near Spring Street, SoHo.
An early practitioner of staged outdoor photography and something of a cult figure, Mr.
Link used floodlights to give nighttime images of passing trains a startling intensity that was increased by the smallness and fineness of his prints.
For this exhibition, he has reprinted his 1950's negatives in a larger format; no doubt his cult standing will remain intact.
Through Dec. 22.
Hours: Tuesdays to Fridays from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Saturdays from noon to 6 P.M.; Wednesdays from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; closed Sundays and Mondays.
Information: (212) 226-0056.
Dec. 6
SHEILA METZNER, International Center of Photography, 1130 Fifth Avenue, at 94th Street, Manhattan.
A mid-career survey of 120 print by a photographer best known for dreamy portraits and fashion shots whose hazy textures recall turn-of-the-century Pictorial photography.
Through Feb. 2.
Hours: Tuesdays from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays to Sundays from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $3.50 ($2 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 860-1777.


Ilene Rifkin Engaged To Marry in March
Rita and Marvin Rifkin of Cherry Hill, N.J., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter, Ilene Beth Rifkin, and Charles Steven Epstein, a son of Claire and Philip Epstein of Hillcrest, Queens.
Miss Rifkin, 35 years old, is a casino supervisor at Bally's Park Place Casino Hotel in Atlantic City.
Mr.
Epstein, 36, graduated from Cornell University and has a master's degree in consumer economics from the University of Maryland and a law degree from Western New England College.
He is a special assistant and the director of policy for office of the Bronx Borough President.


NUCLEAR ACTIVITY BY NORTH KOREANS WORRIES THE U.S.
The rapid expansion of a mysterious nuclear complex in North Korea is heightening concern in Washington, Seoul and Tokyo that the unpredictable regime of President Kim Il Sung may be closer to producing a crude nuclear weapon than anyone thought just a year ago.
The concerns are being driven by North Korea's continued refusal to allow international inspection of the site at Yongbyon, a nuclear complex 60 miles north of Pyongyang that dates back at least two decades.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Here is a sampling of arts and entertainment events in New York City during the holiday season, compiled by New York Times critics, writers and contributors.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Nov. 12
ROBERT SHAW.
The great choral conductor concludes a rare series of appearances with the New York Philharmonic and the Westminster Symphonic Choir, performing Mozart's C-minor Mass and Barber's "Prayers of Kierkegaard." Avery Fisher Hall. 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $50.
Information: (212) 875-5030.
Nov. 14
"LA TRAVIATA." The highly acclaimed soprano Cheryl Studer stars as the Franco Zeffirelli production returns.
Metropolitan Opera House, 8 P.M.
Other performances: Nov. 18, 22 and 26 at 8 P.M., and Nov. 30 at 1 P.M.; Dec. 6, 9, 12 and 28 at 8:30 P.M., and Dec. 31 at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $19 to $95.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
Nov. 17
CHRISTOPHER HOGWOOD.
The English conductor leads his Academy of Ancient Music in works of Mozart and Haydn, joined at the fortepiano by the brilliant improviser Robert Levin.
Avery Fisher Hall, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $13 to $28.
Information: (212) 875-5030.
ALFRED BRENDEL.
The renowned pianist will play two Mozart concertos with George Cleve and the Orchestra of St.
Luke's.
Avery Fisher Hall, 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $16 to $32.
Information: (212) 875-5030.
Nov. 20
LES ARTS FLORISSANTS.
William Christie, an American who has made Paris his home, leads his early-music group in works of Charpentier and Philidor.
Opera House, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10 and $25.
Information: (718) 636-4100.
Nov. 23
OSLO PHILHARMONIC.
Mariss Jansons, who has made this orchestra a practiced hand in the Russian repertory, conducts Shostakovich's Seventh Symphony.
Carnegie Hall, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $45.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
Nov. 24
ALICIA DE LARROCHA.
The esteemed Spanish pianist performs works by Soler, Mozart and Schubert.
Avery Fisher Hall, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $14 to $28.
Information: (212) 875-5030.
Nov. 25
SALZBURG MARIONETTE THEATER.
The Austrian company begins its series of extravagant and inimitable Mozart opera productions with "The Marriage of Figaro." Alice Tully Hall, 8 P.M. (Also Nov. 30 at 2:30 and 8 P.M.).
"Don Giovanni," Nov. 26 at 8 P.M. and Dec. 1 at 2:30 P.M.) "Cosi Fan Tutte," Nov. 27 at 8 P.M. "The Magic Flute," Nov. 29 at 2:30 and 8 P.M. Tickets: $25 for each performance. Information: (212) 875-5050. Dec. 2
SHURA CHERKASSKY.
At the age of 80, the seemingly ageless and venerable master will play a Carnegie Hall recital.
Carnegie Hall, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $45.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
Dec. 5
MOZART REQUIEM.
So it's finally here.
On the actual 200th anniversary of Mozart's death, Sir Neville Marriner conducts the Academy of St.
Martin-in-the-Fields in a performance of the composer's Requiem in Carnegie Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $13 to $60.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
On the same evening, Erich Leinsdorf and the New York Philharmonic will perform the work with the New York Choral Artists in Avery Fisher Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $50.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
"TREEMONISHA." The Harlem School of the Arts and Opera Ebony present Scott Joplin's fetching folk opera, with Tania Leon conducting.
Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 997-1003.
Dec. 6 and 7
GIDON KREMER.
If all Mozart has begun to sound alike to you by now, you might look up this artist, who seems sure to do something different.
He plays all the Mozart violin concertos and leads the Deutsche Kammerphilharmonie of Frankfurt in two concerts.
Carnegie Hall, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $45.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
Dec. 8
CARNEGIE HALL CHRISTMAS CONCERT.
Andre Previn conducts and plays, joined by the St.
Luke's Concert Artists and the American Boy Choir.
Carnegie Hall, 7 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $95.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
HAYDN'S "CREATION." Sir Neville Marriner conducts the Academy of St.
Martin-in-the-Fields.
Avery Fisher Hall, 3:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20, $30 and $40.
Information: (212) 875-5030.
Dec. 9
THE KING'S SINGERS.
A seasonal program features music of five centuries and a traditional British pantomime.
Carnegie Hall, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $8 to $25.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
Dec. 11
"TRIPTYCH." The John Brownlee Opera Theater of the Manhattan School of Music mounts the American premiere of Alexander Goehr's "Triptych," a set of three short music-theater pieces presented to great acclaim at the Aldeburgh Festival in England last year.
Stephen Wadsworth directs, and David Gilbert conducts.
Manhattan School of Music, Broadway at 122d Street, Manhattan. 8 P.M.
Also on Dec. 13 at 8 P.M., and Dec. 15 at 2:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10 and $15.
Information: (212) 749-2802.
YO-YO MA AND EMANUEL AX.
The program includes works by Beethoven, Mozart, Bernstein, Chopin and Brahms.
Avery Fisher Hall, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 875-5030.
Dec. 15
VIENNA CHOIR BOYS.
A Christmas program from Austria.
Carnegie Hall, 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $45.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
Dec. 19
"THE GHOSTS OF VERSAILLES." John Corigliano's first major opera, commissioned by the Metropolitan Opera more than a decade ago, is finally at hand.
For many who have never seen a work by a living composer at the Met, that experience in itself should be invigorating.
Metropolitan Opera, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $19 to $125.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
CAROL VANESS.
The gifted American soprano makes her debut with the New York Philharmonic in scenes from Strauss's "Daphne," with Erich Leinsdorf conducting.
Avery Fisher Hall, 8 P.M.
Other performances: Dec. 20 and 21, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $50.
Information: (212) 875-5030.
Dec. 24
NEW YORK STRING ORCHESTRA.
The venerable Alexander Schneider leads a youthful group in this annual tradition.
Carnegie Hall, midnight.
Tickets: $7 to $25.
Also on Dec. 29 at 3 P.M.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
Dec. 31
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC.
Leonard Slatkin conducts a New Year's Eve program.
Avery Fisher Hall, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $90.
Information: (212) 875-5030.


The Century May Already Be at an End
Although the century has not quite wound down, it's time to ask the question: what was 20th-century music?
Answer No. 1: Twentieth-century music was modernist music.
Its principal features were the destruction of tonality and the pursuit of Serialism.
All other music was an anachronism.
Or as Pierre Boulez put it: "Any composer who has not felt . . . the necessity of the 12-tone language is
superfluous
. For everything he writes will fall short of the necessities of his time."


Veterans Day Tomorrow
Veterans Day will be observed tomorrow.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  PARADE: Begins at 9 A.M. on Fifth Avenue at 39th Street and proceeds south on Fifth Avenue to 24th Street, ending around noon.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and Special Delivery only.
Post offices will be closed with the exception of the emergency window at the Main Post Office, 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Option to close.
PARKING: Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION: No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Open.
TRANSPORTATION: Regular weekday service.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Local option.
TRANSPORTATION: Regular weekday service.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Regular weekday schedules.
TRAFFIC ALERT
The Brooklyn-bound lanes of the Brooklyn Bridge will be closed for repairs until 3 P.M.
Monday.


New Violence at a Mine in South Africa Kills 22
New violence linked to a two-day national strike earlier this week erupted Friday night at a gold mine in the Orange Free State, leaving 22 mine workers dead and 51 others injured.
The mine, which the Anglo-American Corporation operates in the town of Welkom, was the scene of a brawl last Sunday night in which 15 men died and 39 were injured.
According to Anglo- American, that clash was touched off when some of the black mine workers supporting the strike tried to prevent others from going underground.


On the Street; Long or Short But All Black
Women attending the spring fashion shows in New York last week provided a show of their own and a firm answer to the hemline question.
The consensus: Length is a matter of choice, as long as everything is black.
Skirts were long and short, full and narrow.
Trousers were long or short, fitted or flared.
Some women did away with the skirt, choosing leggings and a top.
Two women waiting for a cab on Seventh Avenue especially turned heads: they were in black from head to toe, and wore long pencil-slim skirts.
Their clothes spoke volumes about why fashion changes -- boredom with the familiar.
Still, there is plenty of room for slim, short skirts with a well-tailored, belted jacket, black leggings and ankle boots.


There's a New World Order in Asia; The U.S. Will Have to Catch Up
A handful of Asia-based diplomats are willing to give President Bush the benefit of the doubt.
They are willing to believe that he canceled his trip to Asia this month for reasons that go beyond opinion polls suggesting that the President's globetrotting habits have cut into his approval rating among voters.
In fact, some diplomats say, President Bush may have been well advised to stay home until he knows with certainty how Washington should respond to the political and economic changes that are sweeping across the Far East, and that appear destined to alter the American role.
"Everything is fluid in the region right now," said a senior European diplomat in Bangkok.
"Perhaps now is not the moment for the President to visit Asia. The United States needs time to absorb it all."


Doubts Voiced on Yugoslav Sanctions
The European Community's limited economic sanctions against Yugoslavia have little chance of forcing the Serbs and the Croats to end their deadly feud and find a way of sharing in peace the lands they jointly inhabit, or once did, Yugoslav economists and Western diplomats say.
"The boycott will not achieve the results expected by those who imposed it," said Ljubomir Madzar, a Belgrade University economics lecturer.


Adriana Davis Weds
Adriana E. Davis, a freelance public-relations adviser, and Clark B. Dyson, a securities investor, were married yesterday at Le Chateau in South Salem, N.Y.
The Rev.
David S. Lothrop, a Baptist minister, officiated.
Mrs.
Dyson, 30 years old, graduated from Catholic University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard V. Davis of New York.
Mr.
Dyson, 32, is the son of Dr.
Robert C. Dyson of Rye, N.Y., and Romola M. Dyson of Mamaroneck, N.Y.


RECORD BRIEFS
Bruckner: Symphony No. 6
Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra conducted by Jesus Lopez-Cobos. Telarc CD-80264; CD.


Baedeker
To the Editor: As an inveterate traveler for 40 years I particularly enjoyed Karl E. Meyer's "Traveling with the Intrepid Baedeker" (Travel, Sept. 29).
The first Baedeker I ever saw was in the 1940's while in high school.
It was the 1930 edition on India, which was in German and belonged to a great uncle who had used it on an Asian odyssey in the 1930's.
He first aroused my lifelong interest in travel.


Gothic and Classical Themes Cut a Swath Across Four Centuries
THE walls of the Austin Gallery at Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford have turned autumnal.
The color is a mixture of dusty plum and rusty brown, and it sets off to perfection "Sacred and Secular," a show about the fusion of Christianity and classicism in Europe from the 12th to the 16th centuries.
This confluence is easier to see in the art of northern Europe, where classicism, arriving late, had the Gothic style (and mentality) to contend with.
In Italy, where the Renaissance began -- in part as a rebirth of Rome -- it was a matter of adapting classical concept to Christian ends.
But these paintings, scuptures, illuminated manuscripts and textiles, drawn from the museum's collection, cut a swath through Italy, France, the Low Countries and Germany, touching Spain, Switzerland and England on the way.


A Jarring Reveille For Sports
EVERY few years, the SportsWorld gets a wake-up call.
Invariably, the snooze button is punched, the alarm whines off, and the fans drift back into their sweaty Oz.
Why should it be different this time?


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about the Greenburgh school district misidentified Numa Rousseve.
He is a member of the Greenburgh Board of Education, not its president.


Highlights of last week's elections
Some Surprises Beat Big Odds In National Races Pennsylvania Senator Harris Wofford, a little-known Democrat with an anti-Bush message, trounces former Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, winning 56 percent of the vote to Mr.
Thornburgh's 44 percent.
Mr.
Wofford was 40 percentage points behind Mr.
Thornburgh, a popular former Governor, as the race began, but had hammered away at related themes: that President Bush's policies had damaged the economy and particularly the middle class, and that the United States badly needs national health insurance.
Pennsylvania voters told pollsters that national health insurance was the No. 1 issue on their minds.
On Thursday, Republicans in Congress introduced a new bill to create an insurance plan; it includes tax credits to help people buy insurance, millions for new clinics and regulations on insurance premiums.
More Congressional Democrats spoke up for their own bill, which is modeled on Canada's system.
Mississippi Governor Kirk Fordice becomes the state's first Republican governor since 1876, ousting the incumbent, Gov.
Ray Mabus.
In a bitter campaign, Mr.
Fordice, a wealthy construction contractor, painted Mr.
Mabus as a liberal in the Kennedy tradition and charged that he had bloated the state's payroll as its economy slid downhill.
And, although he rejected comparisons with David Duke next door in Louisiana, he introduced racial themes late in the race, stressing his opposition to quotas and attacking welfare recipients.
Kentucky Governor Lieut.
Gov.
Brereton C. Jones, a Democrat, gets 65 percent of the vote for governor, easily defeating a seven-term Congressman, Larry J. Hopkins.
Mr.
Hopkins had received campaign help from President Bush but was hurt when it was revealed that he was one of the lawmakers who wrote bad checks on the House of Representatives bank.
Power Shifts in State and Local Ruling Bodies
New Jersey Legislature Republicans riding a tide of anger over tax increases by Gov.
Jim Florio sweep Democrats out of their majorities in both houses for the first time in 20 years.
The next day, as they introduce the members of their new veto-proof voting blocs, G.O.P. leaders say they will roll back about $550 million in taxes.
Virginia General Assembly Although the Democrats maintain their majorities in both houses, Republicans become a major force in the legislature for the first time since Reconstruction.
The Senate is now split 22 to 18 in favor of Democrats; before it was split 30 to 10.
The results are seen as an embarrassment for Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder, who is running for the Democratic presidential nomination and describing how effective his government has been, but whom voters apparently felt was ignoring the state.
Suffolk County, New York G.O.P. regains control of the government of this suburban Long Island county as a little-known Assemblyman, Robert J. Gaffney, defeats the incumbent, Patrick G. Halpin, in the race for county executive.
Mr.
Halpin's popularity suffered from the effects of the recession and the county's high taxes.
In adjacent Nassau County, however, traditional Republican dominance of the legislature is sharply reduced as Democrats gather enough votes to block Republican ordinances.
New York City Council A new 51-member council is elected with few surprises because most of the races were settled in the Democratic primaries.
Peter F. Vallone, the Council Speaker from Queens who has led the newly powerful council in several challenges to Mayor David N. Dinkins, seems in no danger of losing his grip on the body.
Closely Watched Ballot Measures Are Defeated
Term limits for officeholders In Washington State, a proposal to limit the state's governors and members of Congress to two or three terms is defeated.
It is the first time such a measure has lost since term limits got the public's attention last year, when voters in California, Colorado and Oklahoma approved them -- although not for holders of national office.
Opponents argued that term limits would mean populous states like California would overwhelm smaller ones like Washington that are protected by having senior representatives in important Congressional posts.
One such opponent was House Speaker Thomas S. Foley, a Representative from Washington who would have lost his job if the measure had passed and whose last-minute campaigning against it was thought to have been crucial to its defeat.
Suicide help by doctors Another Washington ballot initiative, one that would let doctors kill or assist in the suicide of terminally ill patients who ask to die, is also defeated.
Opponents said the bill would mean elderly people with little money would feel family pressure to commit suicide, that Washington would become a "fly and die" destination for people from other states and that some people might be labeled terminally ill prematurely.
The turnout in Washington is a record for an off-year election.


Yves Montand, Sage Charmer of French Film and Politics, Dies at 70
Yves Montand, the French actor and singer whose political views and passionate affairs stirred as much controversy as his film roles and songs won him popularity, died near Paris today.
He was 70 years old.
He apparently suffered a heart attack while working on his latest film on location in Senlis and died at the local hospital.


Joan Dzaluk Weds Raymond Turro
Joan Pendleton Dzaluk, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Dzaluk of Port Chester, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Raymond Anthony Turro, a son of Anthony Turro of New York and Jean Turro of Mahwah, N.J.
Msgr.
James Turro, an uncle of the groom, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Mercy Church.
Mrs.
Turro, 27 years old, is an assistant vice president in corporate bonds at Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Providence College.
Her father, a former Mayor of Port Chester, is the executive director of the Westchester Housing Forum, a lobbying group in White Plains.
Her mother, Joan Dzaluk, is a retired communications analyst for I.B.M. in White Plains.
Mr.
Turro, 27, graduated from Bucknell University.
He is a mortgage bond trader at Lehman Brothers in New York.
His mother is a medical assistant in Mahwah.
His father, who is retired, was a special agent for the F.B.I.


Rid American Sports of Racial Stereotypes
To the Editor:
The baseball playoffs and World Series have played contemporaneously with Senate hearings that focused on racial and sexual discrimination.
Anyone choosing to watch the home games of the Atlanta Braves would learn that ethnic stereotyping continues to infect our cultural life.


Oasis on I-95 Lures Truckers With Hot Coffee and Warm Smiles
THE other day at the Mayflower Diner in Milford, Kenny Perkins was mopping the last dollop of chili out of a wide ceramic bowl with a piece of bread while discussing the travails of driving a two-ton diesel truck across the southern Connecticut stretch of Interstate 95.
Though he had never received a ticket anywhere, he said, he knew of truckers who had passed through the state and been fined for barely violating weight restrictions and for not tying down their portable refrigerators.
"I don't want to offend anybody or anything," said Mr.
Perkins, who wore a blue flannel shirt, jeans and a baseball cap.
"But out on the road Connecticut's known as a communist state. The police are too strict here. They harass us and don't make us feel very welcome. They've got no respect for us, plain and simple."


Iraqi Suffering Deepens As the Economy Rots
Many of the infants in the pediatrics ward at Al Qadissiya Hospital look up from their beds with the hollow gaze of malnutrition, or the grimace that comes with the cramps of gastroenteritis.
Less than a mile from the hospital, in the central market for the hinterland of Shiite Muslim neighborhoods on the edge of the Iraqi capital, the shops and stalls are overflowing with 100-pound bags of wheat, rice and sugar, from Turkey, Jordan and France.
Egg vendors sell from the curbside to passing motorists.
There is cooking oil from Singapore and tomato paste from Iran, and there is fresh meat in the butcher shops.


Douglas Levy to Marry Joy Ciarcia
The Rev. and Mrs.
Albert F. Ciarcia of Waterbury, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Joy Carole Ciarcia to Douglas Robert Levy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Levy of Davie, Fla.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Ciarcia, 27 years old, is a production associate for the ABC News program "20/20" in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received a master's degree in media studies from the New School for Social Research.
Her father is the minister emeritus of the Unitarian Universalist Church of Greater Bridgeport in Stratford, Conn.
Her mother, a community theater director, is the founder and director of the Playreaders Theater of Waterbury and is a legal assistant in the Waterbury law firm of of Moynahan, Ruskin, Mascolo, Mariani &amp; Minnella.
Mr.
Levy, 25, is an account executive at Girgenti, Hughes, Butler &amp; McDowell, a pharmaceuticals advertising agency in New York.
He graduated from Florida State University.
His mother, Janet Levy, is an executive secretary for Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm, in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
His father is the president of RML Associates, a graphic arts company in Davie.


HOLIDAY TREES
Here is a listing of farms in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut that offer pick-your-own Christmas trees.
This listing came from agricultural guides published by the New York State Department of Agriculture and Markets, and the Christmas Tree Growers Associations in New Jersey and Connecticut.
Farmers say the earliest time to cut a tree is right after Thanksgiving.
At some farms, the farmers may want to do the cutting themselves; they may also provide trees that are already cut or live trees with roots intact that can be replanted.
Saws or rope to tie the tree to a car may or may not be provided by the farmer.
Therefore, farmers recommend a call to the farm to confirm hours and the kind of equipment needed.
NEW YORK STATE Columbia County
ROXBURY HOLLOW TREE FARM, Hollowville, (518) 851-9080. Dutchess County
BILMAR NURSERIES, Pleasant Valley, (914) 635-3206.
DEEP HOLLOW FARM, Millbrook, (914) 677-8093.
HASBROUCK TREE FARM, Millbrook, (914) 677-3878.
MARKET FARM, Clinton Corners, (914) 266-5688.
MILLETT TREE FARM, Poughkeepsie, (914) 473-9267.
PRIMROSE HILL FARM, Staatsburg, (914) 889-4725.
SOLVANG FARM, Poughkeepsie, (914) 473-0224.
ELMAR VAN WAGNER, Hyde Park, (914) 229-2116.
WHALEN'S TREE FARM, Clinton Corners, (914) 868-1925. Greene County
JOHN GUBAR, Hannacroix, (518) 966-5766. Orange County
BANKS FARM, Sparrowbush, (914) 856-3982.
GRANEY TREE FARM, Pine Bush, (914) 361-5360.
SUMMIT VIEW FARM, Goshen, (914) 294-8191. Ulster County
DISTELL BROTHERS NURSERY, Ellenville, (914) 647-4359.
EAST MOUNTAIN TREE FARM, Napanoch, (914) 647-5548.
THE GREEN TREE FARM, Kingston, (914) 338-8353.
EDGAR W. MARSHALL, Accord, (914) 626-4059.
MOUNTAIN FRESH TREE FARM, Highland, (914) 795-2125.
QUICK'S TREE FARM, Accord, (914) 626-7321.
DANIEL SCHOONMAKER, Accord, (914) 626-5569.
STOVER'S CHRISTMAS TREE FARM, Stone Ridge, (914) 687-7512.
JOE TANTILLO, New Paltz, (914) 255-5587. Westchester County
JOHN J. BUNDSCHUH JR., Rye Brook, (914) 937-4314.
WILKENS FRUIT AND FIR FARM, Yorktown Heights, (914) 245-5111.
NEW JERSEY Hunterdon County
AL'S TREE FARM, Pittstown, (908) 782-4283.
BLACK OAK FARM, Asbury, (908) 537-4133
CAROM CHRISTMAS TREES, Ringoes, (908) 788-1679.
DEERFIELD TREE FARM, Stockton, (609) 397-3639.
HALL TREE FARM, Glen Gardner, (908) 537-2056.
HOLLY BOUGH PLANTATION, Whitehouse Station, (908) 534-9875.
JUGTOWN MOUNTAIN TREE FARM, Pattenburg, (908) 735-5593.
J. C. LEWIS, Holland Township, (908) 995-4721.
MERRY MORRIS TREE FARM, between Croton and Quakertown, (908) 806-8733.
PENWELL MOUNTAIN FARM, Port Murray, (908) 852-6372.
ROSEMONT TREE FARM, Rosemont, (609) 397-1809.
SCHROEDEL FAMILY TREE FARM, Flemington, (908) 782-6745.
SOLLNER'S CHRISTMAS TREE FARM, Flemington, (908) 782-8733. Mercer County
BEAR SWAMP CHRISTMAS TREE FARM, Trenton, (609) 587-1776. Middlesex County
ALLEN'S CHRISTMAS TREE FARM, Union Valley, (609) 395-7528.
BARCLAY'S TREE FARM, Cranbury, (609) 799-1855.
BRYANT NURSERY, Jamesburg, (201) 521-2718.
GRAVEL TOP FARM, Jamesburg, (908) 521-4922.
W. V. GRIFFIN NURSERIES, South Brunswick Township, (908) 257-2484.
W. V. GRIFFIN NURSERIES, Union Valley, (908) 257-2484.
LANTIER TREE FARM, Englishtown, (201) 673-0625. Monmouth County
ANNE ELLEN CHRISTMAS TREE FARM, Englishtown, (609) 397-0725 or (908) 349-2705.
HAZIENDA EVERGREEN PLANTATION, Holmdel, (908) 842-3309.
KERIS TREE FARM, Allentown, (609) 259-0720.
LINCROFT CHRISTMAS TREE FARM, Lincroft, (908) 741-2754
WATERS NURSERY, Englishtown, (908) 446-6138.
WOODFIELD CHRISTMAS TREE FARM, Colt's Neck, (908) 542-6692 or (908) 542-7672.
Morris County
DIXIEDALE FARM, Chatham, (201) 635-2097.
GREEN VILLAGE NURSERY, Green Village, (201) 984-8425.
PEPPERWOOD TREE FARM, Hackettstown, (201) 852-7971.
PLEASANT GROVE TREE FARM, Pleasant Grove, (201) 584-2862.
TROUT BROOK FARM, Chester, (908) 879-5935. Somerset County
OSTERMAN NURSERY, Neshanic Station, (908) 369-4600.
SHADOW HILL FARM, Skillman, (609) 466-3596.
ROLLING RIDGE FARM, Gladstone, (201) 234-0711.
WOLGAST TREE FARM, Somerset, (908) 873-3206.
CONNECTICUT Litchfield County
JAMES ALLEN, Bridgewater, (203) 354-6507.
ANGEVINE FARM, Warren, (203) 868-7226.
LAURA M. AUBURN, New Hartford, (203) 379-2483.
BOREAL FORESTS, Litchfield, (203) 567-3707.
BUSY ACRES TREE FARM, Woodbury, (203) 263-4786.
EDWARD BUTLER, Avon, (203) 673-3863.
THE CHRISTMAS TREE PLANTATION, Riverton, (203) 379-3125.
DUMAS TREE FARM, Harwinton, (203) 485-1193.
FLANDERS NATURE CENTER, Woodbury, (203) 263-3711.
GUSTAFSON'S CHURCHILL GARDENS, Woodbury, (203) 263-3516.
HENRY HART, Woodbury, (203) 263-2777.
HILLTOP ACRES TREE FARM, Woodbury, (203) 263-2027.
HOLIDAY FARM ORCHARDS AND CHRISTMAS TREES, New Hartford, (203) 482-4971.
HOMEGROWN FARMS, Barkhamsted, (203) 379-8741.
KA-MI IN THE VALLEY, Thomaston, (203) 283-9112.
KRUSKY CHRISTMAS TREE FARM, New Milford, (203) 354-5218.
CHARLES F. LEWIS, Woodbury, (203) 263-4230.
MAPLE HOLLOW FARM, New Hartford, (203) 489-8184.
MEADOWVIEW FARM, Litchfield, (203) 567-9243.
MILLER'S CHRISTMAS TREE FARM, Terryville, (203) 583-8829.
PAR 3 CHRISTMAS TREE, Bethlehem, (203) 266-7075.
ROGER PLOURDE, Woodbury, (203) 266-0330.
QUAIL RUN TREE FARM, Harwinton, (203)4 85-1280.
CARLTON C. TAYLOR, New Hartford, (203) 379-3701.
WILLIAM TOWILL, Plymouth, (203) 283-9436.
MR. AND MRS. ANTHONY TSIMONIS, Morris, (203) 567-0109.
WINDY RIDGE INC., Warren, (203) 868-2029. New Haven County
BERNARD BERES, Seymour, (203) 888-3671.
BISHOP'S ORCHARDS, Guilford, (203) 453-2338.
BROKEN ARROW NURSERY, Hamden, (203) 288-1026.
BURKELL TREE FARM, Wallingford, (203) 269-5459.
CHRISTMAS TREE HILL FARM, North Guilford, (203) 457-0200.
DRUMLIN HILL TREE FARM, Southbury, (203) 264-0299.
ED AND RUTH HARNEY, Southbury, (203) 264-2653.
HILLSIDE CHRISTMAS TREES, North Guilford, (203) 457-1032.
HUMPHREY TREE FARM, Guilford, (203) 457-0689.
JOSEPH'S TREE FARM, Hamden, (203) 248-8955. Fairfield County
GANIM'S TREE FARM, Easton, (203) 261-5600.
GORDON'S TREE FARM, Easton, (203) 261-8733.
JONES TREE FARM, Shelton, (203) 929-8425.
MAPLE ROW TREE FARM, Easton, (203) 261-9577.
MEDRIDGE TREE FARM, Sandy Hook, (203) 426-9178.
R. RECHT, Newtown, (203) 426-2701.
SMITH RICHARDSON TREE FARM, Westport, (203) 937-5643.
STAIB TREE FARM, Bethel, (203) 748-1610.
TASHUA FARMS, Trumbull, (203) 268-8967.
WAIDLEICH'S TREE FARM, Brookfield, (203) 775-9198.
ZINSER'S BROOKFIELD TREE FARM, Brookfield, (203) 775-4567.


Miss Cox Weds R. W. Gordon
Suzanne Ames Cox, the daughter of Archibald Cox Jr. of New York and Cornelia S. Claiborne of Huntington, L.I., was married yesterday in Shreveport, La., to Robert William Gordon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Gordon of Keithville, La.
The Rev.
William Stowell performed the ceremony at the Emmanuel Baptist Church.
Mrs.
Gordon, 25 years old, trains show horses in Wilton, Conn.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the First Boston Corporation in New York.
Her mother is the principal of Country Interiors, a design concern in Huntington.
Mr.
Gordon, 25, is a management trainee at the Home Depot Corporation, a home-improvement company in Fairfield, Conn.
His mother is a welder with the General Motors Corporation in Shreveport.
His father, who is retired, worked for A.T.&amp;T. in Shreveport.


Chileans Pay Dearly For Economic Growth
The only people in America who may not be ready for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to decide whether he will run for President are the political cartoonists and satirists.
In a world overstocked with Dan Quayle jokes, Mr.
Cuomo's should-I-or-shouldn't-I routine has provided fresh material for the monologues of Johnny Carson, Jay Leno and Mark Russell.
Political cartoonists from coast to coast have searched for the best visual vehicle to depict the baggy-eyed Governor in the throes of his indecision.


Insurers' Drive to Sell 'Bare Bones' Health Policy Falters for Lack of Interest
A major push by health insurers to provide affordable coverage for millions of uninsured workers is running into unexpected trouble: Employers are not buying.
And that is creating a big problem for insurers, who have furiously lobbied state legislatures and insurance commissioners to be allowed to sell these so-called bare-bones policies.


New Yorkers, etc.
Let's take it as a given that people appreciate gifts, and that they are aware that the thought is just as meaningful as the gifts themselves.
Still, for the unvarnished truth, tack on the word "theoretically." The fact is that no matter how lovely and sincere the thought is, for most of us, it's a tossup between disappointment and a real letdown to open a package and see something unwanted.
With the champion gift season rapidly approaching, some men and women are not only making lists but beginning to shop.
Generally speaking, such planners-ahead are the most caring of gift-givers.
They devour catalogues and keep an eagle eye out for what they think will be just the right gift, taking into consideration the likes, dislikes, hobbies and interests of the recipient.


Lori Senderoff to Marry Jason Ader
Dr. and Mrs.
Elliot Senderoff of Eastchester, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lori Anne Senderoff to Jason Nathaniel Ader, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Ader of Harrison, N.Y.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Senderoff, 23 years old, graduated cum laude from New York University.
Her father is an associate professor of surgery at the State University of New York Health Science Center in Brooklyn.


Drugs of Choice
To the Editor:
As former director of, and now a consultant to, university counseling programs, I would say the main consequence of the decreased marijuana consumption you report (front page, Oct. 29) has been increased alcohol consumption among middle-class youth and increased cocaine use among the disadvantaged young.
Both alcohol and cocaine are more dangerous than marijuana, and both lower the threshold for aggression in a way that is quite opposite the effect of marijuana.
In the meantime the consumption of prescribed psychiatric drugs whose long-term effects are often either deleterious or unknown continues to increase.
If the decrease in marijuana use is a "success" of the Reagan-Bush war on drugs, it is once again only a public relations success designed to draw attention away from the uncaring and inhumane policies of these administrations.
MICHAEL MOSKOWITZ  New York, Nov. 1, 1991
The writer is adjunct associate professor in the CUNY doctoral program in clinical psychology.


The Executive Computer; Plenty of Bells and Whistles on the Latest Portables
Battery-powered color displays and data entry from pens or styluses appear to be the next frontiers in portable computing, judging from the new models on display at the Comdex trade show in Las Vegas, Nev., last month.
While pen computing does not appear likely to capture a significant share of the portable market soon, primarily because of the lack of pen-based software, color displays are attractive for some specialized applications.
And they use existing software.
Epson America, AST Research, Dell Computer, Sharp Electronics and several other computers makers showed off new battery-powered, color laptops at Comdex, with prices ranging from $5,000 to more than $10,000.
The Sharp PC 6881 appears to be especially good, but it, like many other models, will not be ready until late spring because companies have had difficulty in getting reliable color screens.


Deserving Of Better
To the Editor:
I find it most distressing that the 150th birthday of Antonin Dvorak, Sept. 8, passed virtually unnoticed.
I cannot understand why this musical genius, who composed masterpieces in almost every form, has been so neglected.
He spent almost three years in this country (much of that time in Manhattan), wrote here, among other works, the "New World" Symphony (which had its world premiere at Carnegie Hall) and influenced a whole generation of American musicians.


Sunday Brunch; Meals Before the Matinee, Bountiful and Leisurely
A convenient and, to some extent, less crowded time to see a Broadway show is on Sundays, when matinees begin around 2 P.M.
Not only is there less traffic; many restaurants in the neighborhood serve copious, relatively inexpensive brunches.
Here are three good places for brunch.
La Cite
120 West 51st Street, (212) 956-7100 -- This grand multilevel setting has two main dining arenas and a cozier grill room, which serves similar fare at slightly lower prices.
The main rooms evoke all the festive garishness of grand European brasseries: Art Deco molding, immense cylindrical chandeliers, tall mirrors, red velvet banquettes and waiters in spiffy black jackets and long white aprons.


Tuskegee Announces Effort to Raise $150 Million
Tuskegee University, one of the nation's most prominent historically black colleges, is seeking $150 million in donations by the year 2000 in the largest fund-raising effort any black college has ever attempted.
Officials of Tuskegee, founded in Alabama a century ago by Booker T. Washington,, announced the campaign at a luncheon on Wednesday in New York.


Title-Match Request
The World Boxing Association on Friday asked GENARO HERNANDEZ of the United States and DANIEL LONDAS of France to fight for the world junior lightweight title after Thursday night's renouncement of the crown by JOEY GAMACHE.
The head of the W.B.A.'s world championship committee, ELIAS CORDOVA of Panama, said Gamache informed him in a letter that he couldn't make the 130-pound weight classification and asked to be reclassified as a lightweight.


Rid American Sports of Racial Stereotypes; Diversity's Pitfalls
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 28 front-page article about the debate at New York City's Hunter College on what to teach about diversity understates the opposition at faculty hearings to the proposed curriculum changes.


Colorado Escapes an Upset In Last :06 on a Fake Kick
Robbie James's 20-yard touchdown pass to Christian Fauria on a fake field goal with 6 seconds left gave Colorado a 16-12 victory over Oklahoma State and kept alive Buffaloes' hopes for a third consecutive trip to the Orange Bowl.
Colorado, 6-2-1 over all and 4-0-1 in the Big Eight Conference, turned the ball over six times but Oklahoma State (0-8-1, 0-4-1) wasted several first-half scoring chances.
Colorado is No. 8 in The New York Times's computer ranking.


For St. John's: Tricentennial and Repairs
IN a corner of Getty Square here, in the crowded downtown area that has its share of drug problems, homelessness and other ills, there is a quiet place that remains unruffled by the passage of time, despite centuries of sometimes turbulent changes that have taken place outside its gates.
In the churchyard of St.
John's Episcopal Church one recent morning, vendors brought fall fruits and vegetables to sell at a farmer's market.
Passers-by strolled through the open gates, some to buy homemade jams and jellies or perhaps a bag of fresh-picked apples, and others merely to savor a few moments away from the jostling of the crowds on the street.


POSTINGS: Brick and Granite; A New Home for the A.S.P.C.A.
Well accomplished in finding new homes for its charges, the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals will soon be getting a new home of its own.
The building at 424 East 92d Street is to serve as headquarters for the national and local operations of the A.S.P.C.A.
Besides offices, there will be an adoption center (with a circular viewing window on the ground floor) and the Henry Bergh Memorial Hospital (with a waiting room under the arched window on the second floor).
The six-story structure is clad in rose-red and iron-spotted brick and plum-colored granite.
An eight-foot sculptural plaque is to be installed tomorrow.
The architects are Silver &amp; Ziskind of Manhattan.


Observing the Annual Rite Of Good Food and Cheer
NEW YORK CITY puts on a mile-wide smile at this time of year.
Its routine workaday gait takes on an unaccustomed lilt as sightseers swarm along Fifth Avenue, Rockefeller Center and the commercial canyons of Herald Square.
For many, this holiday ritual is not complete without a well-deserved respite in a restaurant, perhaps a Marleyesque institution where happy ghosts of holidays past reside.
Festive New York dining spots in December are as plentiful as mistletoe.
At some places, like the Sea Grill at Rockefeller Center and the Rainbow Room, the setting alone buoys spirits.
At others, like Aquavit and La Grenouille, the seasonal fare and the good cheer of the staff do the job.


Making a Difference; Mr. Olsen Hangs On . . .
Kenneth H. Olsen, the 65-year-old president and founder of the Digital Equipment Corporation, is under the gun these days.
His company, the nation's second-largest computer maker after the International Business Machines Corporation, is struggling to regain a strong footing during difficult economic times.
Mr.
Olsen has faced a series of financial and organizational crises during Digital's 34-year history and each time he has pulled the company out, stronger than before.
But analysts say this time is different: he has never had to initiate massive layoffs and cutbacks as he is doing now.


CAMPUS LIFE: Vanderbilt; Trustees Allow Members to Pick Club Memberships
Vanderbilt University trustees approved a policy at their annual fall meeting last week allowing board members freedom of choice on affiliation with private clubs.
The decision followed months of study by a special trustee committee, which was created at the behest of the board's diversity committee.


Gissing Remembered
To the Editor:
George Packer's fine essay on George Gissing ("The Struggling Writer: Gissing Had It Right," Oct. 13) treats him as a forgotten novelist.
While it's true he is not nearly as widely known as Mr.
Packer shows he should be, he is well remembered in some quarters.
His 20-odd novels and some of his other books were all in print until recently, and the best ones are still on publishers' lists.


Prisoners Of a Soft Housing Market
"IT'S like I have a monkey on my back," said Sherry Reisch, an accountant whose two-bedroom co-op in Hackensack, N.J., has been on the market without a nibble for more than three years, most recently at half the price it cost.
"I can't move, I can't rent it and still cover my expenses, so I'm stuck," said Ms.
Reisch.
"I have to stay here until it sells."


The Treasury Opens Up Its Auctions
"Ruinous competition," said John D. Rockefeller, was the enemy of all his plans.
When the founder of the Standard Oil Trust spoke, however quietly and secretly, about the need to avoid "wasteful conditions," he was usually heeded.
Last week, on trading desks at many of the Treasury's 40 primary dealers, the same sort of warnings about the costs of competition could be heard above the din surrounding the most open auctions in memory.
Used to be, said one trader, "You would have frank discussions with other dealers" to learn their plans.
Now that the Salomon scandal has awakened the regulators, "It's hands off," he said.
Discussions are limited to saying "I have interest," or "I don't have interest."


Making a Difference; Downsizing for Dilenschneider
Just six weeks ago, he was in charge of an army of 1,800 public relations executives operating out of 66 offices in 25 countries.
But these days, Robert L. Dilenschneider is starting over.
Forced out in September as president and chief executive of Hill &amp; Knowlton Inc., Mr.
Dilenschneider has just opened the Dilenschneider Group.
His staff: one secretary who came with him from the old firm, where he had worked for almost 25 years.
His base: temporary quarters in his lawyer's office in Manhattan.
His agenda: to "provide personal service to a limited and select number of clients."


'An Anthology of the World'
LOS ANGELES
Capital of the Third World.
By David Rieff. 270 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $20.


Correction
An illustration on Oct. 20 with a brief review of Susan L. Roth's "Marco Polo: His Notebook" was wrongly attributed.
It was part of a print by Martin Schongauer, reproduced by courtesy of the National Gallery of Art.


P.L.O. IS REOPENING DAMASCUS OFFICES
Syria will allow the Palestine Liberation Organization to reopen its offices in Damascus, ending eight years of conflict with Syria, P.L.O. officials said today.
Analysts say the rapprochement will strengthen the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, against his hard-line opponents, who have condemned his agreement to Palestinian participation in peace talks with the Israelis.


Eternal China
To the Editor:
I find it hard to recognize Jia Pingwa's picaresque, earthy epic of peasant life, deep in the Yellow River heartland where China was born, in Lauren Belfer's review of his novel "Turbulence" (In Short: University Presses, Sept. 22).


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
WEST ISLIP 10, CENTRAL ISLIP 6 -- Patrick Wallace rushed 27 times for 141 yards and a touchdown yesterday to help West Islip (7-1) earn a victory in the semifinals of the Division II Suffolk County Conference playoffs.
Central Islip finished its season at 2-6.
BELLPORT 28, EAST ISLIP 6 -- In the other semifinal game in Suffolk County, Bellport (5-2) handed East Islip (7-1) its first loss.
Running back Okesa Smith of Bellport made the most of the 64 yards he gained on just 12 carries by scoring three touchdowns.
Smith's teammate Greg McGraw ran for 69 yards on 17 carries as a running back, and chalked up 12 unassisted tackles as a defensive back.
Bellport will play at West Islip on Saturday afternoon to determine the conference champion.


A Cornucopia of Missiles, Muck And Models for All Ages
THE revival of Silly Putty and Erector sets notwithstanding, it may be that the retro surge in toyland is aimed not so much at children as at their deeply nostalgic parents.
A recent perambulation through one of Manhattan's larger toy stores found the bigger folk noodling around with the more iconic items: train sets, archetypal, Steiff-like teddy bears, Bauhaus blocks.
The kids were doing  what kids are wont to do: fooling with the virtual reality of a not-so-distant future.
This landscape is scattered with stuff like the Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles Sewer Playset ("mutagenic ooze and action figures not included") and all things Nintendo (be aware: Super Nintendo, with 16 bytes as opposed to the 8 bytes of the original, will be appearing on many lists this year).


Concetto di Mauro, 61, A Retired Executive
Concetto di Mauro, a retired business executive, died on Wednesday at St.
Francis Hospital in Hartford.
He was 61 years old and lived in West Hartford and South Dartmouth, Mass.
He died of liver cancer, his family said.


Sun Valley Adds Snow-Making
Sun Valley, the Idaho ski resort, says it will operate the world's largest automated snow-making system when its 56th season begins on Thanksgiving Day.
The computerized system on Baldy Mountain will create a base of dry, light powder that will assure good snow conditions on about one-third of the resort's ski terrain.
This year, Sun Valley says, it has been installing a $5.5 million snow-making system manufactured by York Automatic Snow, of Englewood, Colo.
Last year the resort invested $2.6 million in snow-making.
Twenty-four runs on Baldy will come under the snow guns this winter, and more slopes will be opened earlier in the season.


Suburban Belfast: Is It a World Apart?
The road to Bangor curls northeast from the city's center, skirting the shipyards and the bleak neighborhoods beyond the River Lagan before it opens onto the green, suburban landscape of outer Belfast.
Here are the well-tended towns of Knocknagoney and Holywood and rural County Down, where "the troubles," the euphemism used to describe three decades of sectarian strife, are more often cursed because the odd bombing has tied up traffic along the Bangor road.


Deanne Mayrowetz To Wed in March
Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Mayrowetz of West Caldwell, N.J., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter Deanne Susan Mayrowetz and Steven Lloyd Sabin, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert Sabin of Short Hills, N.J.
Miss Mayrowetz, 26 years old, graduated from Simmons College.
She is a physical therapist at Morristown (N.J.) Memorial Hospital.
Mr.
Sabin, 25, graduated summa cum laude from Clark University, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
He is a medical student at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ONE GIANT LEAP  By Jeff Hostetler with Ed Fitzgerald. Putnam, $19.95.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Seeking Asian Herbs
Q.
I am a chef interested in gardening.
I have searched without success for several Southeast Asian herbs: lemon grass, curry leaf and kaffir lime (sometimes called Ichang lime).
Any information would be greatly appreciated. -- Douglas E. Nartker, Davenport, Iowa.
A.
Lemon grass (Cymbopogon cipratus), also known as citronella or camel grass, is an aromatic member of the grass family, Gramineae, from tropical Asia.
It is used in both Asian and South American cooking.
The curry leaf tree (Murraya koenigii), an evergreen, is a member of the rue family related to the orange.
It too is found in warm parts of Asia, and the leaves are used in curries.
Kaffir lime or kaffir limeleaf (Citris hystria) is used in Thai cooking and imparts a lime flavor.
These and other fascinating Asian herbs are not easily found outside a few shops in cities with large Asian communities.
But seeds of lemon grass plants and Chinese herbs and vegetables are available from the Oriental Seed Catalogue, Sunrise Enterprises, P.O.
Box 330058, West Hartford, Conn. 06133. (The catalogue is $2, refunded on first order).
Cyrus Hyde, a collector of rare herbs and an owner of Well-Sweep Herb Farm, a New Jersey mail-order supplier, said he has lemon grass plants in stock.
He said he expects to have curry leaf and kaffir limeleaf plants by spring.
The address is 317 Mount Bethel Road, Port Murray, N.J. 07865.
The catalogue is $2.
Christmas Cactus Care
Q.
My windowsill receives maybe two or three hours of sunlight daily.
Can I grow a Christmas cactus there, and how do I care for it? -- Jeremy Levinson, Riverdale, Bronx.
A.
Christmas cactuses (Schlumbergera truncata), now available in bloom at many florists and dime stores, are epiphytic, or tree-perching, members of the cactus family.
They have no prickly spines, and since they grow wild in the jungle, your two or three hours of windowsill sun should make them quite happy.
This group of succulents, also known as orchid or crab cactuses, usually bear their bright-colored winter blooms on leafless, flat, segmented stems that cascade gracefully over the sides of their pots.
If you avoid overwatering it, a Christmas cactus is easily grown indoors.
If you buy it in flower, keep it on the coolest windowsill you have so its blooms will last longer.
Keep the soil barely moist until it has finished flowering, which may be any time between Thanksgiving and New Year's.
Then reduce the frequency of watering and keep the plant on the dry side, just short of the point where the foliage begins to wither.
Late in spring, when its growing season begins, water more often and feed it every few weeks with a diluted solution of any fertilizer used for flowering house plants.
If possible, give your Christmas cactus a summer vacation outside in a shady spot.
The flower buds form as the days shorten and the nights grow cool, so it will be fine outdoors until just before the first frost.
Recent new hybrids include plants that bear flowers on upright stems, including one called Bridgeport, which has pure white blooms; Santa Cruz, with large peach-and-white flowers, and Windsor, whose large flowers are lavender and white.
Saving Soil
Q.
We grow many annuals outdoors in window boxes in large pots.
Can the soil be saved for next year? -- Rosa DeVita, West Orange, N.J.
A.
By all means save the soil.
You will have to increase its fertility and improve its friability before using it again, but you can do this in late winter or very early spring.
Stir in an additional one-third volume of equal parts of perlite, peat moss and either compost or cow manure.
Just before adding new plants, mix in a handful of any 5-10-5 granular fertilizer.
Address questions to Garden Q. &amp; A., The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Those of general interest will be published.
Unpublished questions cannot be answered individually.


Yankee Doodle Dandy


Ms. Dunning, Executive, Wed
Jennifer Dunning, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Franklin W. Dunning of Ithaca, N.Y., was married yesterday in Cambridge, Mass., to Philip Hamlin Clendenning, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Randall D. Clendenning of Guelph, Ontario.
The Rev.
Samuel B. Abbott performed the ceremony at St.
James's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Clendenning is a managing director of Boston International Advisers, an equity-investment management concern in Boston.
She graduated from Colgate University.
Her father is a vice president of Shepard Niles Inc., a heavy-equipment company in Montour Falls, N.Y.
Mr.
Clendenning is the president of Oriental Research Partners, a publishing concern in Newton, Mass.
He graduated from the University of Toronto, received a master's degree in international relations from Tufts University and has a doctorate in Russian history from Cambridge University.
His first marriage ended in divorce.
His father was the vice president of the Guelph Sporting Goods Company.


Publishers Go Undercover, So It's Harder to Judge a Book
PSSST.
There's this new book you've got to read.
Can't say anything now.
Just wait until it comes out.
Buy it, you'll see.
Increasingly, the way to sell a book these days is to keep it secret until the very last moment.
The strategy is for the publisher to entice the reader by revealing tidbits in carefully chosen forums like some literary dance of the seven veils.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL AROUND THE NATION
Worth Noting TEXAS TECH (4-5, 3-3) defeated ARKANSAS (5-4, 4-2), 38-21, at Lubbock, Tex.: It was the Red Raiders all the way from a first-quarter blocked punt, after which Robert Hall passed for a 9-yard touchdown to Rodney Blackshear to give Tech a 10-0 lead.
Arkansas did make a comeback to cut the score to 24-21 halfway through the third quarter, but Hall's 1-yard quarterback streak gave Tech an unbeatable advantage in the Southwest Conference game.
Tech had not beaten Arkansas in Lubbock since 1966.


Young Maxwell Expects To Make Profit on News
The new publisher of The Daily News has no plans to shut it down if it does not produce a profit by March, when labor contracts expire, he said last week.
But he has told officials at the paper that one of his father's principal motivations in acquiring it was to make money, and that he expects the paper's unions to contribute toward that goal in negotiations next spring.
Once he is confident that a profit will be reached, he said, he is prepared to make a significant investment in The News.


New Paris Train Speeds Trip To Orly Airport
A new train line, Orlyval, has made it easier to get to Orly Airport from the center of Paris.
The 4.7-mile track originates at the suburban Antony station on the B line of the R.E.R. suburban train, which includes stops in Paris.
Until now, travelers had to catch a bus from an outlying area or take a cab.
To get to the Orlyval train from Paris, travelers take the R.E.R.
B (in the direction of St.-Remy-les-Chevreuse) to Antony station, south of Paris, where the Orlyval train is across the platform.
The Orlyval then goes directly to the airport.
From the Chatelet stop in Paris, for example, the journey, including changing trains at Antony, takes 19 minutes and costs about $9.60, making it quicker and less costly than taking a cab.


Buried Treasures
THROUGHOUT HISTORY, THE TRUFFLE HAS been considered a delicacy, an elitist delight.
The Emperor Claudius, Napoleon and Henry IV were reputedly all avid truffle eaters.
Louis XIV is said to have eaten a pound of them a day.
Much of the mystery associated with truffles comes from the way they grow -- from 3 to 12 inches below the ground, primarily on or near the roots of oak, hazelnut and elm trees.
As for the truffle's reputation as an aphrodisiac, this is common among rare edibles, particularly roots and fungi that grow beneath the ground and have an unusual, musky scent -- although with truffles there is also some scientific data supporting the claim.
Several researchers now believe truffles produce the same type of sexual attractant that male animals produce.
Female animals, drawn to the scent, then disperse the truffle spores, thus helping the fungus to reproduce.


Corrections
An article last Sunday in the quarterly Education Life section, about innovators, misidentified the chancellor of Vanderbilt University.
He is Joe B. Wyatt.


Low-Strung


Vietnam Memorial Gathering Its Own Art Exhibit
In awarehouse 20 minutes outside of Washington, Duery Felton and Tony Porco, curators for the National Park Service, don white gloves to handle the estimated 25,000 items that have been left in memory of the dead at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial since the monument was dedicated on Nov. 13, 1982.
A popsicle stick, beer cans, a single, blue woman's pump or a pair of black lace panties seem unlikely objects for such care and cataloguing, but the curators are preparing a selection of them for national display one year from now, on the 10th anniversary of the monument, in an exhibit at the Smithsonian Museum of American History.


Valerie Ludlum, Lawyer, Is Wed
Valerie Anne Ludlum and Edward Harding Livingston, assistant district attorneys in the Westchester County District Attorney's Office in White Plains, were married yesterday at St.
Theresa's Roman Catholic Church in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert J. Dunn officiated.
Mrs.
Livingston, 28, graduated from Dickinson College and received a law degree from Pace University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter H. Ludlum of Ossining, N.Y.
Her father is a vice president of the Bank of New York in White Plains.


Review/Opera; Mozart's View of Women's Fickleness
This year's Mozart celebrations, for all their numbing repetition of the overfamiliar, will in the end have afforded lasting insights into the composer's development.
In particular, repeated exposure to the early operas, works of endless charm but intermittent genius, has been invaluable for the added light these fledgling ventures throw on the mature composer's achievement.
And now comes a consummate masterpiece, "Cosi Fan Tutte," which returned to the repertory of the Metropolitan Opera on Thursday evening in the production staged by Graziella Sciutti in 1984.


Answering The Mail
Q.
Rain is filling the sunken well around the outside of my basement window, and
water runs under the window on to the basement floor.
Also, there is a crack in the concrete basement wall under this window.
Would digging out the bottom of the window well and filling it with gravel help?
And is there a danger of the basement wall's collapsing?
A.
I doubt that there is any danger of the basement wall's collapsing, even if it does have a crack in it.
Digging out the bottom of the well to a depth of at least 12 inches and filling it with gravel will help if the soil drains well.
If not, you will also have to lay underground drain tile to carry the water at least 10 feet away from the bottom of the window well.
Otherwise, the crack in the wall may allow water to seep into the basement, even if it is not doing this now.
Sealing the edges of the window with foam or rubber weatherstripping also will help keep out the water.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
FAMILY CONCERT
The Fairfield Orchestra, under the direction of Thomas Crawford, and the actress Patricia Englund have joined forces for a family concert today at 4 P.M. in Christ Church, 254 East Putnam Avenue in Greenwich.


Sara S. Granley Wed in Virginia
Sara Sidbury Granley, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin C. Granley of Alexandria, Va., was married yesterday to Stephen Nelson Becker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen W. Becker of East Hampton, L.I.
The Rev.
Edna J. Banes officiated at the Old Presbyterian Meeting House in Alexandria.
Mrs.
Becker, 31 years old, is a systems analyst for American Management Systems in Arlington, Va.
She graduated from Meredith College and received a master's degree in management information systems from the University of Virginia.
Her father retired as a civil engineer with the Federal Highway Administration in Washington.


What Sort of TV Will Phones Bring Us?
To the Editor:
The news that the Federal Communications Commission has unanimously proposed rules to allow telephone companies to deliver television programs through fiber optics to homes deserves your Oct. 25 front-page placement and the Nov. 3 editorial "Baby Bells as Big Brother." If the rules are passed and then upheld by the courts, the public eventually will have hundreds of choices for entertainment and information.


POSTINGS: Co-op/Condo Forum; Advice for the Board
These days, board members responsible for the well-being of co-ops and condominiums are facing a daunting array of concerns.
Taxes and labor costs are rising.
Mortgages on many buildings converted in the 1980's must be refinanced.
Slower sales are reducing income from flip taxes.
And the need for repairs is unrelenting.
Yet help is on the way.


China Denies Hunger Strike
China today denounced as "a fabrication with ulterior motives" Western press reports that 10 political prisoners in northeastern China were planning a hunger strike to protest harsh treatment.


Rangers Pick Up First Tie And Don't Like It a Bit
For the Rangers, the first tie of the season was an unwelcome outcome, a blow to the morale disguised as a point in the standing.
The 3-3 result against the Toronto Maple Leafs on Friday night at Madison Square Garden could have been a 3-2 victory with a little more defensive care or a bit more power-play zest.
The Rangers clambered into sole possession of first place in the Patrick Division for the first time this season, but could have done it with far more grace.


Miss Lewallen Has Wedding
Kathryn Louise Lewallen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene E. Lewallen of Wilmington, N.C., was married there yesterday to Jeffrey Brett Aibel, the son of Ellen A. Bierman of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Benjamin G. Aibel of New York.
The Rev.
Robert Cook officiated at St.
James Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Aibel, 25 years old, graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and was until recently a pharmacist in Charlotte, N.C.
Her father owns Engineering Consultants in Wilmington.
Mr.
Aibel, 32, graduated from Lehigh University and received an M.B.A. from U.N.C.
He is a management consultant for Ernst &amp; Young in Atlanta.
His father is a vice president of Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, investment bankers in New York.


U.S. Goes Along With Sanctions On Yugoslavia
Hoping to pressure Yugoslavia's republics to stop their civil war, President Bush said today that the United States would join in the European Community's economic sanctions against that strife-torn nation and in the call for the United Nations to impose an oil embargo.
"We will apply sanctions on Yugoslavia comparable to those of the European Community," Mr.
Bush said at a news conference after four hours of talks here with the community's top two officials.
"The E.C. can also depend on the United States to co-sponsor a new United Nations Security Council resolution on Yugoslavia looking toward a possible oil embargo and cooperate fully in efforts to strengthen an embargo on arms exports to Yugoslavia."


They're Off! It's the Race To Find a Party Outfit
NOTHING brings out the frantic, fashion-obsessed kernel of one's being like last-minute shopping for a dressy affair.
No matter how many weeks you have had the engraved invitation, comes the day of the ball, suddenly you have nothing to wear.
Or you have only two shirt studs.
Or you realize, around lunchtime, that everybody attending this party was also at the last party, and they all have seen your beaded black dress.
Twice.


Ms. Richardson Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Richardson of Geelong, Victoria, Australia, have announced the engagement of their daughter Belinda Helen Richardson to John Lindsley Cort, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Cort of New York.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Richardson, 26 years old, graduated from Deakin University in Geelong.
Until recently, she was a manager at Rowland's Commerical Catering in Melbourne, Australia.
Her father, who is retired, owned H. F. Richardson &amp; Company, a real-estate brokerage in Geelong.


Men in Dance: Moving Beyond Muscularity
When Ted Shawn decided that he wanted to be a dancer, one of his fraternity brothers at the University of Denver exclaimed, "But, Ted,
men
don't dance." That was back when both the century and Shawn were young, a time when, if many respectable Americans even admitted the possibility of male dancers, they assumed that such men must be idlers or profligates. Or worse.And today, vestiges of such dark suspicions still linger.
Shawn, however, refused to be intimidated.
He did become a dancer, and in 1914 he married Ruth St.
Denis, one of the most charismatic figures in early modern dance.
The next year they founded their influential Denishawn school and performing company.
Until his death in 1972, Shawn involved himself with a multitude of choreographic projects but remained a leader in the crusade to make dancing an honorable career for men.


Giving the Bathroom A More-Elegant Look
REPLACING a shower curtain with a glass or plastic door is fairly easy and adds elegance to an otherwise ordinary-looking bathroom.
The sliding doors described here are designed to fit rectangular tubs or shower stalls set between two end walls.
Hinged doors for these and other styles of tubs and stalls are also available.
Shower-door kits generally consist of glass door panels, strips of metal or plastic channel that have to be cut and fastened to form a frame; hardware, sometimes including a special tool like drill bits, and towel bars or other accessories.


Miss Miller Is a Bride
Kimberley Joan Miller, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward Miller of Binghamton, N.Y., was married there yesterday to David Hartwell Morse, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hartwell P. Morse Jr. of Cazenovia, N.Y.
The Rev.
W.
Frisby Hendricks performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Morse, 25 years old, is a financial consultant at Andersen Consulting in New York.
She graduated from Lafayette College.
Her father is an oncologist in Binghamton.
Mr.
Morse, 30, is an assistant vice president in finance at G. E. Capital Corporation in Stamford, Conn.
He graduated from Hamilton College and received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.
His mother, Nancy G. Morse, is a broker with Farrell Realtors in Binghamton.
His father, who is retired, was the executive vice president of the Marine Midland Bank in Buffalo.


MOMMY OLDEST
Cunningham is missing an important point.
Like her, I am an adoptive mother.
But I am also a patient in an infertility clinic.
The reason that people keep using fertility technology is that they want to experience pregnancy.
Cunningham's remark that these billions of dollars would be better spent on curing disease is altruistic.
I, too, would like to see the world free of disease.
However, on a personal level, I want to be pregnant.
LAUREN ROTHBERG
Chappaqua, N.Y.


RECORD BRIEFS
Paul McCartney: 'Choba b CCCP The Russian Album'
Capitol 97615; CD and cassette.


An Institution Under Duress
It has been a tough few weeks for Congressional committees.
First, the Senate Judiciary Committee's hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas provided material for late-night comedians.
Then, two major, complicated bills -- energy in the Senate and banking in the House -- suffered embarrassing defeats on the floor.


Kendra Kaye Is Engaged
Drs.
Donald and Janet Kaye of Gladwyne, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Kendra Beth Kaye to Dr.
Jerry Marc Zuckerman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aaron Zuckerman of New Rochelle, N.Y.
A March wedding is planned.
Dr.
Kaye, 28 years old, is a fellow in rheumatology at Temple University Hospital in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Lehigh University and the Medical College of Pennsylvania, where her father is chairman of the department of medicine and her mother is an associate professor of psychiatry and medicine.
Her father is also the president and chief executive of Medical College Hospitals in Philadelphia.
Dr.
Zuckerman, 29, is a fellow at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received his M.D. from Cornell University.
His mother, Bernice Zuckerman, is a controller at Bayberry Nursing Home in New Rochelle, N.Y.
His father is a certified public accountant with his own firm in New Rochelle.


Castaway


INSIDE
Basic Insurance in Trouble
An effort by health insurers to provide affordable coverage for uninsured workers has run into trouble: employers are not buying.
Page 22.
Paying to Resettle Refugees
The U.N. official charged with caring for the world's refugees hopes to persuade wealthy Persian Gulf states to help pay resettlement costs.
Page 14. 6 Die in Bronx Crash
Six young people died after their car slammed into a tree in what the police called the worst car accident in New York City this year.
Page 50.
In S. Africa, 'Mayor Who?"
More confusion than curiosity awaits Mayor Dinkins in South Africa, where he heads tonight.
Page 42.
Yves Montand Dead at 70
Yves Montand, the French actor and singer renowned for political and other passions, died at age 70.
Page 52.


Name That Tune
When he wrote the "Enigma" Variations, Sir Edward Elgar hinted that "through and over the whole set, another and larger theme 'goes,' but is not played." Since the composition was first performed in 1899, audiences and scholars have tried to guess just what that hidden theme could be.
Last week it was revealed that Joseph Cooper, a British pianist, may have solved the riddle at a concert 30 years ago, keeping to himself his discovery that the "Enigma" theme bore a strong resemblance to one in Mozart's "Prague" Symphony.
"I had got the score with me, and was reading along with the music," he said, when he thought he heard echoes of Elgar.
"I wrote on the cover, right away, 'Enigma,' " he said.
Mr.
Cooper recently confided in Jerrold Northrop Moore, an expert on Elgar, who revealed the finding in The Sunday Telegraph in London.
Though the Mozart theme is in G-major and the Elgar in G-minor, and the rhythms are different, Mr.
Moore said, "It's a better idea than has been put forward by anybody else."


RECORD BRIEFS
Bach: Mass in B minor
Soloists; Chicago Symphony Chorus and Orchestra conducted by Sir Georg Solti.
London 430 353-2; CD.


This Week: After the Flood
If your lawn or trees were inundated by salt water during the unusually high tides just over a week ago, irrigate frequently to remove the salt.
Applying 50 pounds of gypsum per 1,000 square feet will also help leach out salt, said Maria Cinque, a turf specialist at the Cornell University Cooperative Extension.
Salt can kill grass and severely damage trees and woody plants.
Do not plant or seed until the salt has leached from the soil, Ms.
Cinque warns.
Have the soil tested.
Or plant a bit of ryegrass seed in a pot of soil from the affected area.
Then plant ryegrass seed in a second pot of soil that has not been exposed to salt.
Label them carefully, and water.
Then cover with a plastic bag and keep in a warm, sunny window.
If the seed in the salt-exposed soil grows, it is safe to reseed or resod.
Wait until spring to assess the damage to plants that have been exposed to salt, but meanwhile water them frequently to remove salt.


Italian Cafe Makes an Impressive Debut
THE parade of the pasta cafes continues.
If it seems as though every other Italian restaurant opening on Long Island is a pasta cafe, there is good reason.
These popular newcomers are perfectly matched to contemporary life styles.
They are informal, moderately priced and casual, yet often strikingly attractive.
Best of all, their food not only tastes great, but is also nutritionally sound.
The new Caffe Donatello in Plainview is not just another copycat cafe.
It is best of breed.
Although its open kitchen and high-ceilinged airy look is standard and familiar, there is exceptional warmth in its buttery-yellow and pale-peach walls.
An arresting mural of formal Italian gardens draws diners into the picture.
Overhead, faux skylights are actually recessed ceilings that are cleverly lighted and painted to resemble the sky, complete with swirling swallows.


Edberg Quits A.T.P. Finals
STEFAN EDBERG yesterday dropped out of next week's eight-player, $2.25-million Association of Tennis Professionals Finals in Frankfurt because of tendinitis in a knee.
A.T.P. officials said Edberg had been treating the knee for three weeks, but had been advised to take at least two weeks off because of continued swelling.
"I feel it's important to deal with the injury now so I can be ready to go in 1992," Edberg said.


Car Crashes in Bronx, Killing the Driver and Five Passengers
Five young people were crushed to death and a sixth was fatally injured yesterday when their sports car veered off a Bronx street notorious as a speed strip and slammed into a large tree.
The police said it was the worst vehicular accident of the year in the city.
Investigators said beer bottles were found in the car and quoted witnesses as saying the vehicle had been traveling at 80 to 85 miles per hour -- so fast that the roaring impact of the crash left the mangled wreckage embedded in the four-foot thick tree.


Caroline Perera Wed in Boston
Caroline Faith Perera, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence T. Perera of Boston, was married there yesterday to Kevin Arnold Barry, a son of Mrs.
Thomas B. Barry of Manhasset, L.I., and the late Mr.
Barry.
The Rev.
Spencer Morgan Rice performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Barry, 27 years old, graduated from Middlebury College.
She is the recruitment coordinator for the New York law firm of Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius.
Her father is a partner in the Boston law firm of Hemenway &amp; Barnes.
Mr.
Barry, 37, is a partner in the New York law firm of Goldwater &amp; Flynn and also is a priest at St.
George's Episcopal Church in New York.
He graduated from Hamilton College and received a law degree from Vanderbilt University and a divinity degree from Yale University.
His father was the president of Bernhardt Screw Machine Products in New York.


Beirut University Will Reopen
The administration of the American University of Beirut, undeterred by a terrorist attack that destroyed a main building on campus, told its 5,000 students today to report to their classes on Monday.
A statement by the public relations department said violence would never prevent the university from pursuing its educational mission in the service of Lebanon and the rest of the Middle East.


Verdict in Palermo Case
After deliberating for three hours, a Dallas jury convicted Army Pvt.
KEVIN BIVINS for the aggravated robbery that led to the shooting and partial paralysis of American League umpire STEVE PALERMO.
The 22-year-old soldier, stationed at Fort Hood in Killeen, Tex., faces up to 99 years in prison and could also be fined up to $10,000 when jurors meet to consider his sentence.


Rufus Z. Smith, Ex-Diplomat, 69
Rufus Z. Smith, a retired American diplomat, died Thursday at his home in Annandale, Va.
He was 69 years old and died of heart failure, his family said.
He was in the United States foreign service from 1946 to 1974, retiring as a deputy assistant Secretary of State.
He had postings to Canada, Panama, Thailand and the Netherlands and he served in Washington as the State Department's officer in charge of Burmese and Malaysian affairs and as director of Canadian affairs.
He was a founder of the Foreign Service Grievance Board for staff members' complaints and of the Association of Canadian Studies in the United States.


Hialeah Reopening Today After a Lapse of Two Years
Hialeah Park, once the showplace of horse racing, will reopen on Sunday after being closed for nearly two years during the continuing struggle among Florida's tracks for the choice racing dates in the winter tourist season.
The elegant old track, which was opened originally in 1925, will stage racing for 50 days until Jan. 7, when its rival, Gulfstream Park, begins its winter season.
The third track in the south Florida area, Calder, will open its spring and summer season after Gulfstream closes on March 15.


Marcy Tarnoff Plans to Marry
Jerome Tarnoff and Rica Feiden Tarnoff, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter Marcy Jane Tarnoff to Henry Klein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Klein of Cape Town.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Tarnoff, 28 years old, is a manager of marketing planning at the Cunard Line in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Berger Steingut Tarnoff &amp; Stern and the vice chairman of the New York County Democratic Committee.
Her mother is a broker at the New York real-estate concern of Alice F. Mason Ltd.


For Family of Peekskill Pilot Lost in Vietnam, the Final Chapter
AMONG thousands of names etched on the cold black-marble wall of the Vietnam War Memorial is that of Air Force Maj.
Robert Harry Irwin.
To find him, go to Panel 2-West, Line 107, near the center and close to the bottom of the wall.
Next to his name, where there had been a small cross, is a freshly chiseled diamond -- an inscription made by the National Park Service to indicate that the F-4 Phantom fighter pilot and Peekskill native was killed in Vietnam.


CORRECTION
A listing in the Residential Resales column last Sunday misstated the address for a co-op sale.
It was at 156 East 79th Street, not 165 East 79th.


Art Galleries in Hospital Aim at 'Communication'
ON entering Memorial Hospital of Burlington County, one immediately sees that attention is paid not only to patients but also to the art world.
A prominent lobby display of paintings and large steel sculptures attests to a program that brings patients, visitors and the hospital staff face to face with art every day.
The lobby is one of four professionally run exhibition areas within the 402-bed hospital.
Known collectively as the Pavilion Galleries, these also include a self-contained space where invitational and juried shows feature works by artists from New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania; a corridor where sculpture is displayed and an alcove for small solo shows.


Robert Wei Wed to Susan Wetchler
Susan Cathy Wetchler, the director of sales and marketing at the Hotel Wales, and Robert Chung Wei, a vice president of Morgan Guaranty Trust, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Union League Club.
The Rev.
Robert D. Williams of the Marble Collegiate Church officiated.
The bride, 34 years old, graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in hotel administration from Cornell University.
She is the daughter of Barbara Dunne Wetchler of New York and the late Dr.
Bernard Bruce Wetchler, a surgeon.
Mr.
Wei, 45, graduated from Yale University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
He is a son of Waling Wei of New York and the late Tseh Heen Wei, a foreign exchange broker.
The bridegroom is a grandson of the late Mun Yew Chung, China's Ambassador to the United States.


Votes in Congress; Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
C.I.A.
Nominee : Vote to confirm Robert M. Gates to head the Central Intelligence Agency.
Approved 64 to 31, Nov. 5.
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
N
Lieberman (D)
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
N
Lautenberg (D)
N
New York
D'Amato (R)
Y
Moynihan (D)
N
House
1.
Banking Reform: Vote on passage of a bill to overhaul the nation's banking laws that would have made it more difficult than the Bush Administration wanted for banks to expand into the securities and insurance businesses.
Rejected 324 to 89, Nov. 4.
2.
Abortion Counseling: Vote on passageof a 1992 fiscal year Department of Health and Human Services spending bill including a provision that would block the Bush Administration from enforcing a ban on abortion counseling at federally funded family planning clinics.
Approved 272 to 156, Nov. 6.
3.
Civil Rights: Vote on passage of a compromise civil rights bill that makes it easier to sue in job discrimination cases.
Approved 381 to 38, Nov. 7.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Y
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D)
N
Y
Y
3. DeLauro (D)
Y
Y
Y
4. Shays (R)
N
Y
Y
5. Franks (R)
N
Y
Y
6. Johnson (R)
N
Y
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
N
Y
Y
2. Hughes (D)
N
Y
Y
3. Pallone (D)
N
Y
Y
4. Smith (R)
N
N
Y
5. Roukema (R)
Y
Y
Y
6. Dwyer (D)
A
Y
Y
7. Rinaldo (R)
N
N
Y
8. Roe (D)
N
N
Y
9. Torricelli (D)
N
Y
Y
10. Payne (D)
N
Y
Y
11. Gallo (R)
N
Y
Y
12. Zimmer (R)
N
Y
Y
13. Saxton (R)
N
N
Y
14. Guarini (D)
N
Y
Y
New York
1. H'brueckner(D)
Y
Y
Y
2. Downey (D)
Y
Y
Y
3. Mrazek (D)
A
Y
Y
4. Lent (R)
N
N
Y
5. McGrath (R)
N
N
Y
6. Flake (D)
N
Y
Y
7. Ackerman (D)
N
Y
Y
8. Scheuer (D)
Y
Y
Y
9. Manton (D)
Y
N
Y
10. Schumer (D)
Y
Y
Y
11. Towns (D)
Y
Y
Y
12. Owens (D)
N
Y
Y
13. Solarz (D)
Y
Y
Y
14. Molinari (R)
N
Y
Y
15. Green (R)
A
A
Y
16. Rangel (D)
N
Y
Y
17. Weiss (D)
Y
Y
A
18. Serrano (D)
N
Y
Y
19. Engel (D)
N
Y
Y
20. Lowey (D)
Y
Y
Y
21. Fish (R)
N
Y
Y
22. Gilman (R)
N
Y
Y
23. McNulty (D)
N
Y
Y
24. Solomon (R)
N
N
Y
25. Boehlert (R)
N
Y
Y
26. Martin (R)
N
Y
Y
27. Walsh (R)
Y
N
Y
28. McHugh (D)
N
Y
Y
29. Horton (R)
N
Y
Y
30. Slaughter (D)
N
Y
Y
31. Paxon (R)
N
N
Y
32. LaFalce (D)
N
N
Y
33. Nowak (D)
N
N
Y
34. Houghton (R)
N
Y
Y
KEY = Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


MIDWEST INSTITUTE TO ASSIST ADDICTS
A drug-treatment institute that started in a Midwestern farmhouse is opening a center in a handsome redbrick Manhattan residence that state and city officials hope will become a model for similar programs in the New York region.
Situated on a tree-lined stretch of East 17th Street overlooking Stuyvesant Square, the center, known as the Fellowship Club, will be operated by the Hazelden Institute of Minnesota as a halfway house.
It will treat 50 to 60 men and women, from 18 to 65 years of age, who already have completed detoxification and primary treatment for drug addiction or alcoholism elsewhere.
Typically, they will stay four months and will be expected to work during that time, since an early return to employment is a crucial part of the Hazelden treatment.


All Wrapped Up In the Wrapping
To the Editor:
Another way of formulating the contemporary cultural situation in this country so eloquently explained by Neal Gabler: as the packaging increasingly becomes more important than what it contains, content takes on the quality of the wrapping, loses its significance and atrophies.
ERNEST H. SANDERS  New York


New Solutions for New Refugees
The emerging "new world order" offers great promise.
But it also threatens new waves of human dislocation, giving fresh urgency to old questions.
Who is a refugee?
How should nations and international organizations like the United Nations respond to their plight?
Under international law, a refugee is someone with a well-founded fear of persecution at home.
The number of refugees seeking asylum or already resettled is now 17.5 million, up from 12 million just three years ago.
Many of those who do flee their homeland, however, are victims of crushing poverty, not political oppression.
Under law, they are not entitled to asylum.


It's Goodbye, Yonkers And Hello, O'Rourke
FROM Neil J. DeLuca's perspective, becoming deputy county executive for Westchester County could promise tranquillity after four tumultuous years managing Yonkers, the state's fourth largest city and among its most politically and financially troubled.
For County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, Mr.
DeLuca's arrival on Nov. 18 as his second-in-command could bring needed toughness and experience to guide the county budget through the legislative negotiations that begin when the figures are released on Friday.


Commercial Property: 40 Wall Street; Citicorp Aborts $50 Million Financing of Renovation
THE property, 40 Wall Street, has a long history.
The developer, Burton P. Resnick, has a long track record.
But Citicorp has cut short a $50 million renovation of that lower Manhattan skyscraper, apparently concerned that the main tenant will depart and it will be tough to find a replacement.
Citicorp's decision last month to stop financing work in progress on such a high-profile property -- marketing brochures and even a brokers' party were being planned at the time -- will most likely throw into deeper doubt the prospects for downtown's older office buildings, which have been plagued by vacancy rates of 25 percent and higher.


Need More Humor or Horror? Add Music -- Very Carefully.
During the filming of "Lifeboat" (1944), Alfred Hitchcock rejected the use of background music.
The characters, after all, were stranded in the middle of the ocean on a small boat; where would the music come from?
"Ask Mr. Hitchcock to explain where the cameras come from," snapped an insulted film composer, "and I'll tell him where the music comes from."


FILM
Here is a sampling of arts and entertainment events in New York City during the holiday season, compiled by New York Times critics, writers and contributors.
Dates and times are subject to change.
November
"CAPE FEAR." Martin Scorsese can make anything he touches his own, from the Mafia ("Goodfellas") to the Bible ("The Last Temptation of Christ").
No doubt he can do the same with this remake of the 1962 film noir.
Robert De Niro is the brutal ex-convict who terrorizes a lawyer (Nick Nolte) and his wife (Jessica Lange).
Opens Wednesday.
"MEETING VENUS." She can act, but can she lip-sync?
Glenn Close plays a Swedish opera diva with Kiri Te Kanawa's dubbed-in voice in this romantic comedy about a tyrannical conductor trying to pull off a major Paris production.
Directed by the Hungarian director Istvan Szabo ("Mephisto"), with Niels Arestrup as the conductor.
An international goulash, with music.
Opens Friday.
"PROSPERO'S BOOKS." Peter Greenaway's visually extravagant, eccentric version of Shakespeare's "Tempest," with John Gielgud as Prospero guiding us through the books he has taken to his island exile.
Both praised and excoriated for "The Cook, the Thief, His Wife and Her Lover," Mr.
Greenaway returns to the lyrical meditations about art that informed his "Draughtsman's Contract." Opens Friday.
"FOR THE BOYS." Personal traumas, historical battles and music as Bette Midler and James Caan play long-lived U.S.O. performers from World War II through Vietnam.
A pet project of Ms.
Midler's, directed by Mark Rydell, who also directed her best film, "The Rose." Opens Nov. 20.
"THE ADDAMS FAMILY." Charles Addams's lovable ghoulish family, born as cartoons and famous from the television series, is hilariously cast, with Anjelica Huston as Morticia and Raul Julia as Gomez.
The first film directed by the cinematographer Barry Sonnenfeld ("Miller's Crossing").
Opens Nov. 22.
"AN AMERICAN TAIL: FIEVEL GOES WEST." In this sequel to Don Bluth's animated mouse-tale, the Russian immigrant Fievel Mousekewitz fulfills every child's fantasy by becoming becomes a gunslinging lawman in the Wild West.
Voices by Amy Irving, James Stewart, Dom DeLuise and John Cleese.
"Presented by" Steven Spielberg; directed by Phil Nibbelink and Simon Wells.
Opens Nov. 22.
"BEAUTY AND THE BEAST." She is a beauty named Belle.
He is a prince turned into a beast.
They waltz to happily-ever-after life in Disney's new animated version of the classic fairy tale.
Music by Howard Ashman and Alan Menken, the "Little Mermaid" people.
Opens Nov. 22.
"MY GIRL." The new Macaulay Culkin movie, although he only plays the heroine's best friend.
Anna Chlumsky is an 11-year-old tomboy, jealous when her father (Dan Aykroyd), a widowed mortician, falls for his cosmetologist (Jamie Lee Curtis).
The film has already become controversial for its hard-to-take ending.
Opens Nov. 27.
December
"LET HIM HAVE IT." The first-rate English director Peter Medak ("The Ruling Class" "The Krays") is back with this fact-based story about Derek Bentley, a mentally handicapped teen-ager who was hanged for a 1952 robbery and murder.
Opens Dec. 6.
"HOOK." The biggest, most anticipated movie of the year is Steven Spielberg's dream-cast update of "Peter Pan." Robin Williams is the grown-up Peter who must rescue his children from the still-villainous Hook (Dustin Hoffman), with help from the spritely Tinkerbell (Julia Roberts).
Opens Dec. 11.
"STAR TREK VI: THE UNDISCOVERED COUNTRY." After "Star Trek V," this should be called "Star Trek VI: How Dare They?" But it's the 25th anniversary of "Star Trek," so the old standbys -- William Shatner, Leonard Nimoy and the rest of the Enterprise crew -- take on the Klingons for a final adventure, or so they say.
The promising sign is that it was directed by Nicholas Meyer ("Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan").
Opens Dec. 13.
"THE PRINCE OF TIDES." Barbra Streisand directs and stars in this version of Pat Conroy's best-selling novel.
She is a New York psychiatrist; Nick Nolte is a Southern man whose suicidal sister is Ms.
Streisand's patient.
Opens Dec. 18.
"BUGSY." Warren Beatty as the man who built Vegas and Annette Bening as the glamour girl he loves.
Barry Levinson directs.
Opens Dec. 20.
"FATHER OF THE BRIDE." A sure sign of regressive times: the remake of a a big-wedding movie.
This updated version of the classic with Spencer Tracy and Elizabeth Taylor stars Steve Martin as the dad who worries about losing his little girl and Diane Keaton as the good mom.
From Charles Shyer and Nancy Meyers, who made "Baby Boom," the least realistic having-it-all film in recent memory.
Opens Dec. 20.
"J. F. K." Oliver Stone's already controversial film takes on the Kennedy assassination and the possibility of a conspiracy.
Kevin Costner plays Jim Garrison, the New Orleans district attorney who tried to prove a conspiracy, with Gary Oldman as Lee Harvey Oswald.
Opens Dec. 20.
"AT PLAY IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD." Missionaries and mercenaries threaten a village along the Amazon River in this version of Peter Matthiessen's newly topical, politically correct 1965 novel.
Hector Babenco ("Kiss of the Spider Woman") directs Aidan Quinn and Kathy Bates.
Opens Dec. 22.
"CITY OF JOY." Patrick Swayze doesn't dance or turn up as a ghost, but he does turn noble, playing a doctor in the poorest section of Calcutta in this film directed by Roland Joffe ("The Killing Fields").
Opens Dec. 25.
"GRAND CANYON." Lawrence Kasdan of "Big Chill" fame turns his serio-comic ensemble approach to Los Angeles in the 90's.
Danny Glover, Kevin Kline, Steve Martin, Alfre Woodard and Mary McDonnell, among others, discover that the city is a killer but it's a wonderful life.
Opens Dec. 25.
"THE INNER CIRCLE." Andrei Konchalovsky ("Runaway Train") shot this in Moscow -- within Kremlin walls and K.G.B. headquarters, he says.
Bob Hoskins plays a K.G.B. agent who seduces the wife of Stalin's personal projectionist.
Tom Hulce and Lolita Davidovich star, with a cast of Soviet actors.
Why is this opening on Christmas Day?
Opens Dec. 25.
"MADAME BOVARY." Claude Chabrol's faithful version of Flaubert's novel, starring Isabelle Huppert as the hopelessly romantic housewife.
Visually, these bourgeois are more hauts than petits, but the film was widely praised in France, where they take Emma seriously.
Opens Dec. 25.
"RUSH." The superb Jennifer Jason Leigh ("Last Exit to Brooklyn") plays an addicted undercover narcotics agent in a drama of crime, cocaine and love with Jason Patric.
Based on Kim Wozencraft's autobiographical novel, this is the first film directed by Lili Fini Zanuck, who co-produced "Driving Miss Daisy." Opens Dec. 25.
"FRIED GREEN TOMATOES." Kathy Bates visits Jessica Tandy in a nursing home and hears her story about female friendship in a town in the old South.
In flashbacks to the 1920's, Ms.
Tandy turns into Mary Stuart Masterson.
From Fanny Flagg's affecting comic novel, "Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistle-Stop Cafe." Opens Dec. 27.
"THE LAST BOY SCOUT." A buddy-movie mystery, with Bruce Willis as a detective whose client is murdered and Damon Wayans as the dead woman's boyfriend, an ex-football player.
They team up to solve the murder and make the world safe for professional football.
Action by the director Tony Scott ("Top Gun").
Words by Shane Black ("Lethal Weapon"), who was paid $1.75 million for the script.
Opens in December.
"THE MAMBO KINGS." Based on Oscar Hijuelos's rich, Pulitzer Prize-winning novel.
Armand Assante and Antonio Banderas are Cuban brothers who move to New York City in the 1950's and briefly find success with a musical group called the Mambo Kings.
They idolize Desi Arnaz, played here by Desi Arnaz Jr.
Great possibilities, but can the first-time director Arne Glimcher, an art dealer turned film producer, pull this off?
Opens in December.
"HIGH HEELS." Pedro Almodovar's women are always on the verge of some sort of nervous breakdown.
Here a daughter marries her mother's former lover.
He turns up dead, and the women share the mother-daughter experience of being murder suspects.
Opens in December.
"MAP OF THE HUMAN HEART." Anne Parillaud ("La Femme Nikita"), Patrick Bergin, John Cusack and Jeanne Moreau star in a complicated love story spanning 30 years, two continents and you don't want to know how many coincidences.
An Eskimo loves a half-Cree woman, who falls for him and a white map-maker.
Directed by the New Zealander Vincent Ward, whose exquisite time-traveling film, "The Navigator," suggests he can maneuver through this.
Opens in late December or early January.


LAW ON THE FEMINIST FRONTIER
If Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas had read Fred Strebeigh's informative article about Catharine MacKinnon, he would have been able to repudiate Anita Hill's testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee in a much more decisive manner than his emotional and largely inconclusive defense.
He could have referred to the landmark 1986 Supreme Court decision that defined hostile environment, sexual harassment and quid pro quo as being discriminatory.
He would have known that, even if these charges had been brought against him in a timely fashion in the early 1980's, they were not interpreted at that time by the courts of this land as illegal sexual harassment.
Surely, he should not be expected to answer these charges from a 1990's-informed perspective.
On the contrary, he demonstrated his misunderstanding of this by stating that if Hill's allegations were true, she would have been able to bring a case against him at the time of their occurrence.
This, from a Yale Law School graduate who claims he has never discussed Roe v.
Wade?
I am less concerned about what Justice Thomas may or may not have said 10 years ago than about his apparent lack of interest in some of the most compelling legal issues of today.
TEDD SMITH
Mount Vernon, N.Y.


Knicks' Half-Price Offer
The Knicks will offer half-price tickets to active military personnel and fans over 60 years old, the team said yesterday.
"We are pleased to give something back to the military and senior Knicks fans, people who have given so much to this country," Dave Checketts, the team president, said in a statement.
Tickets are limited and will be sold one to a customer on the day of the game only at the Madison Square Garden box office after 6 P.M.
The purchaser must


Get the Judges Back Into the Act
To the Editor:
In "Reorganizing the Bankruptcy Code" (Forum, Oct. 27), Jeffrey Chanin pointed out the high cost of going bankrupt.
Fees, the major component of cost, are related to the length of the reorganization proceedings.
In the bankruptcy system, a large debtor corporation pays the fees of nearly all the professionals on all sides of the case monthly.
There is no incentive to bring a Chapter 11 case to a speedy conclusion.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
Thinking Like a Mountain
Scott Russell Sanders, while tracing the history and uses of limestone, reflects on the peculiar solace a contemplation of stone offers.
This is from "In Limestone Country" (Beacon, paper).


Has Poetry for Kids Become A Child's Garden of Rubbish?
Ours is an age without poetry, and this is not news.
But our children have inherited a poetry of their own, as they so often inherit the castoffs of the adult world.
Like tapioca pudding and cream of tomato soup -- the stuff most adults will not touch -- a kind of poetry is alive, if not exactly flourishing, at the children's table.
The trouble with most poetry intended for children is that it is so bad.
There's evidence that, by and large, it always was.
In 1923, Viscountess Grey of Fallodon wrote in her introduction to "A Child's Book of Lyrics," "If I could buy up all the Christmas annuals and school periodicals and magazines that provide verse written specifically for children and burn these things publicly in the market-place, I would do it with both hands. . . . Popular carelessness allows rubbish to be given to children for no better reason than that children are young."


Old Boys and Good Ol' Boys Don't Mix
To the Editor:
According to your report that Yale University's Skull and Bones club has voted to accept women into its ranks (news article, Oct. 26), the secret society "can no longer rightly be considered just a 'good old boy,' network." You make the common mistake of splicing "good ol' boy" onto "old boy."


Sookan Grows Up
YEAR OF IMPOSSIBLE GOODBYES
By Sook Nyul Choi. 171 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $13.95. (Ages 10 and up)


Hard Truths, Wet Noses
FIGMENT, YOUR DOG, SPEAKING
By Laura Hawkins. 155 pp. Boston:  Houghton Mifflin Company. $13.95. (Ages 8 to 10)
STRIDER
By Beverly Cleary.
Illustrated by Paul O. Zelinsky.  179 pp.
New York:  Morrow Junior Books. $13.95. (Ages 8 and up)


It's Not Too Late to Plant Some Bulbs
THE usual deadline for planting bulbs has passed.
Supposedly all bulbs should be in the ground by Election Day.
But this fall has been mild.
Many vegetables, like tomatoes and squash, and annuals like vincas and impatiens, seemed to last forever.
Lawns were still being mowed.
This sort of weather provided a sense of ennui that the planting chores could be delayed for another day or two.
And so the bulbs sat unplanted in the toolshed, garage or garden center's bins.
But as any gardener knows, winter is on its way.
Bulbs are better in the ground now, even at this late date, than left in the garage or toolshed, where they will eventually freeze or rot, or both.
Even if the blanket of leaves has to be pushed aside for the planting efforts, it is better that it be done, and done quickly.
Remember the basic bulb-planting rule: well-drained soil and a level base for the bulbs, so water does not sit under them.


Welcome To 1992; A Survival Guide For Elected Officials (Results May Vary)
Yes, Mr. or Ms. Elected Official, the voters really are angry out there.
This is not the time to run on your savvy, your years of influence or your ability to work the "corridors of power," as Dick Thornburgh, the former Attorney General, put it in his hapless campaign for Senate in Pennsylvania.
The voters are frustrated with the corridors of power, tired of the status quo.


Conversations With Lions
MATISSE, PICASSO, MIRO AS I KNEW THEM
By Rosamond Bernier.
Foreword by John Russell.
Illustrated. 278 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $50.


Going a Step Beyond
To the Editor:
"Reorganizing the Bankruptcy Code" is a crowd pleaser.
But what are the consequences of Mr.
Chanin's populist approach?


Anderson Just Wants To Be Anderson
Kenny Anderson just wants to get going on the fast break for the Nets.
Grab an outlet pass from Sam Bowie, pump those spindly legs upcourt as if he were a jet taking off, look this way, look that way and then feather a snazzy pass to Derrick Coleman for a dunk that will have the fans shaking, rattling and rolling.
Let those placid fans try to ignore that, Anderson will mutter as he glides downcourt.
Very soon, Anderson hopes to have the staid Meadowlands Arena filled with fun.
Attracting fans to watch a chronic loser in East Rutherford, New Jersey, is an unenviable chore, but Anderson may be the one to do it.
The point guard is flashy and his era as the Nets' point guard begins tonight when they play host to the Detroit Pistons.


World Markets; Hedging Away the Dollar Risks
The sudden swoon of the dollar, which has fallen 4 percent against the German mark in the last two weeks, indicates how difficult it can be to manage currency exposure in big international stock portfolios.
Quick shifts in the dollar can knock a good strategy askew.
But this year's strong dollar rally -- the American currency was up 25 percent before the recent slide -- shows that investors in overseas stocks are almost compelled to hedge their risk, and at the same time they may even add value to their portfolios.


Technology; Antitrust Actions on the Rise Again
A decade after the Justice Department dropped its long-running lawsuit against the International Business Machines Corporation, the computer industry is seeing a resurgence of Government antitrust investigations and private antitrust lawsuits.
The new antitrust actions are aimed not at I.B.M., whose power has waned, but at a group of younger companies and coalitions that have risen in prominence through their control of industry standards.


World Cup Squash Called Off Again
The World Cup squash championships, scheduled for Dec. 4-9, have been postponed for a second time.
The International Squash Players' Association, in consultation with the United Arab Emirates Squash Racquets Association, said the tournament was rescheduled to Feb. 11-16.


Perspectives: South Bronx Houses; Higher Density Goal Spurs New Designs
EVERYBODY talks about density, but builders in the South Bronx are beginning to do something about it.
The results on the ground will emerge next year.
One place to examine them will be in the Melrose section, where the Procida Construction Corporation plans to break ground in March for a development called Melrose Court.
The site is near the Hub, the central business district at East 149th Street and Third Avenue.


Anguilla Group Of Small Hotels
Sixteen small hotels, guesthouses and housekeeping apartments on the Caribbean island of Anguilla have formed an association called the Inns of Anguilla, enabling vacationers to make reservations at any one of them with a single call.
Some of the properties are on beaches, others inland, and several have housekeeping units.
Daily rates for the coming winter season range from $55 for a double room to $195 for a three-bedroom apartment.
Among members of the group is La Palma, which has a studio at $65 and a double room at $55 at Sandy Ground, the 16-mile-long island's harbor community.
The Ferryboat Inn, which has nine units and a restaurant at Blowing Point, charges $125; Milly's Inn near Shoal Bay has four units at $150.
The Inns of Anguilla can arrange car rentals, dive trips and yacht sails and charters.
More information from the association: (516) 261-1234 or (800) 553-4939.


A La Carte: The Year Of Chefs From Abroad
MANY Manhattan chefs made the move to Long Island last year.
This year might well be remembered as the year in which the chefs of Europe began their trek to Nassau and Suffolk Counties.
A few of the Manhattanites who put down roots on Long Island had achieved wide recognition before making the move.
Now Europeans with impressive credentials are arriving.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Manalapan
GROWTH is a touchy issue in the 31.2-square-mile Township of Manalapan.
Between the 1980 and 1990 censuses, its population soared by 41.2 percent and developers recently sued the town successfully for the right to build 3,400 high-density housing units in the sparsely populated southern section, which will almost double the township's current 4,000 housing units.
"The recession has held them up," said Mayor Lorraine Kulick, "but when these projects come in, they will change the whole township. When I moved in 27 years ago, the old-time residents didn't like the new developments. Now, even two-year residents say, 'Stop development.' "


Chicago Journal; In Political World, Lines Are Made to Be Redrawn
Nobody ever said politics was tidy or fair in the best of worlds, and least of all in Chicago.
That is a lesson that people like Burton Natarus, a longtime alderman here, are learning the hard way in these days of redistricting fever.
For the past 20 years, Mr.
Natarus has represented what could be regarded as the choicest single sliver of Chicago -- the Gold Coast, the Magnificent Mile, Water Tower, Tiffany's, the galleries and penthouses that make up the Chicago of tourism brochures and executives on the fast track.
It is known as the 42d Ward.


'A Gentle Young Man Who Would Be 16 Forever'
FOR THE COLOR OF HIS SKIN
The Murder of Yusuf Hawkins and the Trial of Bensonhurst.
By John DeSantis.
Illustrated. 240 pp.
New York: Pharos Books. $18.95


Erotomania: A Rare Disorder Runs Riot -- in Men's Minds
Justice Clarence Thomas has taken his seat on the Supreme Court and Prof.
Anita Hill has gone back to teaching law in Norman, Okla., but their epic confrontation echoes on, with all sorts of arcane-sounding psychological concepts finding their way into common parlance.
Consider, for example, erotomania, a rare mental disorder in which people -- mostly women, the experts say -- suffer from the delusion that they are having an affair with someone above their station.
Clarence Thomas's defenders on the Judiciary Committee hypothesized such romantic delusions -- "The Story of Anita H." -- to discredit Professor Hill's charges of sexual harassment against her former boss.
Yet Justice Thomas's detractors couldn't help wondering if another psychological disorder was in fact at work, erotomonomania, a male delusion that attractive young women are harboring erotic fantasies about them.
Some who watched John Doggett Jr. testify about his Svengali effect on women have also called it Doggett's Disease.


Balance in Booth
To the Sports Editor:
Tim McCarver and Jim Kaat ("So How About McCarver and Kaat?" The Times, Oct. 25) as the play-by-play team for the World Series?
I am as impressed as anyone by McCarver's analytical talents.
Still, you need to balance his ever-pressing prescience with the more relaxed, calming voice of a Jack Buck (or a Ralph Kiner).


They Couldn't See the Forest
LAST STAND
Logging, Journalism, and the Case for Humility.
By Richard Manning. 179 pp.
Salt Lake City: Peregrine Smith Books/ Gibbs Smith. $19.95.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 13 about crossing the Atlantic on the Queen Elizabeth 2 misstated the availability of standby passage.
Passengers sailing standby may do so in either direction and fly in either direction.
They are not limited to sailing from the United States to England and flying back.


Some Shortcuts for Birds Chinese Style
ONE of the most attractive sights on a dinner table is a perfectly roasted bird with a crisp, bronzed skin.
The experts at cooking birds that turn out this way, of course, are the Chinese.
Pay a visit to Chinatown and you will see rows of glistening lacquered ducks hanging in shop windows, the perfect dish to serve on a day when you don't feel like cooking.
You can buy them ready to eat for as little as $10 each and take them home, along with a supply of pancakes, scallions, cucumbers and hoisin sauce, to eat in the Peking style.
Making a Peking duck the traditional way is a complicated process that will tempt few cooks to try at home.
Air is pumped under the skin through an opening at the neck so that it puffs up like a balloon (you can do this yourself by blowing through your mouth).
The ducks, which have their heads on, are hung on a hook, scalded with boiling water, coated with a syrupy mixture made with sugar and honey, before being left to dry in a cool, drafty place for several hours.
Then their cavities are filled with water and the birds are hung in an oven to roast.


Jack Katzen, 70, Dies; Ex-Pentagon Official
Jack Katzen, a former Pentagon official and defense industry executive, died on Oct. 28 while vacationing on Lan Tau Island in Hong Kong.
He was 70 years old and lived in Greenwich, Conn.
Mr. Katzen's death was apparently caused by a heart attack, a doctor at the scene said.


Susan Griesmer Wed
Susan Valian Griesmer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel I. Griesmer of Milton, Mass., was married yesterday to Douglas Marshall Pease, a son of Penelope C. Pease of Kensington, Conn., and the late Marshall A. Pease.
The Rev.
Dr.
Donald A. MacLeod officiated at the Newton (Mass.) Presbyterian Church.
A graduate of Hope College, Mrs.
Pease, 33 years old, is the leasing manager of the Boston Wharf Company, a commercial real-estate concern.
Mr.
Pease, 37, graduated from the University of Vermont.


A Cornucopia of Missiles, Muck And Models for All Ages
THE revival of Silly Putty and Erector sets notwithstanding, it may be that the retro surge in toyland is aimed not so much at children as at their deeply nostalgic parents.
A recent perambulation through one of Manhattan's larger toy stores found the bigger folk noodling around with the more iconic items: train sets, archetypal, Steiff-like teddy bears, Bauhaus blocks.
The kids were doing  what kids are wont to do: fooling with the virtual reality of a not-so-distant future.
This landscape is scattered with stuff like the Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles Sewer Playset ("mutagenic ooze and action figures not included") and all things Nintendo (be aware: Super Nintendo, with 16 bytes as opposed to the 8 bytes of the original, will be appearing on many lists this year).


N.F.L.'s AIDS Policy? There Isn't One, Yet
For football, a contact sport that often results in cuts and scrapes, the issues surrounding AIDS have taken on larger importance since Magic Johnson said he was retiring from the Lakers because he had been infected with the virus that causes the disease.
The National Football League must now determine whether it will routinely test players for the human immunodeficiency virus, and must decide what it will do if players test positive.
In a statement he issued Friday, Commissioner Paul Tagliabue said that a "persuasive case for mandatory leaguewide testing" had not been presented to him or the league's medical adviser, Dr.
Lawrence Brown.
At this point, the league would rather leave the thorny medical and ethical questions of AIDS testing up to the individual clubs.


Hush Money
Over the years, lawsuits have been filed on behalf of homeless people by various social organizations, but Richard R. Kreimer, whose home is the streets of Morristown, N.J., has shown that he has all the wherewithal he needs to advocate himself.
This year he was the focus of a ruling by New Jersey's Attorney General that homeless people need not have an address to be eligible to vote.
He also won a suit overturning the local library's rules barring homeless people who offended other patrons with their body odors or their stares.
But the litigious Mr.
Kreimer's crowning victory came last week when Morristown agreed to pay him $150,000 to drop a harassment suit against the police and to otherwise leave the municipality alone.
"I'm going to get my life in order," said Mr.
Kreimer, who grew up in a local middle-class family and is vague about how he ended up on the streets.
The president of the town council, which hopes it has heard the last of Mr.
Kreimer, called him "a self-created homeless man," who did not deserve "one red cent."


Refuge


MARGUERITE DURAS
The uproar that followed the publication of Marguerite Duras's article about Christine Villemin, a woman who was accused of murdering her child, had little to do with Duras's supposed concern for social injustice ("The Life and Loves of Marguerite Duras" by Leslie Garis, Oct. 20).
When Duras's article appeared in Liberation, Christine Villemin had been indicted but not tried and convicted of murdering her son.
It was Duras who assumed her guilt, and wove about this assumption a rambling meditation on the dark beauty of such a terrible act.
As she put it, in a much-parodied phrase,
"Sublime, for
cement sublime, Christine V."
By calling her sublime, Duras implied that Christine V. was a working-class Medea, subject to subterranean psychological forces and somehow admirable.
After a flood of letters, Serge July, the editor of Liberation, apologized in print for having published an article that, quite simply, dispensed with any presumption of innocence.
As an American living in Paris at the time, I found Duras's article to be a particularly chilling example of how many European intellectuals who profess concern for the working classes regard them from an Olympian height.
In her literary musings on Christine Villemin, Duras showed no more concern for her subject's feelings or rights than a scientist might for those of a laboratory rat.
JIM CHEVALLIER
New York, N.Y.
ILS&gt;Photo: Marguerite Duras (Photograph by Julio Donoso/Sygma for The New York Times)


Perils of America as Seen in a Chinese Novel
Wang Qiming, a violinist from Beijing, grew up thinking of America as a paradise.
Then he arrived in New York and had his luggage stolen at the airport.
That was only the beginning of his troubles: he lost a small fortune gambling and his daughter became a drug addict before she was kidnapped and murdered.
Mr.
Wang is a fictional character, but his creator, Cao Guilin, is a Chinese emigrant who lives in Queens and says the character is based on his own experiences.


BASEBALL'S ANGRY MAN
I wish Bill White, president of the National League, well in his efforts "to put some fun" back into baseball ("Baseball's Angry Man" by Claire Smith, Oct. 13).
His objective seems modest and reasonable, but I suspect that at this juncture White may realize that the task is an impossible one.
Fun is something players have when they play a game.
Baseball, as it has evolved, is a business -- run by businessmen, promoted by businessmen and now executed on the field by businessmen.
All are understandably concerned with making a profit and, sadly, preoccupied with their own agendas.


49ers Have Got Bono, So Will Beating Go On?
The week was spent trying to separate the unseemly past from the uncertain future, but also trying to adjust to life with another new quarterback.
Still, as the days drew closer to another game, the San Francisco 49ers still hadn't sorted out their troubles.
Joe Montana was lost long ago to elbow surgery.
Steve Young is gone, too -- at least for this weekend -- because of an injury to his left knee.
Now, it is Steve Bono's team, and at the most important of times.


Sukey Timpson Wed in Washington
Annadel Timpson, the daughter of James Timpson of Fairfield, Conn., and Annadel B. Timpson of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to James Edward McGolrick 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
McGolrick Jr. of Manassas, Va.
The Rev.
Joseph Jenkins performed the ceremony at St.
Ann's Catholic Church in Washington.
Mrs.
McGolrick, 29 years old, is known as Sukey.
She graduated from the University of Virginia and is a vendor services coordinator at the Associates Relocation Management Company in Washington.
Her father is a retired vice president of Soros Associates, a consulting engineering concern in New York.
Mr.
McGolrick, who is 32 and is known as Edward, graduated from St.
Andrew's College and is a banquet manager at the Ritz Carlton Hotel in Arlington, Va.
His father is a lawyer in Manassas.


Cynthia Nelson Is Married to Jonathan Chazen
Cynthia Kate Nelson, the national sales manager of the Longman Publishing Group in White Plains, was married last evening to Jonathan A. Chazen, a producer for Tape Film Industries in New York.
Rabbi A. B. Goldman officiated at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
A graduate of Hofstra University, Mrs.
Chazen, 28 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Nelson of Norwalk, Conn.
Mr.
Chazen, 34, graduated from Grinell College.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Chazen of Hackensack, N.J.


Anne Sweeney Wed to Kevin Smith
Anne Elizabeth Sweeney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Sweeney of Oakdale, L.I., was married yesterday in Cape May, N.J., to Kevin Eugene Smith, the son of Margery Smith of Falls Church, Va., and the late W. Eugene Smith.
The Rev.
Donald Clifford performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady Star of the Sea Church.
Mrs.
Sweeney-Smith, 33 years old, is a freelance book editor and publishing consultant in Brooklyn.
She graduated cum laude from Villanova University.
Her father, who is retired, was the manager of manufacturing and engineering at the Tenneco Chemicals plant in Flemington, N.J.


Another Storm Threatens the Philippines


Mother Teresa's Pick
Telling them to "love each other" and that she would pray for them, the Nobel Peace Prize winner MOTHER TERESA met with members of the South African cricket team in Calcutta on the eve of a match against India that will end their isolation from international sport.
When asked whether she supported India or South Africa in today's first one-day match, Mother Teresa said, "Oh, both. I will have to pray more." (AP)


Virgin Islander Has Shot at 5 Olympics
With health and even a hint of ability, Seba Johnson of the United States Virgin Islands has a chance to do something not even Sonja Henie, the legendary figure skater of Norway, could achieve.
The youngest skier in the 1988 Calgary Olympics, at 14 years of age, Johnson is well positioned to compete in five Winter Olympics, one more than Henie and two other women who share the record for the winter games.


Praiseworthy Blockbuster
To the Editor:
For heaven's sake!
Can't Michael Kimmelman ever enjoy an exhibition at the National Gallery of Art in Washington without carping?
He nit-picks a brilliantly conceived and masterfully executed exhibition  [ " 'Circa 1492': An Enormous, Magnificent Muddle," Oct. 20 ] .


Florida Court Restricts Open-Records Law
The Florida Supreme Court has ruled that the state's open-records law, one of the most liberal in the nation, does not apply to the courts, the Legislature, the governor or the governor's Cabinet officers.
The court decided unanimously Thursday that the law did not apply to parts of the government created by the State Constitution.
Only agencies set up through statutes passed by the Legislature must comply, it said.


Alice M. Tarafa Wed
Alice Martin Tarafa, the daughter of Jacqueline A. Martin of Key Biscayne, Fla., and the late Henry B. Martin, was married yesterday in Port Jefferson, L.I., to Stephen Michael Takach, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Oliver Takach of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
Roy Lloyd, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at Danfords Inn.
Mrs.
Takach attended Stratford College in Danville, Va.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.
Mr.
Takach graduated from St.
John's University.
He is a home builder in Quogue, L.I.


Joan Schlager Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
S.
Lawrence Schlager of Chestnut Hill, Mass., and Palm Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Joan Ellen Schlager, to Mark Robert Weinsten, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Weinsten of Harrison, N.Y., and Delray Beach, Fla.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Schlager graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Bulfinch Companies, a real-estate investment and development company in Boston.
Mr.
Weinsten graduated from Carnegie Mellon University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
He is a management consultant in the New York office of Grant Thornton, a Chicago accounting and consulting firm.
His father retired as chairman and chief executive of MJM Management Company, a uniform manufacturer in New York.


TOURS
Here is a sampling of tours by bus, van, helicopter and foot that are scheduled during the holiday season in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
DEAD HORSE BAY, Floyd Bennett Field, Exit 11S off the Belt Parkway, Flatbush Avenue, Flatlands, Brooklyn.
A walking tour led by National Park Service rangers will explore the natural and historic elements of this area on the western edge of Floyd Bennett Field. 10 A.M.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718) 338-7441.
EAST VILLAGE WALKING TOUR, Manhattan.
A tour of St.
Mark's-in-the-Bowery, an 18th-century church; the Yiddish Theater, and Tompkins Square Park.
Led by Joyce Gold, professor of Manhattan history at New York University.
Meets at noon at the church, 10th Street and Second Avenue.
Fee: $10.
Information: (212) 242-5762.
LOWER EAST SIDE, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the historic neighborhood, sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.
"AUTUMN IN THE VALE," Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Participants will spend the afternoon raking, weeding and planting bulbs in the Vale of Cashmere, a landscaped area with several ponds and raspberry bushes.
Take a chisel and gloves.
Meets at the Stranahan Statue at the Grand Army Plaza entrance to Prospect Park.
Sponsored by Friends of the Parks. 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Also Nov. 17, same time.
Free.
Information: (718) 622-2647.
CEMETERY TOURS, Green-Wood Cemetery, Brooklyn.
The 478-acre cemetery will be explored in three different tours focusing on different sections of the cemetery.
Among the sights is the 1861 Gothic main gatehouse, a New York City historic landmark. 1 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Meets at the Fort Hamilton Parkway entrance, off McDonald Avenue in Kensington.
Tours on Nov. 17 and 24, focusing on other areas of the cemetery, meet at 1 P.M. at 25th Street and Fifth Avenue in Sunset Park.
Information: (718) 469-5277.
"HISTORIC NEW YORK," a tour from City Hall to the Battery, Manhattan.
Sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 1 P.M. on the east side of Broadway at Murray Street.
Also on Dec. 1.
Fee: $12.
Information and reservations: (212) 989-2456.
"ALL OF THE GALL," Kissena Park, Flushing, Queens.
A search for galls, tumorlike growths on twigs, stems and leaves that are created by insects for shelter.
Sponsored by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Kissena Park Nature Center, Rose Avenue and Parsons Boulevard.
Free.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
"ANIMAL HOUSE," Crotona Park, Crotona Park East, the Bronx.
A search to discover the homes of Crotona Park's resident animals, including snakes, frogs, rabbits and mice.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the Crotona Park Nature Center, Charlotte Street and Crotona Park East.
Free.
Information: (212) 589-0096.
"WEB OF LIFE," Van Cortlandt Park, Riverdale, the Bronx.
A walk along the John Kieran Nature Trail to observe plant and animal life.
Sponsored by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Van Cortlandt Visitors' Center, reached from the park entrance at 242d Street and Broadway.
Free.
Information: (212) 548-7070.
"NATURE'S SKYSCRAPERS," Fort Greene Park, Fort Greene, Brooklyn.
A stroll to learn about beeches, oaks, maples and other trees and discuss their uses throughout history.
Sponsored by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Fort Greene Visitors Center.
Free.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
"FIELD TO FOREST," Inwood Hill Park, Manhattan.
A walk to trace the evolution of a forest.
Sponsored by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information and meeting place: (212) 427-4040.
"PEDDLER'S PACK," lower Manhattan.
A guided walking tour of the turn-of-the-century Lower East Side, led by a costumed actor.
Sponsored by the Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street.
Meets at the museum at noon.
Also on Nov. 24 at noon.
Fee: $12 ($10 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 431-0233.
Tuesday
FINANCIAL DISTRICT, lower Manhattan.
An architectural walk through the Wall Street area.
Sponsored by Urban Explorations. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Meeting place and reservations: (718) 721-5254  Wednesday
"HISTORIC SKYSCRAPERS," Manhattan.
A walking tour of skycrapers and landmarks in lower Manhattan, led by Alfred Pommer, a professional tour guide.
Sponsored by the New York Cultural Walking Tour.
Meet at 1:30 P.M. at City Hall Park.
Also on Nov. 20 and 27.
Fee: $14.
Information: (212) 979-2388.
Nov. 16
ASTORIA, QUEENS.
A walking tour of the neighborhood, which has the largest Greek population outside Athens, sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 1 P.M.
Fee: $5 plus subway fare.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.
"NOSHING IN LOWER MANHATTAN." A food-tasting and shopping tour by mini-van of a wide variety of ethnic cuisines on the Lower East Side, led by Louis Singer, a local historian and tour operator. 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Fee: $25.
Information: (718) 875-9084.
"TOUR THE TIP OF QUEENS," Fort Tilden, Rockaway Beach, Queens.
A walking tour of the westernmost point of the Rockaway Peninsula, which provides a critical habitat for a variety of wildlife, with a view of the Atlantic Ocean, Jamaica Bay and acres of rolling dunes.
Sponsored by the National Park Service. 10 A.M.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718) 474-4600.
WEST VILLAGE, Manhattan.
A walking tour of Greenwich Village along the Hudson.
Sponsored by Citywalks.
Meet at 1 P.M. at the northwest corner of Seventh Avenue and Christopher Street.
Fee: $12.
Information and reservations: (212) 989-2456.
LANDMARKS OF GREENWICH VILLAGE, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the area's historic sites, led by Alfred Pommer, a professional tour guide.
Sponsored by New York City Cultural Walking Tour.
Meets at 1:30 P.M. at Astor Place, between Lafayette Street and Fourth Avenue and East Eighth Street.
Also on Nov. 23 and 30, same time.
Fee: $14.
Information: (212) 979-2388.
FALL FOLIAGE, Inwood Hill Park, Manhattan.
A walk through the park, past many varieties of trees.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
"ARCHES AND BRIDGES," Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
A tour of the 19th-century bridges and arches designed by Calvert Vaux.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information and meeting place: (718) 287-3400.
Nov. 17
"CITY WALK ON THE WEST SIDE," Manhattan.
A walk that focuses on the history of the West Side; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Meets at 10 A.M. at Central Park West entrance of the Paramount Building at Columbus Circle.
Fee: $15.
Information: (212) 986-1430.
WEST VILLAGE, Manhattan.
An architectural walk past pre-Civil War buildings.
Led by Andrew Decker, an urban historian.
Sponsored by the Municipal Art Society. 2 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Meeting place and reservations: (212) 935-3960.
ELLIS ISLAND, walking tour led by Joyce Gold, a professor of Manhattan history at New York University.
Meets at 9:30 A.M. at the flagpole in Peter Minuit Plaza opposite the Staten Island ferry terminal, Manhattan.
Fee: $18, including entry to Ellis Island.
Reservations necessary.
Information: (212) 242-5762.
"JEWISH WILLIAMSBURG," Brooklyn.
A visit to the synagogues and other institutions of the Satmars, a Hasidic sect, led by David Edelstein, an urban-affairs specialist.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 11 A.M.
Fee: $25.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
"WRITERS' UPPER WEST SIDE," Manhattan.
Works by Edgar Allan Poe, Saul Bellow, Anais Nin, Dorothy Parker, Elizabeth Hardwick, Herman Wouk and others will be read on the streets where they lived.
Led by Marvin Gelfand; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100 or (212) 415-5420.
CITY ISLAND AND ORCHARD BEACH, Pelham Bay, the Bronx.
A seven-mile walk, sponsored by Shorewalkers.
Meets at 10 A.M. at the Pelham Bay Park terminal on the IRT subway line in the Bronx.
Fee: $3.
Information: (212) 663-2167.
CHINATOWN, lower Manhattan.
A walk focusing on the history and architecture of the area.
Sponsored by Urban Explorations.
Noon.
Fee: $15.
Meeting place and reservations: (718) 721-5254.
LOWER EAST SIDE, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the area that was the first home in America for thousands of new immigrants.
Sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Chatham Square, at the corner of East Broadway and Oliver Street.
Fee: $12.
Information and reservations: (212) 989-2456.
"SIWANOY WONDERS," Pelham Bay Park, northeast Bronx.
A nature hike along the Siwanoy Trail and through the Pell Sanctuary.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the Split Rock/Pelham Golf House, Shore Road.
Free.
Information: (212) 589-0096.
"WATERFOWL WATCH," Marine Park, Avenue U between East 33d and Burnett Streets, Brooklyn.
Participants may observe the many varieties of ducks that live in the park, including buffleheads, small North American ducks; mergansers, diving ducks with a long, slender, toothed beak and a crested head, and pintails, which have long necks and pointed tails.
Sturdy shoes and binoculars are recommended.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 9 A.M. at Marine Park parking lot.
Free.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
CENTRAL PARK SKYLINE, Manhattan.
A walk along Fifth Avenue that focuses on the museums that border the park.
Sponsored by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at Fifth Avenue and 79th Street, on the park side.
Free.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
"UPTOWN, DOWNTOWN," Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
A slide show on the history of the tenement, followed by a bus tour of "model" tenements in a Manhattan development known as the York Avenue Estate, created by the City and Suburban Homes Company on the Upper East Side.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the Lower East Side Tenement Museum. (Also Nov. 24, same time.) Fee: $20, including bus fare.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
Nov. 21
MANHATTAN ATRIUMS.
A walk focusing on the landscape and architecture of some of the borough's atriums, including those at the I.B.M. building and Park Avenue Plaza.
Sponsored by Urban Explorations. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Meeting place and reservations: (718) 721-5254.
Nov. 23
CHINATOWN AND LITTLE ITALY, Manhattan.
Sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Mott Street and the Bowery.
Fee: $12.
Information: (212) 989-2456.
"SEARCH FOR THE GREAT HORNED OWL," Pelham Bay Park, northeast Bronx.
An afternoon search for the elusive horned owl.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 3 P.M. at the Environmental Center, section 2, Orchard Beach.
Free.
Information: (212) 589-0096.
"A REVOLUTIONARY TOUR," Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
A bus tour tracing the paths of the Colonial and British armies in the Battle of Long Island; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Noon.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
SOHO GALLERIES, Manhattan.
A tour of private and co-operative galleries.
Sponsored by Urban Explorations. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Meeting place and reservations: (212) 721-5254.
Nov. 24
GRAMERCY PARK, Manhattan.
A walking tour of one of New York's most noted residential communities; sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.
PARK AVENUE, Manhattan.
A walking tour from 42d to 57th Street, with a stop at Grand Central Terminal; sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Park Avenue and 42d Street, southeast corner.
Fee: $12.
Information: (212) 989-2456.
"SHORE FOOTIN' IT," Inwood Hill Park, Manhattan.
A hike along the Hudson River shoreline.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the west end of Dyckman Street, at the Hudson River and Henry Hudson Parkway.
Free.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
"LAND OF THE LENAPE," Miller Field, Administration Building, New Dorp, S.I.
A guided walking tour with a National Park Service Ranger through the Swamp White Oak Forest, once home to Lenape Indians, and a discussion of how the Indians used natural resources to survive.
Sponsored by the Gateway National Recreation Area.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Miller Field Adminstration Building.
Free.
Information: (718) 351-8700.
QUAKER CEMETERY, Prospect Park, Prospect Park Southwest and 16th Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
A tour through the historic Friends Cemetery, which dates from the mid-19th century, with a discussion of the Society of Friends and the importance of its presence in America; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
Nov. 26
MIDTOWN MANHATTAN ART DECO.
A walk past Art Deco sights including the General Electric Building, the Chrysler Building and the Daily News Building.
Sponsored by Urban Explorations. 10 A.M.
Fee: $15.
Meeting place and reservations: (718) 721-5254.
Nov. 30
GREENWICH VILLAGE, Manhattan.
Walking tour of Washington Square Park, the Salmagundi Mansion, St.
Luke's Church, New York University and town houses; sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 1 P.M. on the southeast corner of Fifth Avenue and Eighth Street.
Fee: $12.
Information: (212) 989-2456.
"WALK OFF THE TURKEY," Manhattan.
A 13-mile tour along the Hudson River from South Ferry to the Little Red Lighthouse under the George Washington Bridge; sponsored by Shorewalkers.
Meets at 9:30 A.M. in front of the Staten Island Ferry Terminal.
Fee: $5.
Information: (212) 663-2167.
"THE BIG SLEEP," Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Urban Park Rangers will discuss how animals adapt to cold weather in various habitats.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Boathouse, reached from the park entrance at Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue.
Free.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
"ESSENTIAL ELEMENT," Oakland Lake, Bayside, Queens.
A walking tour to study and discuss the organisms living in the lake.
Sponsored by the Urban Parks Rangers.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Cloverdale Boulevard and 46th Avenue.
Free.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
HAWK WATCH, Inwood Hill Park, Manhattan.
Walkers will scan the skies for red-tailed and Cooper's hawks.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Binoculars are recommended.
Meets at 10 A.M. at the western end of Dyckman Street, at the Hudson River and Henry Hudson Parkway.
Free.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
Dec. 1
GRAMERCY PARK TOUR, Manhattan.
A walking tour through the historic landmark district of Gramercy Park, led by Joyce Gold, a professor of history at New York University.
Meets at noon on the northwest corner of Lexington Avenue and 21st Street.
Fee: $10.
Information: (212) 242-5762.
"ROBERT MOSES' NEW YORK," Queens.
A bus tour through Queens, focusing on the projects of Robert Moses, including parks, parkways and bridges, and how they shaped present-day New York.
Sponsored by the Urban Parks Rangers.
Free.
Meeting place and information: (718) 699-4204.
"THE EDGE OF EXTINCTION," Van Cortlandt Park, Riverdale, the Bronx.
A walk to learn about endangered native plants and animals.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Van Cortlandt Visitors Center, reached from the park entrance at 242d Street and Broadway.
Free.
Information: (212) 548-7070.
"HAWK MIGRATION, BEAUTIFUL BUTEOS," Central Park, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the park to catch the end of the hawk migration, which is expected to include the buteo, a variety of hawk.
Binoculars are recommended.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 10 A.M. at 79th Street and Central Park West, on the park side.
Free.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
Dec. 7
BROOKLYN CIRCULAR WALK.
A strenuous 14-mile walk from Prospect Park in Park Slope to Coney Island and back; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Meets at 9 A.M. under the arch at Grand Army Plaza, Prospect Park.
Take a lunch.
Fee: $15.
Information: (212) 986-1430.
MIDTOWN WEST SIDE, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the revitalized area formerly known as Hell's Kitchen and now known as Clinton; sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.
QUEENS NATURE WALK, Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge, Cross Bay Boulevard, Rockaway, Queens.
A search for winter wildlife through pine and holly groves, around a freshwater pond and along the shoreline of Jamaica Bay. 1 P.M.
Take binoculars.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718) 338-3829.
"UP WITH TREES," Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
A walking tour to explore the park's trees.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the Prospect Park Boathouse, reached from the park entrance at Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue.
Free.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
Dec. 8
LEFFERTS HOMESTEAD WINTER FESTIVAL, Prospect Park, Flatbush Avenue at Empire Boulevard, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
A multi-cultural celebration with African-American doll-making, Dutch pancake-making, candle-making, American Indian dances, storytelling and an appearance by St.
Nicholas. 1 to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 965-6505.
"ROCKY ROAD TO BROOKLYN," Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Glaciers, kettle ponds and outwash plains are discussed on this geological walk through various Brooklyn neighborhoods.
Sights include Prospect Park, Bay Ridge, Brooklyn Heights and Flatlands.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at Litchfield Mansion, Prospect Park West and Fifth Street.
Free.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
CHELSEA TOUR, Manhattan.
A walking tour, with stops at the General Theological Seminary (formerly the site of the Grand Opera House), the Chelsea Hotel and the current national headquarters of the Communist Party.
Led by Joyce Gold, a history professor at New York University.
Meets at noon at the General Theological Seminary, Ninth Avenue at 21st Street.
Fee: $10.
Information: (212) 242-5762.
"CONE ZONE," Kissena Park, Flushing, Queens.
A walking tour to explore a miniature coniferous forest.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at Kissena Park Nature Center, Rose Avenue and Parsons Boulevard.
Free.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
"RIVERDALE RAMBLING," Riverdale Park, Riverdale, the Bronx.
A walk through the woodlands of Riverdale Park, including a view of the Hudson River and the Palisades.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the Henry Hudson Parkway and West 233d Street.
Free.
Information: (212) 430-1832.
"SIGN LANGUAGE," Central Park, Manhattan.
A walk to find the habitats of the animals who live in Central Park.
Sponsored by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at 100th Street and Central Park West, on the park side.
Free.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
Dec. 11
CANDLELIGHT TOURS, Abigail Adams Smith Museum, 421 East 61st Street.
Manhattan.
Museum tours featuring holiday decorations from past eras, including the Colonial and Victorian periods.
From 6 to 8 P.M.
Also on Dec. 12 and 13.
Fee: $5.
Information: (212) 838-6878.
Dec. 14
LEFFERTS HOMESTEAD HOLIDAY PARTY, Prospect Park, Flatbush Avenue at Empire Boulevard, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Entertainment, refreshments and workshops for making holiday decorations; sponsored by the Daughters of the American Revolution, Fort Greene chapter. 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 965-6505.
"WINTER WONDERLAND," Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
A walking tour of the park to learn about its natural history.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at Litchfield Mansion, Prospect Park West and Fifth Street.
Free.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
"NORTH 40 BY FOOT," Floyd Bennett Field, Visitor Contact Center, Exit 11, south of the Belt Parkway, Flatbush Avenue, Flatlands, Brooklyn.
A hike across 125 acres along the trails of the northern end of Floyd Bennett Field.
Sturdy shoes and binoculars are recommended. 10 A.M.
Free.
Information and reservations: (718) 338-7441.
Dec. 15
NEW YORK CITY WALK.
A random walk beginning in upper Manhattan, heading south to the Brooklyn Bridge into Brooklyn and then back to Manhattan, with a possible stop in Chinatown.
Meets at the northwest corner of 86th Street and Lexington Avenue. 9:30 A.M.
Sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Fee: $15.
Information: (212) 986-1430.
CHELSEA HOTEL, Manhattan.
A tour of a Victorian Neo-Gothic hotel that has been a sanctuary for the likes of Mark Twain, Willem de Kooning, Virgil Thomson, Arthur Miller and Thomas Wolfe, with a visit to some artists' studios.
Led by Jerry Weinstein, assistant manager of the hotel; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 1 P.M.
Fee: $30.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
ROOSEVELT ISLAND.
A seven-mile walking tour sponsored by Shorewalkers.
Meets at noon at the Tramway, Second Avenue and 59th Street, Manhattan.
Fee: $3.
Tram fair: $2.80 round-trip.
Information: (212) 663-2167.
"OWL PROWL," Kissena Park, Flushing, Queens.
Walkers will learn about owls while touring the park.
Sturdy shoes and flashlights are recommended.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meet at 7 P.M. at Kissena Park Nature Center, Rose Avenue and Parsons Boulevard.
Free.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
Dec. 21
WINTER SOLSTICE, Van Cortlandt Park, the Bronx.
A discussion of the winter season during a walk along the Cass Gallagher Nature Trail.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Broadway and Mosholu Avenue.
Free.
Information: (212) 548-7070.
Dec. 22
LIGHTS BUS TOUR, Pelham Bay, northeast Bronx.
A bus tour of the homes and businesses decorated for the season.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 6 P.M. at the Van Cortlandt House, reached from the park entrance at 242d Street and Broadway.
Free.
Information and reservations: (212) 548-7070.
"RUSTIC CENTRAL PARK," Central Park, Manhattan.
Walkers will explore rustic shelters in the woodlands of Central Park.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at Columbus Circle, 59th Street and Central Park West.
Free.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
Dec. 26
GREENWICH VILLAGE, Manhattan.
A tour that includes Washington Square Park and the Isaacs-Hendricks House, which dates from 1799 and is believed to be the oldest house in the West Village.
Sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 10 A.M. at the southeast corner of Fifth Avenue and Eighth Street.
Fee: $12.
Information and reservations: (212) 989-2456.
Dec. 28
WINTER FIELD WALK, Van Cortlandt Park, Riverdale, the Bronx.
A walk to learn how plants and animals survive in the cold.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the Van Cortlandt Visitors' Center, midpark between 248th and 249th Streets.
Free.
Information: (212) 548-7070.
Dec. 29
GREENWICH VILLAGE HISTORY, Manhattan.
A guided tour of the area led by Joyce Gold, a professor of history at New York University, with an emphasis on street names, graveyards and architecture.
Meets at the Washington Square arch.
Fee: $10.
Information: (212) 242-5762.
"SEED MONSTERS," Kissena Park, Flushing, Queens.
Walkers will learn about seeds and where they come from.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Kissena Park Nature Center, Rose Avenue and Parsons Boulevard.
Free.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
"FOREVER GREEN," Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
A walk through the park, focusing on evergreen trees and shrubs.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at Prospect Park Boathouse, Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue entrance.
Free.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
Dec. 31
CHINATOWN, Manhattan.
A walking tour through the largest Chinese community in the United States, ending with dinner at a restaurant in the area.
Sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 6 P.M.
Fee: $5, plus $8 for dinner.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.


Ridgely Thorp Has a Wedding
Charlotte Ridgely Thorp, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter C. Thorp of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Darryl Joseph Donohue, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Donohue of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
The Rev.
P.
C.
Ennis officiated at the Reformed Church of Bronxville.
Mrs.
Donohue, 26 years old and known as Ridgely, is an assistant treasurer at J. P. Morgan in New York and a graduate of the University of Vermont.
Her father is the manager of university relations at Citibank in New York.
Her mother, Schatze Thorp, is an associate at Valerie Wilson Travel in New York.


Sunday Menu; Counterpoint of Textures and Flavors
There are a variety of ways to prepare bulgur beyond tabbouleh, the cracked-wheat salad that makes a refreshing light supper or side dish.
But cracked wheat is as good in hot dishes as it is in cold, and it only takes about 10 minutes to cook.


TRIP BY DINKINS ELICITS CONFUSION
The scheduled visit of Mayor David N. Dinkins to South Africa next week has prompted more confusion than curiosity here, with some South Africans, black and white, shrugging and others asking, "Mayor Who?"
One reason for the lack of excitement is that Mayor Dinkins has left his itinerary entirely in the hands of the African National Congress and that the congress has yet to release any details of the trip.
Mr.
Dinkins leaves New York on Sunday evening and arrives in Johannesburg on Tuesday morning after a stop in Rome.
Carl Neihaus, a congress spokesman, confirmed that his organization was working on Mr.
Dinkins's program.


Conflicted on Europe
Within a month, two cities in Europe are likely to symbolize a basic challenge to U.S. policy toward Europe.
In Maastricht, in the Netherlands, the European Community's heads of government will seek to reach a breakthrough agreement on political union.
And in Kiev, the Ukraine's legislators are likely to formalize their state's independence of any Soviet and thus Russian control.
Whatever the outcomes -- and these efforts will face many complications -- both represent historical milestones.
Both will change Europe's political map.
Both will contribute to the further redistribution of global power.
And both will soon require a strategically sound and timely United States response to complex, even potentially dangerous, new dilemmas.


Giants Try to Break Current Losing Trend
If the Giants are to get well, win some games and put themselves in the wild-card playoff picture, the time to start is now.
On Sunday, at Sun Devil Stadium, they will play another ailing team, the Phoenix Cardinals.
The Giants, with a 4-5 record, have lost in the last two weeks to the Washington Redskins and the Philadelphia Eagles, their main division rivals.
They have been punchless on offense and prone to error on defense.
But at least the Super Bowl champions seem to have talent, listless though it may be.


'Anna Christie' Warms Up to Shines
WHETHER or not you're an O'Neill aficionado, give "Anna Christie" at the George Street Playhouse a break, and hang around after the second part -- that is, the third and fourth acts, which come after the intermission.
It isn't until then, when the more hasty or less hardy theatergoer may already have fled into the contrasting and welcoming cold air, that the characters' conflicts unleash, the actors let go, the director trusts them and, to paraphrase the playwright, one finally has the secure sense that "something's happening here."


Big Green Keeps Its Eye on the Ivy Title
Dartmouth came to New York needing a victory over Columbia to stay in the driver's seat for its second straight Ivy title.
After tying a weaker Harvard squad in Cambridge, Mass., last week, the Big Green looked to continue its unbeaten ways in Ivy League competition and extend its current unbeaten streak over the Lions to 20 games.
It did, overcoming three Columbia leads and playing almost flawlessly on offense in the second half to beat the Lions at Wien Stadium, 28-19.
The Big Green improved to 5-2-1 and remained in the league lead at 4-0-1.
The Lions fell to 1-7 over all and 1-4 in the league.


The Education of Paul Wellstone
LIKE MILLIONS OF AMERICANS on a recent Saturday morning, Senator Paul David Wellstone was glued to the television, following the Senate Judiciary Committee hearings into the sexual harassment accusations against the Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas.
Sitting on the living room floor in his daughter's apartment in St.
Paul, the freshman Democrat watched with mounting anger as Senator Orrin G. Hatch -- in the Republicans' drive to discredit Anita F. Hill, Thomas's accuser -- recited a passage from "The Exorcist," the novel about satanic possession.
When the Democrats on the Judiciary Committee simply listened in silence, Wellstone exploded.
"This is unbelievable!" he shouted to his wife and daughter, who were also looking on in disbelief.
"I can't believe they're getting away with it!" Wellstone, who had opposed the Thomas nomination in a floor speech even before Hill's allegations surfaced, took refuge in the kitchen, unable to watch the rest of the proceedings.


Double Dip or Dead-Cat Bounce?
ROSY SCENARIO, that always-cheerful economist, may soon be jilted if we are indeed in a
double dip
.
That dread prospect first found expression in Business Week in February 1975, attributed to an unidentified Ford Administration economist: "What is now likely is a '
double-dip recession
,' as one Administration economist puts it." Three months later, it reported a scenario that "portrays a
double-dip recession
in which the economy recovers in the second half of 1975 but lapses into decline again in 1976." (This did not happen.)


They're Off! It's the Race To Find a Party Outfit
NOTHING brings out the frantic, fashion-obsessed kernel of one's being like last-minute shopping for a dressy affair.
No matter how many weeks you have had the engraved invitation, comes the day of the ball, suddenly you have nothing to wear.
Or you have only two shirt studs.
Or you realize, around lunchtime, that everybody attending this party was also at the last party, and they all have seen your beaded black dress.
Twice.


DANCE
Here is a sampling of arts and entertainment events in New York City during the holiday season, compiled by New York Times critics, writers and contributors.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
DANCE THEATER WORKSHOP, Bessie Schonberg Theater, 219 West 19th Street, Manhattan.
The sprightly patriarch of New York experimentalist dance theaters is presenting "The Minstrel Show," a typically thought-provoking work by Donald Byrd in which minstrelsy is seen as a barometer of social and racial tensions.
Today at 3 P.M.
Also at Dance Theater Workshop: Vicki Marks's "This Way In," Nov. 20 to 23 at 8 P.M. and Nov. 24 at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $12.
Information: (212) 924-0077.
ST.
MARK'S CHURCH-IN-THE-BOWERY, Second Avenue at 10th Street, Manhattan.
The cozy Danspace plays host to a program by Marta Renzi and Amy Pivar, one of the best movers in the business, about "emotional politics," as the choreographers put it.
Tonight at 8:30.
Also at St.
Mark's: Bill Young, Nov. 21 to 24 at 8:30 P.M.; Blondell Cummings, Dec. 5 to 8 at 8:30 P.M.; Laurie Van Wieren and Jonathan Stone, Dec. 12 to 15 at 8:30 P.M., and the Muntu Dance Theater, Dec. 19 and 21 at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Downtown Performance Sampler: One Night Stand, a showcase of SoHo dance, featuring Douglas Dunn and Dancers, the Victoria Marks Performance Company, Bebe Miller Company, the Munti Dance Theater, Dan Hurlin, Nancy Riley and others.
Dec. 20 at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 529-2318.
PERFORMANCE SPACE 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, Manhattan.
Downtown dance and performance art, in all their variety, are the attraction at this spirited two-theater experimentalist complex.
Typical of the range are the season's first two participants, Judith Ren-Lay who will deal with personal and political illusion in theater-dance set to 12th-century music, through Nov. 17 at 8 P.M., and Steve (Mr. Wiggles) Clemente and the Rhythm Technicians, who elevate street dance to an art form, Nov. 21 to Dec. 1 at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Also at P.S. 122: Judith Jackson, Dec. 12 to 15 at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Information: (212) 477-5288.
"PERFECT COURAGE," Aaron Davis Hall, City College of the City University of New York, 135th Street and Convent Avenue, Manhattan.
"Body maps" by Bill T. Jones, Rhodessa Jones and Idris Ackamoor.
Part of the New Faces/New Voices/New Visions series.
Today and Nov. 17 at 2 P.M.; Nov. 15 and 16 at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12.
Information: (212) 650-7100.
DANCE THEATER OF HARLEM.
The company's Sunday open houses tend to be among the most heartwarming of dance events.
This afternoon, members of the troupe's school ensemble join with guests including the tap dancer Sandman Sims in "A Salute to the Apollo Theater" at 3 P.M. at the company and school headquarters, 466 West 152d Street, between St.
Nicholas and Amsterdam Avenues, Manhattan.
Tickets are $5 for adults; $2.50 for children under 12.
Information: 967-3470.
The school ensemble will also perform on Nov. 13 at 7:30 P.M. at the Winter Garden, World Financial Center, West Street, south of Vesey Street, Battery Park City, Manhattan.
Free.
Information: (212) 690-2800.
The same night, the company celebrates itself in "Arabian Nights Gala," starting at 7 P.M., at the Manhattan Center, 311 West 34th Street.
Tickets: $250 ($500 for patrons and $1,000 for benfactors).
Information: (212) 967-3470.
Nov. 11
MOVEMENT RESEARCH, Judson Memorial Church, 55 Washington Square South, at West Fourth Street, Manhattan.
A series of dance without frills that has become a welcoming celebration of dance in New York.
Nov. 11, Sondra Loring and Peggy Peloquin; Nov. 18, Irene Hultman and Jennifer Monson; Nov. 25, Christopher Caines, Lucy Guerin, Jaime Ortega; Dec. 2, Alexis Eupierre and Yvonne Meier; Dec. 9, K. J. Holmes Workshop and David Zambrano; Dec. 16, Simone Forti and David Dorfman.
All shows begin at 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 691-5788.
NEXT WAVE FESTIVAL, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene.
Collaborations that span all media, in a festival that helped institutionalize the avant-garde.
Featured are Eiko and Koma (today in "Land," an evocation of the spirit and landscape of Taos, N.M., at 3 P.M.; tickets: $18); from Belgium, Wim Vandekeybus in "Always the Same Lies" (Nov. 14 at 7 P.M., and Nov. 15 and 16, 8 P.M.; tickets: $12 to $25); Urban Bush Women in "Praise House" (Nov. 23 at 8 P.M., Nov. 24 at 3 P.M.; tickets: $25 to $12); Garth Fagan Dance in the world premiere of "Griot New York" (Dec. 4 at 7 P.M., Dec. 5 to 7 at 8 P.M.; tickets: $12 to $25.) Information: (718) 636-4100.
Nov. 12
TORONTO DANCE THEATER, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Manhattan.
Impressive performers and premieres by James Kudelka's "15 Heterosexual Duets"; David Earle's "Dreamsend: A Melodrama in 12 Moving Pictures"; Patricia Beatty's "First Music," and Christopher House's "Court of Lions." Nov. 12 to 16 at 8 P.M.; Nov. 16 at 2 P.M., and Nov. 17 at 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
Nov. 14
JOFFREY BALLET, City Center Theater, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
The Joffrey's production of "The Nutcracker" will be not only a holiday classic, but also a feast of role debuts, offering a chance to become acquainted with some interesting new dancers -- and familiar ones in unfamiliar roles.
Nov. 14 to Dec. 1.
Tuesdays through Sundays at 7:30 P.M., Saturdays and Sundays and Nov. 29 at 2 P.M.
No performance on Thanksgiving Day.
Tickets: $10 to $45.
Information: (212) 563-3739.
Nov. 18
PERFORMANCE MIX, Dia Center for the Arts, 155 Mercer Street, SoHo.
A showcase for new work by choreographers, composers and performance artists.
On Nov. 18, Nuria Olive Belles, Lee Katz, Rajeckas and Intraub, David Shea and Felice Wolfzahn and Danny Lepkoff.
On Dec. 9, works by Linda Fisher, Katherine Griffith, Diane Jacobowitz, Kumiko Kimoto and Dennis O'Connor.
Both performances at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $8; free for the elderly.
Information: (212) 226-7624.
Nov. 19
NEW YORK CITY BALLET, New York State Theater.
City Ballet's winter season, from Nov. 19 to Feb. 23, includes two new ballets by Peter Martins and "The Nutcracker," of course.
Performances featuring the City Ballet's repertory (from "Ash" to " 'Raymonda' Variations" to "The Four Temperaments") or new works are on Nov. 19 to 22, Nov. 24, 26, 27, 29, 30 and Dec. 1 at 8 P.M.; tickets: $8 to $150.
"The Nutcracker" returns from Dec. 4 to Dec. 31, with performances Thursdays at 6 P.M.; Fridays at 8 P.M.; Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 1 and 5 P.M.; Tuesdays at 6 P.M. and Wednesdays at 6 P.M.
Special performances: Dec. 23 at 2 and 6 P.M.; Dec. 31 at 2 and 7 P.M.
Through Jan. 5.
Tickets: $12 to $58.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
JENNIFER MULLER/THE WORKS, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Manhattan.
The company will appear in three programs featuring the world premieres of "Glass Houses," "Regards" and "Flight School," and the New York premieres of "Arm in Arm" and "Women with Visitors." 8 P.M.
Through Dec. 1.
Other performances: Tuesdays to Saturdays at 8 P.M.; Sundays at 2 and 7:30 P.M.
There is a benefit for the company on Nov. 20 at 7:30 P.M.
There is no performance on Thanksgiving Day.
Tickets: $25.
Benefit tickets: $125 to $250.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
Nov. 20
MEG STUART, the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Manhattan.
"Disfigure Study," a new work by an emerging experimentalist choreographer.
Nov. 20 to 22, 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10 and $12.
Information: (212) 255-5793.
Nov. 21 and 22
FORCES OF NATURE, Aaron Davis Hall, City College of City University of New York, 135th Street and Convent Avenue, Manhattan.
The company performs "Coming Forth by Day," a full-length choreo-drama based on the Egyptian Book of the Dead, featuring Dyane Harvey Salaam.
At 7:30 P.M.
Also on Nov. 22, same time.
Tickets: $10 in advance or $12 at the door.
Information: (212) 749-7720.
Nov. 22
OUTBACK SERIES, Gowanus Arts Exchange, 295 Douglass Street, between Third and Fourth Avenues, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
New work by emerging and mature choreographers and performance artists.
"Outback No. 52," Nov. 22 and 23, features work by Tyrone Aiken, Frances Becker, Pamela Geber, Margaret Hallisey, Veronique Robert and Susan Trout.
"Outback No. 53," Dec. 20 and 21, features work by Christopher Beck, Bruce Bell, Clare Maxwell, Johanna Meyer, Siri Jontvedt, Kevin Beckciler-Floh, Alexandra Hartmann, Nina Schneider and Lorna Sinclair.
All performances at 8 P.M.
Admission: $9.
Information: (718) 596-5250.
Dec. 1
INTERNATIONAL DANCE CELEBRATION, Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
With the Dancers of Manipour from India; the Serena Dance Theater from New York City; the Manolo Rivera Spanish Dance Company, and the Stars of American Dance, featuring members of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater and the American Ballet Theater.
At 3 P.M.
Tickets: $23.50 to $27.50.
Information: (212) 840-2824.
Dec. 3
MARIA BENITEZ SPANISH DANCE COMPANY, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Manhattan.
Season premieres with works by Joaquin Ruiz, Mario Maya, Angel Atineza and Maria Benitez. 8 P.M.
Through Dec. 15; Mondays through Saturdays at 8 P.M. and Sundays at 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
Dec. 4
ALVIN AILEY AMERICAN DANCE THEATER, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
Known for its electric probings of the heart and its strong, vital dancers, the company will present premieres by Donald Byrd, Louis Falco and the company's director, Judith Jamison, plus revivals of works by Ailey and Donald McKayle.
Dec. 4 to 29.
Opening night, 7:30 P.M.
Other performances, Tuesdays through Sundays at 8 P.M.; matinees Saturdays at 2 P.M. and Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets $10 to $42.
Information: (212) 581-7907.
Dec. 7
MAKSIMOVA AND VASILIEV, Lehman Center for the Performing Arts, Lehman College, Bedford Park Boulevard and Goulden Avenue, Bedford Park, the Bronx.
Two stars of the Bolshoi Ballet, Yekaterina Maksimova and Vladimir Vasiliev, are to perform. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $30.
Information: (212) 960-8833.
Dec. 17
MOMIX, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Manhattan.
A company of dancing illusionists, under the direction of Moses Pendleton.
Programs include "Passion," "Skiva," "Medusa," "Circle Walker," "Venus Envy" and "Fantasy on a Variation." Through Jan. 5.
Tuesdays through Fridays at 8 P.M.; Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sundays at 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Special performances on Dec. 23 and 30 at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $28.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
Dec. 19
WORKING IN THE KITCHEN, the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Manhattan.
Work by Nuria Olive Belles, Errol Grimes, Paula Hunter, Daniel Lepkoff, Yves Musard, Amos Pinhasi, Lynn Shapiro and Muna Tseng.
Dec. 19 to 21 at 8:30 P.M.; Dec. 22 at 3 P.M.
Tickets: Thursday and Sunday, $10; Friday and Saturday: $12.
Information: (212) 255-5793.


A Room of Her Own
THE BORNING ROOM
By Paul Fleischman. 101 pp.
New York: A Charlotte Zolotow Book/ HarperCollins Publishers.


Quotation of the Day
"We see in Yugoslavia how the proud name of nationalsim can splinter a country into bloody civil war." -- PRESIDENT BUSH  [ 16:2 ]


Jewish Program Marks 3 Events
A series of tours commemorating not only Columbus's voyages to the New World but also the 500th anniversary of expulsion of the Jews from Spain and the welcome afforded Sephardic Jews by Turkey has been organized by the travel division of the American Jewish Congress.
The program includes an Old World-New World Odyssey aboard the QE2, March 22 to April 9, starting in Israel and visiting countries associated with the three commemorations -- Turkey, Greece, Italy, Spain, Portugal and England.
The 19-day trip combines a stay in Israel with a 12-day cruise in the Mediterranean.
Morocco, the refuge of most Jews departing Spain in 1492, will be visited on two 11-day tours in February and April.
The nine-night tour, with stays in Rabat, Meknes, Fez, Marrakesh and Casablanca, most meals and air fare from New York costs $2,895 a person (double occupancy) in February and $2,995 in April.
A two-week tour of Spain and Portugal departing June through October will cost about $4,200.
Among others is a two-week trip to Turkey departing Sept. 9 and visiting Istanbul, Izmir, Cappadocia, Anatolia and Ankara, for $3,580.
All prices include air fare, hotels, meals and sightseeing.
More information: American Jewish Congress, 15 East 84th Street, New York, N.Y. 10028; (212) 879 4588 or (800) 221-4694.


Judith A. Jeydel To Wed in April
Mr. and Mrs.
Alan K. Jeydel of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Judith Anne Jeydel to Timothy Patrick Canavan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Canavan of Lawrenceville, N.J.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Jeydel, 30 years old, is a consultant with Sibson &amp; Company, a human resources management consulting firm in Princeton.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father is an associate vice president of investments in the Princeton office of Prudential Securities Inc.
Mr.
Canavan, 31, is the director of sales for Ironbound Inc., a manufacturer of steel shelving in Newark.
His father is the head of the impaired physicians program for the State Medical Society of New Jersey in Lawrenceville.


MOMMY OLDEST
Cunningham implies that women who wait to have a baby typically do so in an effort to preserve an extended period of youth for themselves.
In fact, there are often many complex and overlapping considerations that underlie the decision to wait.
These can include a marriage that turns out badly; the premature death of a spouse; economic and professional factors; or the need to provide care to an elderly or chronically ill relative.
A woman may also elect to delay motherhood until she feels she has a better understanding of the strains and traumas of her own childhood, in an effort to minimize repeating similar problems with her child.
While the author quotes friends who say "there's never a right time," there are certainly times and situations that are better than others.
Cunningham suggests that the common good would be better served if resources and energies were withdrawn from fertility technology and redirected toward curing disease and providing for neglected and deprived children.
It is misguided to pit the gaping inadequacies in medical and social care against the development of advances in fertility technology.
These are two distinct issues.
Furthermore, it is unfair to expect women who are coping with the personal tragedy of being unable to have a baby to necessarily choose adoption as an alternative.
Choices as diverse as adopting a child from a foreign country or giving birth to quintuplets may be exactly right for one woman or couple, completely wrong for another.
MARILYN FEINBERG Clinical Social Worker, Duke University Medical Center
Durham, N.C.


Margo Rudman Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Rudman of Fair Lawn, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Margo Ellen Rudman to Dr.
Jeffrey Charles Gold, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Theodore Gold of Riverdale, the Bronx.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Rudman is the director of marketing in business development at Showtime Networks in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father retired as a department manager at Bloomingdale's in Hackensack, N.J.
Dr.
Gold is the senior vice president and medical director of Robert A. Becker Inc., a pharmaceuticals advertising agency in New York, and the medical director of the Fairfield division of the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale.
He graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
His father is the medical director of Capital Cities/ABC in New York.


COPING: Where to Go to Cheer Yourself Up
Here are the addresses and telephone numbers for the coping suggestions, in the order they are mentioned.
LORD &amp; TAYLOR, Fifth Avenue at 38th Street, Manhattan.
Hours: Mondays and Thursdays, 10 A.M. to 8:30 P.M.; Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 6:30 P.M.; Sundays, noon to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 391-3344.


Cambodian Refugees Face Minefields on Their Return
As hundreds of thousands of Cambodian refugees in Thailand hail a peace settlement in their country and prepare to return home, many express the fear that they may be maimed or even die from land mines that were laid across the Cambodian countryside during the last 12 years of civil war.
No one has a reliable figure on the number of mines laid during the war by guerrilla factions and by troops of the Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government in Phnom Penh.
The estimates vary from 500,000 to five million, and specialists say that it will be several years before the bulk of the mines can be detected and disabled.


Hustler on a String
PUNCH IN NEW YORK
Written and illustrated by Alice Provensen.
Unpaged.
New York: Viking. $14.95. (Ages 3 to 8)


Struggling to Retain Maxwell's Empire
Robert Maxwell, as a columnist in his own British newspaper, The Daily Mirror, described him this week, was "part monster, part magic." Armed with an extraordinary ability to spot the potential in businesses with mediocre performances, a ruthless determination and a gambler's gutsiness, he charmed, bullied and borrowed his way into creating one of the world's biggest publishing empires.
But will it survive him for long?
When Mr.
Maxwell died last week, his lenders, shareholders and employees were shaking at the sudden thought that perhaps the only thing holding the Maxwell empire together was this intimidating wheeler-dealer.


El Al Adds Flight to Riga
El Al Israel Airlines expects to begin operating a weekly flight between Tel Aviv and St.
Petersburg and Riga, Latvia, on Dec. 1.
The airline, which already operates two flights a week between Tel Aviv and Moscow, says there is a demand for the new service from emigrants wanting to leave the Soviet Union and Latvia as well as from tourists.
The Soviet Foreign Ministry has removed its previous objections to the St.
Petersburg and Riga flights, said the president of El Al, Rafi Harlev, during a visit to New York last month.
The airline is negotiating for flights to Japan, Thailand and Australia, added Mr.
Harlev, who said he hoped the Australian route would start by late summer 1992.
El Al also expects to be flying to Bulgaria soon.


Bridge
Almost half a century ago, when the modern form of bridge was less than 20 years old, a young Scot with a great talent for the game and for writing about it made a deplorable and iniquitous suggestion.
If there had been a bridge writers' union at that time, he would have been drummed out without ceremony.
His name was Robert Gray, and still is, for he is alive and well in Johnstone, Scotland.
What he did, in an article in The Bridge World magazine, was to urge others to follow his own example and maintain a "boner book." When he detected an error in a bridge column or magazine article, he cut it out and pasted it in his book.
And he believed in pointing out to the writer the error of his ways.
Readers of this column are asked not to adopt this diabolical practice, although there are some who regularly react by letter or telephone when they uncover a mistake.


WHITES STILL HOLD KEY PRETORIA JOBS
The dismantling of apartheid undertaken by President F. W. de Klerk has yet to transform the civil service, where South Africa's white minority still holds the cushiest jobs and the black majority the most menial ones.
The basic laws mandating racial discrimination were repealed in June.
But the structure of a white, predominantly Afrikaner civil service who put apartheid policies into practice remains intact.
Government opponents worry that the holdovers could frustrate future black majority rule.


Mutual Funds; High-Yield (High-Fee) Dow Trusts
One very simple stock market investment strategy is to buy the 10 highest-yielding stocks in the 30-stock Dow Jones industrial average, and then sit back and enjoy the results.
In the last 20 years, investors would have earned an average annual total return of 15.3 percent, compared with 10.8 percent for the entire Dow average.
New packages of blue-chip stocks that follow this strategy are resounding hits.
Dean Witter has raised $80 million with its products since January; and a clone created by Merrill Lynch, which is also sold by Prudential Securities, has raised $50 million since May.
Merrill Lynch "expects to follow up with others, probably two or three each year," said Stan Craig, a national sales and marketing manager for the firm.


ATTRACTIONS
Here is a sampling of attractions, some featuring holiday activities, in New York City.
Times and dates are subject to change.
Museums and Historic Sites


Dispelling the 55 M.P.H. Myths
To the Editor:
"It's Time to Stop Poking Along at 55" (Forum, Sept. 29) obviously generated considerable interest (Letters, Oct. 13) but two myths concerning the 55 miles-per-hour speed limit still need addressing.


Just Plain Bubbles Or Bangles, Too?
TO some purists, diluting Champagne with foreign substances like orange juice or stout is an act of desecration.
It's like stomping on the flag or wearing brown shoes with a blue suit.
To others, Champagne is merely an interesting canvas on which to spread more vivid colors.
Orange juice, for instance.
By itself it's just, well, orange juice.
Add two parts of Champagne and it becomes a mimosa, an elegant start to any day.


On the Court or Off, Still Magic
At times it truly seemed as if the only one who could keep his composure was the man making the terrifying announcement about himself: Magic Johnson, star of the Los Angeles Lakers and face that launched 2,000 sneakers, was saying he had just discovered he was infected with the virus that causes AIDS and was, on the advice of his doctors, quitting basketball.
Fans everywhere stopped to ask each other whether it could be true.
Several told sportswriters that no moment had struck them with such force since the day they had heard President Kennedy had been shot.
That, in itself, is a testament to Magic Johnson's appeal.
So is the way the news flew around the world.
It made front pages in Italy, Israel, Australia and Japan, countries that are now nearly as basketball-mad as the United States, and were made so partly by a player named Earvin Johnson whose fake-you-out moves and win-you-over smile had helped revitalize the game.
And as fans wept and marketing executives muttered darkly that he would see the $12 million a year he earns in endorsements slink shamefully away, Magic showed his trademark positive attitude, saying he wanted to become a spokesman for AIDS prevention, using his celebrity to help young people "understand that safe sex is the way to go." Within 24 hours, his sponsors were saying they had never dreamed of dropping him.
By Friday night, he was up and educating, appearing on Arsenio Hall's talk show, telling a cheering audience not to be afraid of HIV-positive people.
He indicated there that he got the virus through heterosexual sex.
He had missed some early games because of a flu-like illness that sapped his strength and made him lose weight, but said the infection had been discovered in a blood test for a life insurance policy.
Some experts said it is not certain that playing basketball would hasten the onset of AIDS symptoms; it may take 10 years or more for any to show up, although when they do, they now invariably lead to the full disease and death.
Some sports columnists last week let their phrases about him slip into the past tense -- "Magic was. . . " That's a mistake.
Magic is talking about being around, about being happy, about how much he will enjoy owning a basketball team instead of merely epitomizing one.


The Season for the Admirable Ankle
From the 17th century on, spats (or leggings, or gaiters) were worn to cover the shoe, fastened under the instep and kept legs warm.
Like most clothes, they filled a need.
Then two-tone boots, low and high (with as many as 16 buttons), offered the illusion but not the inconvenience of two things on each foot.


Stastny Sweats It Out To Skate Up a Storm
The jogging in the grueling heat in Verona Park in New Jersey all summer and the skating in August at the Devils' training center near his home are showing up in Peter Stastny's play this season.
After his diligent work in the off season, almost all of it with Vyacheslav Fetisov, the 34-year-old Stastny is skating like a youngster in his 12th season in the National Hockey League and his third with the Devils.


It's Not Too Late to Plant Some Bulbs
THE usual deadline for planting bulbs has passed.
Supposedly all bulbs should be in the ground by Election Day.
But this fall has been mild.
Many vegetables, like tomatoes and squash, and annuals like vincas and impatiens, seemed to last forever.
Lawns were still being mowed.
This sort of weather provided a sense of ennui that the planting chores could be delayed for another day or two.
And so the bulbs sat unplanted in the toolshed, garage or garden center's bins.
But as any gardener knows, winter is on its way.
Bulbs are better in the ground now, even at this late date, than left in the garage or toolshed, where they will eventually freeze or rot, or both.
Even if the blanket of leaves has to be pushed aside for the planting efforts, it is better that it be done, and done quickly.
Remember the basic bulb-planting rule: well-drained soil and a level base for the bulbs, so water does not sit under them.


For One, at Least, an Overcoat was Unnecessary and the Water was Fine


Some Shortcuts for Birds Chinese Style
ONE of the most attractive sights on a dinner table is a perfectly roasted bird with a crisp, bronzed skin.
The experts at cooking birds that turn out this way, of course, are the Chinese.
Pay a visit to Chinatown and you will see rows of glistening lacquered ducks hanging in shop windows, the perfect dish to serve on a day when you don't feel like cooking.
You can buy them ready to eat for as little as $10 each and take them home, along with a supply of pancakes, scallions, cucumbers and hoisin sauce, to eat in the Peking style.
Making a Peking duck the traditional way is a complicated process that will tempt few cooks to try at home.
Air is pumped under the skin through an opening at the neck so that it puffs up like a balloon (you can do this yourself by blowing through your mouth).
The ducks, which have their heads on, are hung on a hook, scalded with boiling water, coated with a syrupy mixture made with sugar and honey, before being left to dry in a cool, drafty place for several hours.
Then their cavities are filled with water and the birds are hung in an oven to roast.


Prosecutors Contend Whites Are Being Kept Off the Kahane Jury
Prosecutors at the trial of El Sayyid Nosair, the Egyptian immigrant charged with murdering Rabbi Meir Kahane, contend that whites are systematically being excluded from the jury, it was disclosed last week.
In the secrecy of the judge's chambers, Assistant District Attorney William Greenbaum has made repeated objections to what he claimed was the defense's unlawful use of the traditional jury screening process, according to Mr.
Nosair's lawyer and officials in the Manhattan District Attorney's office.


The Art of Giving; Something For a Song
There are certain gifts that never die.
Remember the Slinky you used to coax down the stairs or the pearl earrings your mother loved to wear?
You'll find close to 50 affordable presents on these pages.
They may not be one-of-a-kinds, but they are among the best of their kind -- everything from marbles and monogrammed buttons to pillboxes and penknives.
None cost more than $100, many are well under $50 and all, in one way or another, are classics: simple and sensible, but not too essential.


NICARAGUA SEEKS TO CALM CONTRAS
Seeking to calm the fears and angers of former contra rebels who have returned to arms, the Government of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro is reducing the army presence in the northwest of the country and has promised to incorporate former contras into the police in the area.
But one rearmed contra leader, known as Indomable, has rejected the Government 's efforts as inadequate, and officials acknowledge that the ranks of his followers grow in spurts when something occurs to upset or frighten them.


Style Makers; James T. Clarke, Fashion Designer
Anne Slater has been photographed in his dresses.
So have Alan Ladd's wife, Cindra, Kathryn Crosby and Barbara Grant, whose husband Cary knew a thing or two about style.
The simply cut and perfectly correct dresses of James T. Clarke are staples in the closets of many New York women.
They are the sort of easy, effortless clothes that Establishment women seem always to have worn.
Mr.
Clarke, whose shop at 979 Lexington Avenue near 70th Street, first opened on Halloween Day 1974, claims to make no special effort to help his clients look taller and thinner, but that is the effect.


Uta Hagen's Lesson in Self-Revision
"Acting," says Uta Hagen, "is really about life. It's learning about human behavior, human conflicts, human interrelationships, which you have to have some understanding of if you're going to be up there portraying other human beings."
Ms.
Hagen, for years a leading stage actress, is one of the country's most influential acting teachers.
Since 1947, she has taught at the HB Studio, the school in Greenwich Village founded by Herbert Berghof, her husband of 40 years, who died last November.
Personal Revisions
In 1973, her views on performing were expressed in a book called "Respect for Acting," which has sold more than 150,000 copies.
Now there is a new volume, "A Challenge for the Actor," recently published by Charles Scribner's Sons, in which she has revised her thinking, her techniques and her exercises.


RECORD BRIEFS
Kid Creole and the Coconuts: 'You Shoulda Told Me You Were . . . '
Columbia 47121; all three formats.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the marriage of Julia Kaminski misidentified the bridegroom.
He is Barry Nix; Richard Nix is his father.


All Those Tax Cuts: Fool's Gold
Last Tuesday, the 1992 campaign began for real.
The parade of personalities was finally coupled to the engine of real issues.
Pennsylvanian voters, for instance, showed how much they care about jobs and health care by electing unheralded Harris Wofford to the Senate.
Within hours, Republican senators were talking about health care reform and tax cuts, and Dan Rostenkowski, the Democratic chairman of the House tax-writing committee, proposed cutting taxes on middle-class families.


Life, As It Is Lived
To the Editor:
Carin Rubenstein's essay "A Tour of the Wonder Years: It's a Small, Small World"  [ Oct. 13 ]  on the PBS "Childhood" series was so misleading that as the producers we feel obliged to respond.


FIRE INVESTIGATION ANGERS L.I. POLICE
When fire destroyed the Long Island mansion of Reginald Lewis last week, the chairman of a big New York food processing company, Mr.
Lewis telephoned his friend Mayor David N. Dinkins for help.
The Mayor phoned Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown, spokesmen for City Hall and the Police Department said, and two police arson specialists were dispatched to study the ruins of the mansion in Amagansett.


In the Nation; Bush's Strong Suit
President Bush seems rattled by sudden pressures to turn his attention to domestic problems.
But even as he tried at his Rome news conference to change the subject, he sounded a warning that next year's Democratic nominee would do well to heed.
First, Mr.
Bush beat his breast with words voters are likely to hear in 1992 as often as they heard "Willie Horton" in 1988:


RECORD BRIEFS
Henze: 'The Bassarids'
Soloists; RIAS Chamber Chorus; Berlin Radio Symphony conducted by Gerd Albrecht.
Koch Schwann 314 006; two CD's.


At Gloomy Subway Stop The Manager Is Smiling
Kevin Berry posted himself in the mezzanine of the Times Square subway station amid the crowds of morning commuters stampeding through its grimy corridors.
It was noisy.
The trains kept disgorging more and more people.
A nasty smell lingered in the air.
Mr. Berry was in heaven.


Break Sought for Nixon
The Major League Baseball Players Association thinks that OTIS NIXON has been punished enough and plans to file a grievance asking that the Atlanta outfielder's drug suspension be reduced from 60 days to time served.
Nixon was suspended on Sept. 16 after testing positive for cocaine.
He has served 42 days, missing the final 19 games of the regular season, the National League playoffs and the World Series.


In Defense Of Conner
To the Sports Editor:
Dennis Conner has never left "a trail of indebtedness." He pays his debts.
He understands the importance of a balanced budget.
"Conner Will Be Forced to Race Just One Boat," (The Times, Nov. 3) does this dedicated sailor a gross injustice.


Bankruptcy's 'True' Victims
To the Editor:
"Reorganizing the Bankruptcy Code" could go further.
While a company struggling to survive may appear to be a victim, its bankruptcy creates numerous true victims -- unsecured creditors.
Debtors and their advisors use the Bankruptcy Code to circumvent the debtor's obligations to pay for goods and services provided by companies often too small to secure their positions.


F.D.I.C. Takes Over Troubled Staten Island Bank
The Community National Bank and Trust Company, one of Staten Island's largest banks, was declared insolvent Friday and most of its deposits were sold to Chemical Bank.
Although Community National's deposits were insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, that government backing will not apply to accounts that exceeded the $100,000 insurance limit.
The loss on accounts of more than $100,000 will depend on how much the Government collects on the loans and other assets of the failed bank.


New &amp; Noteworthy
ALTERED LOVES: Mothers and Daughters During Adolescence, by Terri Apter. (Fawcett Columbine, $10.) After studying 65 mother-daughter pairs in both Britain and the United States, Terri Apter, a research fellow at Cambridge University, concluded that these relationships are characterized more by love and connectedness than conflict and separation.
Last year our reviewer, Carol Tavris, said she would "heartily recommend" this book "to anyone who is, knows, was or will be a participant in such a pair."
HOCUS POCUS, by Kurt Vonnegut. (Berkley, $5.99.) Eugene Debs Hartke, a Vietnam veteran who has become a college teacher and, finally, a prison inmate, narrates this story of America in 2001, a place less preoccupied with space travel than with racial segregation and foreign investors.
The Japanese have bought up much of the United States, whose population is suffering increasingly from tuberculosis and AIDS.
This is "the most topical, realistic Vonnegut novel to date," Jay McInerney said here last year, "and shows the struggle of an artist a little impatient with allegory and more than a little impatient with his own country."


THIS SCHOOL IS OUT
As a freshman at a high school in Hewlett, L.I., in 1957, I found myself placed in a slow-track algebra class because of scheduling difficulties -- a conflict with Latin I ("This School Is Out" by Jesse Green, Oct. 13).
The classroom was always in chaos.
We were learning nothing.
Several teachers were brought in to control the group, but they transferred out hastily.
Finally, a young, inexperienced local guy was hired.
Harvey Milk was a quiet and gentle teacher.
He was empathetic to kids with problems.
Soon everyone was learning algebra and still having fun.
We did not consider that he might have problems of his own.
After the term was over, I lost track of him -- until that awful day in 1978 when he was murdered in San Francisco.
The Harvey Milk School is aptly named; it is carrying out its mission just the way Milk would have done -- with patience and tolerance.
Of course, it would be better if we could meld all students into unified school communities, without having to segregate those with different learning abilities or life styles.
Until that goal is achieved, it is essential that our educational system provide a safe haven for those students who need it.
PATTI MICHAELS ALTMAN
Weston, Conn.


Princess for a Day


Giving the Bathroom A More-Elegant Look
REPLACING a shower curtain with a glass or plastic door is fairly easy and adds elegance to an otherwise ordinary-looking bathroom.
The sliding doors described here are designed to fit rectangular tubs or shower stalls set between two end walls.
Hinged doors for these and other styles of tubs and stalls are also available.
Shower-door kits generally consist of glass door panels, strips of metal or plastic channel that have to be cut and fastened to form a frame; hardware, sometimes including a special tool like drill bits, and towel bars or other accessories.


'Meeting Venus' Sings of Politics
When Istvan Szabo started filming "Meeting Venus" here in the summer of 1990, all the talk in Hungary and its formerly Communist neighbors was about rejoining Europe, a phrase that soon became a kind of mantra as the newborn democracies cast envious glances westward.
In the movie, which is about a Hungarian conductor who comes to Paris for a multinational production of Wagner's "Tannhauser," Europe also looms as a mirage, but the reality that emerges during rehearsals is not very enticing.
Germans, French and those of other nationalities sling insults back and forth, Western Europeans lord it over their newly liberated Eastern European cousins, union leaders make ridiculous demands, and directors engage in petty intrigues -- a humorous, but hardly a pretty, view of the "new Europe."


Data Bank/November 10, 1991
New Home Sales
Sept.
Aug.
July
Monthly percent change
-12.9
1.8
-2.3
Consumer Credit
Monthly percent change
-2.5
-1.4
-1.0
Productivity
III Q'91
II Q'91
I Q'91
Percent change
2.4
-0.3
0.0
Auto Sales
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
In units
705,086
674,790
695,332
Steel Production
Nov. 1
Oct. 25
Oct. 18
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,795
1,778
1,682
Paperboard
Thousands of tons, weekly total
790.6
797.3
783.5
3-Month Treasury Bills
Nov. 8
Nov. 1
Oct. 25
Rate in percent
4.63
4.76
4.96
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
4.69
4.78
5.03


Hong Kong Says Return of Vietnamese Went Well
Hong Kong officials expressed satisfaction today with the forced return of 59 Vietnamese boat people, despite dramatic resistance offered by some of them, who were dragged or carried onto the plane, and the distressed cries of others.
While defending the level of force used in the operation early today, the officials made clear their intention to continue such flights until tens of thousands of Vietnamese in camps here are sent back.
Hong Kong officials, and those of Britain, the colony's ruler, say that only a small percentage are genuine refugees fleeing persecution, and that the rest, here largely for economic reasons, must go back to Vietnam.


No Sale
Soviet officials angrily denied last week that they were remaindering the most sacred memento of Communism, the embalmed body of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin that reposes in the gigantic mausoleum on Red Square.
They branded as "an impudent lie" a report in Forbes FYI, echoed by the Associated Press, ABC News, the PBS Nightly Business Report and USA Today, that Lenin's body would be auctioned off, with a minimum bid of $15 million.
But even as the Soviet officials fumed, Christopher T. Buckley, editor of the Forbes magazine quarterly supplement, which focuses on tweedy lifestyles and incorporates a dollop of whimsey, happily confessed that the story was a fraud.
"So many extraordinary things have happened in the Soviet Union that we thought it would be fun to test the limits of credulity," he said.
Some of the news executives who flunked the test were not amused.
"I thing the whole thing was in terrible bad taste," said Barry Nemcoff, a producer for PBS.
And Peter Jennings, the network anchor who mentioned the story on ABC, said, "I'd be encouraged in the future if Forbes FYI knows the difference between April Fool's Day and Nov. 3."


To a Stranger, Africa Feels Like Home
I FIRST felt it on horseback as I stared out at an African plain highlighted with spots and stripes.
I felt at home here among the giraffes and zebras.
Really at home.
And yet I had never been to this ranch called Lewa Downs before, never been to Kenya before, never even been to Africa before.
It wasn't just that the landscape looked a lot like West Texas where I had grown up.
It wasn't just that I was riding a horse, which made me feel like one of my own Texas ancestors.
It wasn't just that I tried to sit my mount the way my great-grandfather, the Texas Ranger, sat his.
It was all of that, but more.
My sense of homecoming seemed to have to do with something that went back even before my great-granddad.


FUTURE INVESTORS LINE UP IN PRAGUE
Czechs and Slovaks by the hundreds of thousands have each begun putting up $30 in risk capital to make themselves part owners of enterprises that the deposed Communist leaders had long maintained belonged to "the people."
In an inventive program to privatize the major pillars of this highly industrialized country's economy, citizens are buying books of coupons that will be converted next year into shares, either in the companies or in mutual funds that will be holders of such shares.


IN SHORT: FICTION
PRIVATE FAME  By Richard Burgin. University of Illinois, $16.95.


The Year's Best Illustrated Books
The illustrations on these pages have been taken from The Book Review's choices of the 10 best illustrated children's books of 1991.
The Book Review has annually asked a panel of three judges to make a selection from among the several thousand children's books published each year.
The judges this year were Sybille A. Jagusch, chief of the Children's Literature Center of the Library of Congress, Judith Rovenger of the Westchester Library System and Jon Agee, an artist and illustrator whose books include "The Incredible Painting of Felix Clousseau." As a matter of note, Alice Provensen has been a winner seven times before, James Marshall, Peter Sis and Beni Montresor twice each, and Helme Heine once before.


'Thriller,' Can Michael Jackson Beat It?
It has been four years since his last album, "Bad," and nearly nine years since the release of "Thriller," the best-selling recording in history.
As Michael Jackson bursts back into the nation's consciousness this month with a new album amid a wave of carefully crafted hype, he must prove that he remains at the cutting edge of song and dance while defending his position as the world's pre-eminent pop star.
"This is the most important record in Michael Jackson's career," said Benny Medina, the director of artists and repertory at Warner Brothers Records, a label competing with Mr.
Jackson's record company, Sony.
Matching the earlier success of his "Thriller" and "Bad" albums is "the most difficult challenge faced by any artist in the world," Mr.
Medina added.


Ann Walker Married to John Kelly
Ann Rorer Walker, a daughter of Webster U. Walker Jr. of Southport, Conn., and Helen Prettyman Walker of Philadelphia, was married yesterday in Chestnut Hill, Pa., to John Philip Kelly, a son of Mrs.
Philip J. Kelly Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Kelly.
The Rev.
Scott O'Brien officiated at the Episcopal Church of St.
Martins-in-the-Fields.
Mrs.
Kelly, 27 years old, is a senior media buyer at Grey Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father, who retired, owned J. S. Mathews Company, an office supply and furniture store in Bridgeport, Conn.


Zaleski's First Task: Settling Housing Issue
MAYOR-ELECT Terence M. Zaleski, fresh from a victory few had predicted with any confidence nine months ago, pledged a new professional approach to Yonkers' problems last week.
He indicated he would begin with the housing controversy that has been the city's single most divisive issue.
The choice is probably a good one, according to housing experts and others familiar with the decade-old landmark court case, because a solution is at hand.
The city may not be required by the Federal court or the plaintiffs to build the final 800 housing units ordered as part of the remedy for 40 years of segregation in the city's schools and housing.


A Commodious Omnium-Gatherum At Dartmouth
Recent debates over whether to celebrate or bemoan the impact of Columbus's voyages on the New World have tended to overlook an undeniable corollary -- that the voyages had an equal, and perhaps greater, effect on the Old.
"The Age of the Marvelous," on view at the Hood Art Museum at Dartmouth College (through Nov. 24), offers an eye-opening look at how European observers in the 16th and 17th centuries responded to the sudden and dramatic expansion of their world provided by the voyages of Columbus and those who followed him.
But as this wide-ranging show demonstrates, the taste for the exotic went far beyond a fascination with the new and strange objects brought back from the New World.
Europe had only recently emerged from the Middle Ages, and all over the continent people were eagerly seeking out new ideas and experiences.
The reports of wonders that came from the Americas and the East Indies fitted well into a prevailing tendency to accept, even celebrate, the possibility of miracles and wonders, whether of this world or the next.
The European world view was marked by a hunger for the unusual and astonishing -- for the marvelous.


SPORTS
Here is a sampling of spectator and participatory sports in New York City and the Meadowlands in East Rutherford, N.J., during the holiday season.
Dates and times are subject to change.
FOR SPECTATORS Basketball
MADISON SQUARE GARDEN, Seventh Avenue and 33d Street, Manhattan.
New York Knickerbockers.
Unless otherwise noted, games are at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets range from $12 to $40.
Information: (212) 465-6741.
A schedule of Knicks home games follows: New Jersey Nets (Nov. 12); Philadelphia 76ers (Nov. 23, 8:30 P.M.); Miami Heat (Nov. 26); Detroit Pistons (Nov. 30, 1 P.M.); Seattle Supersonics (Dec. 11); Boston Celtics (Dec. 14); Nets (Dec. 17); Utah Jazz (Dec. 21); San Antonio Spurs (Dec. 26, 8 P.M.); Indiana Pacers (Dec. 28, 1 P.M.
BRENDAN BYRNE ARENA, the Meadowlands, East Rutherford, N.J.
New Jersey Nets.
Unless otherwise noted, games are at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets range from $10 to $75.
Information: (201) 935-3900.
A schedule of Nets home games follows: Utah Jazz (Nov. 13); Washington Bullets (Nov. 15); Sacramento Kings (Nov. 19); Boston Celtics (Nov. 23); Philadelphia 76ers (Dec. 3); Los Angeles Lakers (Dec. 6); Knicks (Dec. 10, 8 P.M.); Denver Nuggets (Dec. 12); Charlotte Hornets (Dec. 14); Cleveland Cavaliers (Dec. 18); Chicago Bulls (Dec. 20); Atlanta Hawks (Dec. 23); Houston Rockets (Dec. 26); Orlando Magic (Dec. 30).
Football
GIANTS STADIUM, the Meadowlands, East Rutherford, N.J.
New York Giants.
Tickets to most games, at $23, are sold out.
Information: (201) 935-3900.
A schedule of Giants home games follows: Dallas Cowboys (Nov. 17, 4 P.M.); Philadelphia Eagles (Dec. 8, 1 P.M.); Houston Oilers (Dec. 21, 12:30 P.M.).
GIANTS STADIUM, the Meadowlands, East Rutherford, N.J.
New York Jets.
Tickets to most games, at $22.50, are sold out.
Information: (201) 935-3900.
A schedule of Jets home games follows: Indianapolis Colts (Nov. 10, 1 P.M.); San Diego Chargers (Nov. 24, 4 P.M.); New England Patriots (Dec. 15, 1 P.M.).
Hockey
BRENDAN BYRNE ARENA, the Meadowlands, East Rutherford, N.J.
New Jersey Devils.
Unless otherwise noted, games are at 7:35 P.M.
Tickets range from $14 to $30.
Information: (201) 935-3900.
A schedule of Devils home games follows.
Philadelphia Flyers (Nov. 12); New York Islanders (Nov. 14); Winnipeg Jets (Nov. 16, 1:35 P.M.); Washington Capitals (Nov. 20); Hartford Whalers (Nov. 22); Calgary Flames (Dec. 5); Detroit Red Wings (Dec. 7); Pittsburgh Penguins (Dec. 13); Chicago Blackhawks (Dec. 21); Buffalo Sabres (Dec. 28); Washington Capitals (Dec. 29).
NASSAU VETERANS MEMORIAL COLISEUM, Hempstead Turnpike, Uniondale, L.I.
New York Islanders.
Unless otherwise noted, games are at 7:35 P.M.
Tickets range from $14 to $35.
Information: (516) 794-9303.
A schedule of Islanders home games follows: New York Rangers (Nov. 16); Boston Bruins (Nov. 27); Washington Capitals (Nov. 30); Montreal Canadiens (Dec. 5); Chicago Blackhawks (Dec. 7); St.
Louis Blues (Dec. 10); New Jersey Devils (Dec. 14); Pittsburgh Penguins (Dec. 23); Devils (Dec. 26); Rangers (Dec. 28).
MADISON SQUARE GARDEN, Seventh Avenue and 33d Street, Manhattan.
New York Rangers.
Unless otherwise noted, games are at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets range from $12 to $45.
Information: (212) 465-6741.
A schedule of Rangers home games follows: Pittsburgh Penguins (Nov. 11); Washington Capitals (Nov. 13); Philadelphia Flyers (Dec. 2); an exhibition game featuring the United States Olympics team (Dec. 4); Boston Bruins (Dec. 8); San Jose Sharks (Dec. 16); Flyers (Dec. 18); New Jersey Devils (Dec. 23); Penguins (Dec. 29.) Tennis
MADISON SQUARE GARDEN, Seventh Avenue at 33d Street, Manhattan.
Virginia Slims Championships, featuring the top-ranked women's tennis players, including Jennifer Capriati, Monica Seles, Steffi Graf and Gabriela Sabatini.
Nov. 18 through Nov. 24.
Matches Monday through Wednesday, 5 P.M.; Thursday and Friday, 6 P.M.; Saturday at noon; and Sunday at 12:30 P.M.
Tickets range from $15 to $38.
Information: (212) 465-6741.
FOR PARTICIPANTS Today
NEW YORK CITY BIATHLON CHAMPIONSHIP, Central Park. 8 A.M.
A competition with a 3-mile run, a 20-mile bicycle race and another 3-mile run; sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club.
Information: (212) 289-4113.
ROTARY CLUB OF UPPER MANHATTAN, Riverside Drive and 124th Street, Manhattan.
A 10-kilometer foot race sponsored by the Rotary Club of Upper Manhattan. 10 A.M.
Registration: $7 in advance, $10 day of race.
Information: (212) 281-4100.
SWIM WITH THE POLAR BEARS, Stillwell Avenue, Coney Island, Brooklyn.
Every Sunday at 1 P.M., members and guests of Polar Bears U.S.A.
Inc. gather for a dip in the ocean and calisthenics.
Meets at the lifeguards' headquarters.
Free; club membership, $20 annually.
Information: (718) 979-8370.
Tomorrow
53D VETERANS RUN, Clove Lakes Park, Clove Road, Sunnyside, S.I.
A 3 1/4-mile foot race sponsored by the Livingston Post American Legion and the Mid-Island Kiwanis Club. 9 A.M.
Registration: $5 in advance, $6 day of the race.
Information: (718) 387-3767.
Nov. 17
GRAND PRIX RACEWALK SERIES NO. 1, Central Park, Manhattan.
A five-kilometer walk, sponsored by the Park Walker's Club. 10 A.M.
Registration: $7 in advance or $9 day of the race.
Information: (212) 628-1317.
ROAD RUNNER CLUB AGE GROUP CHAMPIONSHIP, Van Cortlandt Park, the Bronx.
Races range from 1 mile for children to 10 kilometers for adults; sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 10 A.M.
Registration fees and information: (212) 860-4455.
Nov. 23
TURKEY CLASSIC FESTIVAL, Central Park.
A five-mile foot race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 10 A.M.
Registration fees and information: (212) 860-4455.
Nov. 24
GRAND PRIX RACEWALK SERIES NO. 2, Central Park.
A five-kilometer racewalk, sponsored by the Park Walker's Club. 10 A.M.
Registration: $7 before the race, $9 day of the race.
Information: (212) 628-1317.
34TH ANNUAL PETE McARDLE MEMORIAL CROSS-COUNTRY CLASSIC, Van Cortlandt Park, the Bronx.
A 15-kilometer run. 11 A.M.
Registration fees and information: (212) 860-4455.
THANKSGIVING HALF-MARATHON, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
A 13.1-mile foot race with a 1-mile certified loop; sponsored by Sri Chinmoy Marathon Team.
Registration: $5 in advance, $7 on day of race.
Information: (718) 291-1468.
TOUR OF FORT TILDEN AND JACOB RIIS PARK, an easy, five-mile bicycle tour of Fort Tilden and Riis Park, part of the Gateway National Recreation Area in Queens, led by a National Park Service ranger.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Fort Tilden, Building 1.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718) 474-4600.
Nov. 28
TURKEY TROT FUN RUN, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A five-mile foot race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 10:30 A.M.
Registration fees and information: (212) 860-4455.
Dec. 1
GRAND PRIX RACEWALK SERIES NO. 3, Central Park.
A five-kilometer walk, sponsored by the Park Walkers Club. 10 A.M.
Registration: $7 before race day, $9 on day of race.
Information: (212) 628-1317.
Dec. 8
RUDOLPH'S RUN, Shore Road and 71st Street, Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
A five-mile foot race sponsored by the Bay Ridge Road Runners Club. 10 A.M.
Registration: $10 in advance, $12 on day of race.
Information: (718) 748-9048.
YOUTH FITNESS-JUNIOR ROAD RUNNERS CLUB SERIES NO. 6, Central Park.
Runs of 50 to 300 yards for children 2 to 6 years old and a mile run for those 6 to 18 years old; sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 9 A.M.
Registration fees and information: (212) 860-4455.
Dec. 22
HOLIDAY 4-MILER, Central Park.
Sponsored by New York Road Runners Club. 9 A.M.
Registration: $11 in advance, $13 within 10 days of the race, $17 on day of race.
Information: (212) 860-4455.
MAC 30K CHAMPIONSHIP, Central Park.
Sponsored by the Metropolitan Athletic Congress. 9:15 A.M.
Registration: $11 in advance, $13 within 10 days of the race, $17 on day of race.
Information: (212) 860-4455.
Dec. 31
RUNNER'S WORLD MIDNIGHT RUN, Central Park.
A five-mile foot race featuring some participants in costume; sponsored by Runner's World Magazine and coordinated by the New York Road Runners Club.
A fireworks display will kick off the race, which will feature free Champagne for runners at some of the water stops.
Registration fees and other information: (212) 860-4455.
All Season
CENTRAL PARK CHESS AND CHECKERS HOUSE, midpark at 64th Street.
Twenty-four tables for outdoor play and 10 for indoor play.
Saturdays and Sundays, 11:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 360-2766.
CENTRAL PARK TENNIS, midpark at 96th Street.
Thirty outdoor courts, open daily, 7 A.M. to dusk.
Full-season permits, $50 ($20 for the elderly; $10 for children).
Permits are available at the Arsenal, Fifth Avenue at 64th Street.
Information: (212) 360-8133.
CLAREMONT RIDING ACADEMY, 175 West 89th Street, Manhattan.
English mounts for hire, $30 an hour.
Lessons and courses are available, with costs ranging from $32 for an hourlong group lesson to $570 for 10 private hourlong lessons.
Special events include a "Christmas Ride" on Dec. 16 at 2 P.M.; each ride costs $85.
Open weekdays, 6:30 A.M. to 10 P.M., and Saturdays and Sundays, 6:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Reservations necessary: (212) 724-5100.
DIXIE DEW STABLES, 88-11 70th Road, Forest Hills, Queens.
English and Western mounts for hire, $17 to $20 an hour.
Lessons and courses are available, ranging from $30 for an hourlong, semi-private lesson to $175 for five private one-hour lessons.
Day trips, $150 (including transportation from the stables and lunch), 8 A.M. to twilight.
Open daily 7:30 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (718) 263-3500.
JAMAICA BAY RIDING ACADEMY, 7000 Belt Parkway, between Flatbush Avenue and Rockaway Parkway, Bergen Beach, Brooklyn.
English and Western mounts for hire, $19 for 45 minutes.
Private English riding lessons available, $40 an hour ($32 for children); group lessons Wednesday evenings, $35 an hour.
Open daily, 9:30 A.M. to 5 P.M., with evening hours Tuesdays and Thursdays, 7 to 9 P.M.
Information: (718) 531-8949.
NORTH MEADOW RECREATION CENTER, Central Park, midpark at 97th Street.
Activities for children include board games, table-top hockey, Ping-Pong, arts and crafts, roller skating, kite-flying, basketball and football.
Weekdays through December, 3 to 5:45 P.M.; open weekends from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Information: (212) 348-4867.
PELHAM BIT STABLES, 9 Shore Road (by City Island), Orchard Bay, the Bronx.
English and Western mounts for hire; $15 an hour on weekdays and $18 an hour on weekends and holidays.
Half-hour and hourlong English riding lessons available, ranging from $20 to $30.
Ten one-hour lessons cost $250.
Open daily, 8 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 885-0551.
VAN CORTLANDT STABLES, West 254th Street and Broadway, Riverdale, the Bronx.
English and Western mounts for hire, $15 an hour on weekdays, $18 an hour weekends and holidays.
Half-hour and hourlong lessons available, ranging from $20 to $30.
Open daily, 8 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 543-4433
ROLLERBLADING LESSONS IN CENTRAL PARK, Manhattan.
Saturdays and Sundays at 10 A.M. at Columbus Circle and 59th Street; sponsored by Peck &amp; Goodie Skate Shop, 919 Eighth Avenue, at 54th Street.
One-hour group lesson: $5.
No reservations necessary.
The store is open for Rollerblade rentals Mondays to Wednesdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursdays and Fridays, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Saturdays, 9:30 A.M. to 6 P.M., Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Cost: $12 to $25, for 2- to 24-hour rentals.
There is also a store at 1351 Second Avenue, at 72d Street.
Information: (212) 246-6123 or (212) 249-3178.
ROLLERBLADING IN PROSPECT PARK.
Park Drive, near the Band Shell, reachable from entrance at Prospect Park West and Ninth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
On Saturdays and Sundays from noon to 4 P.M, a free Rollerblading clinic is sponsored by Slope Skates, 418 Eighth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Skate rental: $10 for two hours, $15 for four hours and $25 for 24 hours.
Store hours for rentals: Tuesdays to Fridays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. and Sundays, noon to 6 P.M.
Information: (718) 499-4933.
STATE KEY ROLLER RINK, 2424 White Plains Road, near Pelham Parkway, Morris Park, the Bronx.
Indoor sessions Wednesdays and Thursdays, 8 P.M. to midnight; Fridays, 8 P.M. to 1 A.M., Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 3 A.M. and Sundays, 12:30 P.M. to midnight; closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission: $3 to $6; skate rental, $1.25.
Information: (212) 547-0700.


Lori Moscowitz Plans to Marry
Dr. and Mrs.
Philip K. Moskowitz of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lori Debra Moskowitz, to William Ben Lepler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Lepler of Cupertino, Calif.
Ms.
Moscowitz, 28 years old, is a senior vice president at Frankfurt Gips &amp; Balkind, a New York advertising agency.
She graduated summa cum laude from Syracuse University.
Her father, an internist, is an associate professor at New York University Medical Center.
Her mother, Carol Moskowitz, is a real estate broker with Cleveland E. Van Wert Inc. in Scarsdale.


CAROLING
Here is a sampling of sing-ins and caroling activities in New York City during the holiday season.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Wednesday
"MESSIAH" SING-IN REHEARSAL, CAMI Hall, 165 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
Sponsored by the National Choral Council, to encourage participation in the group's sing-ins, on Dec. 11 and Dec. 27 at Avery Fisher Hall.  7:30 P.M.
Also on Nov. 21, same time.
Scores may be taken or purchased there.
Refreshments served.
Fee: $10 for one rehearsal, $17 for both.
Seating is limited.
Reservations and information: (212) 333-5333.
Dec. 11


Demigods Aren't Forever
EVERYONE KNOWS the effect James Bond had on women.
But what about men?
His influence on the American male may have been just as powerful, and more profound.
I know.
My early adolescence was devoted to the cult of 007.
And the traces still linger.
For me, 1963 was the year of Bond.
The timing was perfect.
I was 13, and Ian Fleming's slender thrillers had become a national sensation after J.F.K. pronounced "From Russia, With Love" one of his 10 favorite books.
On top of that, Sean Connery had just made his first appearance as the British spy in "Dr. No," and more films were on the way.
This cultural ferment helped redefine my goals.
Before 1963, I wanted to be my father.
After 1963, I wanted to be Bond.


Answering The Mail
Q.
Rain is filling the sunken well around the outside of my basement window, and
water runs under the window on to the basement floor.
Also, there is a crack in the concrete basement wall under this window.
Would digging out the bottom of the window well and filling it with gravel help?
And is there a danger of the basement wall's collapsing?
A.
I doubt that there is any danger of the basement wall's collapsing, even if it does have a crack in it.
Digging out the bottom of the well to a depth of at least 12 inches and filling it with gravel will help if the soil drains well.
If not, you will also have to lay underground drain tile to carry the water at least 10 feet away from the bottom of the window well.
Otherwise, the crack in the wall may allow water to seep into the basement, even if it is not doing this now.
Sealing the edges of the window with foam or rubber weatherstripping also will help keep out the water.


A Tragedy at Sea Brings A Dramatic Shift at the Top
Robert Maxwell, who owned The Daily News for six months, may have been the lambasted and lampooned "Captain Bob" in Britain, but in New York City he was beloved, even a hero.
True, he could be a bully, but in New York that came across as street savvy.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Oct. 27 about fly fishing in New Zealand misidentified the proprietors of Lake Brunner Lodge.
They are Marian van der Goes and Ray Grubb, not Dave Lefeve, who was a guest at the lodge.
In addition, a listing with the article carried outdated phone numbers for the Poronui Ranch and the Tongariro Lodge.
The current numbers are (7) 378-9680 for the Poronui and (7) 386-7946 for the Tongariro.


ROHATYN PUSHES DINKINS TO DROP FISCAL PROPOSAL
In an unusually blunt appraisal, Felix G. Rohatyn, the chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, has urged Mayor David N. Dinkins to abandon the long-term fiscal plan that the Mayor unveiled last week.
Describing the Mayor's proposal to use $1 billion in assistance corporation funds to freeze property taxes as a financial "sacrilege," Mr.
Rohatyn called on Mr.
Dinkins instead to enlist financial monitors and business and union leaders in a more fundamental effort to make New York City government more efficient.


ART
Here is a sampling of arts and entertainment events in New York City during the holiday season, compiled by New York Times critics, writers and contributors.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
"ARTISTS OF CONSCIENCE: 16 YEARS OF SOCIAL AND POLITICAL COMMENTARY," Alternative Museum, 594 Broadway, near Houston Street, SoHo.
One of the art world's most single-minded alternative spaces celebrates its new quarters with a survey of 60 artists, including Carrie Mae Weems, Dennis Adams, Luis Cruz Azaceta, Adrian Piper and the collectives Epoxy and Gran Fury.
Through Jan. 25.
Hours: Tuesdays to Saturdays from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Suggested admission: $3.
Information: (212) 966-4444.
"DISLOCATIONS," Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
History, memory and identity (both national and personal) are just a few of the themes that thread their way through this labyrinthine exhibition of seven environmental installation pieces, with results that are sometimes provocative and sometimes overly earnest.
The show is the first curatorial outing of Robert Storr and features the efforts of Louise Bourgeois, Chris Burden, Sophie Calle, David Hammons, Ilya Kabakov, Bruce Nauman and Adrian Piper.
Through Jan. 7.
Hours: Thursdays from 11 A.M. to 8:45 P.M., Fridays to Tuesdays from 11 A.M. to 5:45 P.M., closed Wednesdays.
Admission: $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free for children under 16).
Information: (212) 708-9480.
"HALLOWED HAUNTS: THE DRAWINGS AND WATERCOLORS OF CHARLES ADDAMS," National Academy of Design, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, Manhattan.
It's Addams Family time.
Along with the coming movie about Morticia and Gomez, there's an exhibition: 73 original watercolors and drawings for the artist's macabre New Yorker magazine cartoons, done between 1935 and his death in 1988.
Through Jan. 12.
Hours: Tuesdays from noon to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays to Sundays from noon to 5 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Information: (212) 369-4880.
"THE INTERRUPTED LIFE," New Museum of Contemporary Art, 583 Broadway, near Prince Street, SoHo.
An elaborate multi-media examination of the theme of death in Western cultures -- sometimes slick, sometimes moving -- that includes installations, paintings, sculpture, film, video and photography by 42 artists, living and dead, established and emerging, from Antonin Artaud and Andy Warhol to Bruce Nauman, Peter Greenaway, Kiki Smith and Sophie Calle.
Through Dec. 29.
Hours: Wednesdays, Thursdays and Sundays from noon to 6 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays from noon to 8 P.M.; closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Suggested admission: $3.50 ($2.50 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 219-1355.
"KENNY SCHARF: CLOSET NO. 9," Queens Museum, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
A sci-fi, Day-Glo, Surrealist installation from a talented veteran of the early 1980's youth wave, perhaps best known for wrestling the Jetsons onto canvas.
Through Dec. 22.
Hours: Tuesdays to Friday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays from noon to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: $2 ($1 for children under 12 and the elderly).
Information: (718) 592-5555.
JACOB LAWRENCE, Studio Museum in Harlem, 144 West 125th Street, Manhattan.
Sixty-three illustrations from the 1930's and 40's, remarkable for their powerful forms and rich colors and devoted to the heroism of Frederick Douglass and Harriet Tubman, through today.
Hours: Today, 1 to 6 P.M.
Admission: $3 ($1 for children, $1.50 for the elderly).
Information: (212) 864-4500.
BRICE MARDEN, Dia Center for the Arts, 548 West 22d Street, Manhattan.
After one of the longer transitional phases on record, the young painting star of the early 1970's is evolving into the eminence grise of the 90's.
The elegant linear networks Mr.
Marden has nurtured over the last decade come to fruition in the paintings, drawings and drawings of his recent "Cold Mountain" series, perhaps his strongest work so far.
Through May 31.
Hours: Thursdays to Sundays from noon to 6 P.M.
Suggested donation: $2.
Information: (212) 989-5912.
"MASTERPIECES OF THE MORGAN LIBRARY," Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, Manhattan.
To inaugurate its new wing, this exemplar of institutional understatement pulls out all the stops, in its own way, with the largest exhibition of its permanent collection it has had: more than 275 master drawings and prints, illuminated manuscripts, rare books and music manuscripts.
Through Jan. 5.
Hours: Tuesdays to Saturdays from 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays from 1 to 5 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Suggested admission: $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 685-0008.
"SCOTT BURTON: THE LAST TABLEAU," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
Lobby installation of the artist's last works of furniture-sculpture, all fabricated after his death in 1989, all giving the figure, a hidden referent throughout his art, a new emphasis.
Through Dec. 8.
Hours: Tuesdays from 1 to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays to Saturdays from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $5 ($3 for students and the elderly, free for children under 12).
Information: (212) 570-3676.
"SEURAT, 1859-1891," Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Despite the absence of several major works, this is a splendid show, whose dark velvety drawings and light-filled paintings trace the development of Georges Seurat's meticulous Pointillist technique and the visual poetry it made possible.
Also at the Met: "NEO-IMPRESSIONISM: FRIENDS AND FOLLOWERS OF SEURAT." Ancillary to the Seurat exhibition, this display of 70 works from the museum's collection hardly tells the whole story of Neo-Impressionism, but it indicates some of the immediate and the more distant repercussions of the style's Pointillist technique and saturated color.
Both through Jan. 12.
Hours: Sundays and Tuesdays to Thursdays from 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays from 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Suggested admission: $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 879-5500.
"SIGMAR POLKE," Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, Crown Heights.
An initially disjointed, ultimately stunning survey of 30 years of pictorial high jinks and high style from this influential German maverick, the master of a light touch and dark vision who is one of the greatest postwar painters.
Through Dec. 29.
Suggested admission: $4 ($2 for students, $1.50 for the elderly).
Hours: Wednesdays to Sundays from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Information: (718) 638-5000.
"UNDERCURRENTS IN THE FLOATING WORLD: CENSORSHIP AND JAPANESE PRINTS," Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, Manhattan.
A new look at some of the most admired of all Japanese art, Ukiyo-e wood block prints, known in the West especially for their influence on Impressionism and their sometimes erotic subject matter.
This exhibition traces 250 years of give and take between the artists and print publishers on the one hand and, on the other, the often rigid governmental controls of the Tokugawa Shogunate (1615-1868).
Even the great Utamaro once spent 50 days in hand shackles for his pictorial sins.
Through Jan. 5.
Hours: Tuesdays to Thursdays and Saturdays from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Fridays from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Sundays from noon to 8 P.M.
Admission: $2 ($1 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 288-6400.
Nov. 12
MATTHEW BARNEY, Barbara Gladstone Gallery, 99 Greene Street, SoHo.
One of the strangest and strongest artistic debuts of the season attempts a new fusion of sculpture, installation and performance, as well as sex, sports and religion.
Through Nov. 23.
Hours: Tuesdays to Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Sundays and Mondays.
Information: (212) 431-3334.
"FRANCESCO CLEMENTE: TESTA CODA," Gagosian Gallery, 980 Madison Avenue, at 76th Street, Manhattan.
A new suite of 27 paintings from the Italian Neo-Expressionist, grouped under a title that translates "Heads and Tails," restates the artist's familiar body-fixated repertory with a new sun-baked palette and an even more claustrophobic sense of space.
Through Nov. 16.
Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 744-2313.
Nov. 14
"CELEBRATING CALDER," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
This 50-work, 50-year retrospective of Alexander Calder, perhaps America's most popular 20th-century sculptor, is drawn from the museum's collection and will include mobiles, stabiles, tapestry, jewelry, works on paper and, of course, "Calder's Circus," the stalwart of the Whitney lobby.
Through Feb. 2.
Hours: Tuesdays from 1 to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays to Saturdays from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $5 ($3 for students and the elderly, free for children under 12).
Information: (212) 570-3676.
Nov. 16
JEFF KOONS, Sonnabend Gallery, 420 West Broadway, near Spring Street, SoHo.
How pornographic is it?
Grist for last season's rumor mill, the latest paintings and sculptures from this artist-provocateur and media circus ringmaster will finally make their way to public view in a widely anticipated gallery show.
Through Dec. 21.
Hours: Tuesdays to Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 966-6160.
Nov. 19
"NICOLAS LANCRET, 1690-1743," the Frick Collection, 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan.
The first retrospective devoted to this follower of Watteau and master of Rococo anecdote will feature 29 paintings and 16 drawings, including "Blind Man's Buff." Through Jan. 12.
Hours: Tuesdays to Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sundays from 1 to 6 P.M.
Admission: $3 ($1.50 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 288-0700.
Nov. 21
"FROM EXPRESSIONISM TO RESISTANCE, ART IN GERMANY 1909-1936: THE MARVIN AND JANET FISHMAN COLLECTION," Jewish Museum at the New-York Historical Society, Central Park West at 77th Street, Manhattan.
As this exhibition of 190 works should prove, the powder keg of early 20th-century Germany was mirrored in a series of provocative art styles, from prewar Expressionism to the biting satire of George Grosz and Otto Dix.
Through Jan. 26.
Sundays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Fridays from 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.; Thursdays from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; closed Mondays and Saturdays.
Admission: $4.50 ($3 for students and the elderly, $1 for children under 12).
Information: (212) 399-3430.
Nov. 22
ALEXIS SMITH, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
A 16-year survey of a leading California Conceptualist known for weaving together words, images and the ephemera of popular (especially movie) culture into elaborate, often touching narratives.
Through March 1.
Hours: Tuesdays from 1 to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays to Saturdays from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $5 ($3 for students and the elderly, free for children under 12).
Information: (212) 570-3676.
Nov. 23
"STUART DAVIS, AMERICAN PAINTER," Metropolitan Museum of Art.
A major survey, the first in more than 20 years, of one of the great artistic spans of American modernism, a career that reaches from the Armory Show of 1913 to the 1960's.
Davis was always finding new ways to translate Cubism into an American vernacular.
Through Feb. 16.
Hours: Sundays and Tuesdays to Thursdays from 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays from 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Suggested admission: $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 879-5500.
Dec. 8
"DENNIS OPPENHEIM: AND THE MIND GREW FINGERS, SELECTED WORKS FROM 1967-1991," P.S. 1, 46-01 21st Street, Long Island City, Queens.
A three-floor survey of this erratic yet prominent contributor to earthworks, body art, process art and installation art, a compleat early 1970's artist who still finds new things to do.
Through March 8.
Hours: Wednesdays to Sundays from noon to 6 P.M.
Suggested admission: $2.
Information: (718) 784-2084.


TELEVISION
Here is a sampling of arts and entertainment events in New York City during the holiday season, compiled by New York Times critics, writers and contributors.
Dates and times are subject to change.
November
CBS "CLASSIC WEEKEND." Reprising its unexpected success of last year, CBS brings back a retro-programmed weekend: "Bob Newhart's 19th Anniversary," a look back at both of his CBS series, Nov. 23 at 8 P.M.; "The Very Best of Ed Sullivan II," more highlights from that venerable CBS hit, with Burt Reynolds as the host, Nov. 24 at 9 P.M., and "Memories of M*A*S*H," a retrospective with clips and interviews with the stars of that much-honored CBS hit, Nov. 25 at 9:30 P.M.
"E.T. THE EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL." The television premiere of one of the most popular movies of all time.
CBS bought the rights to Steven Spielberg's classic and scheduled it for Thanksgiving night in the hope it can become a holiday standard.
CBS, Nov. 28 at 8 P.M.
December
"ONE AGAINST THE WIND." A fact-based story of a British-born woman in Nazi-occupied France and her efforts to smuggle Allied soldiers back to England.
With Judy Davis and Sam Neill.
It is the "Hallmark Hall of Fame" presentation, geared at stoking sales of holiday cards, and for that reason this is often one of the stronger television movies of the year.
CBS, Dec. 1 at 9 P.M.
"HONOR BRIGHT." Part of a new network tradition: putting popular series stars in Christmas movies.
Kirk Cameron ("Growing Pains" ) plays a young man devoted to his developmentally disabled sister.
He promises to find her a friend for Christmas.
NBC, Dec. 2 at 9 P.M.
PEARL HARBOR SPECIALS.
Two networks recall one of the central moments in 20th-century American history for its 50th anniversary.
ABC News will co-produce a documentary with the NHK network in Japan anchored by David Brinkley, who will provide personal reminiscences.
Dec. 5 at 9 P.M.
CBS has Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf, retired, as co-host of its special to provide expert analysis on the attack.
CBS plans to use a technique similar to the PBS "Civil War" series, mixing photographs, film and words of witnesses.
Dec. 7 at 8 P.M.
"ONE SPECIAL VICTORY." A television takeoff on Scrooge with John Larroquette playing an avaricious real-estate salesman sentenced to 50 hours of community service.
He ends up coaching a basketball team of developmentally disabled adults. (Christmas television movies often follow certain patterns.) Lessons to be learned about the meaning of Christmas here; and just maybe the hero will even learn something about himself, too.
NBC, Dec. 8 at 9 P.M.
"YES, VIRGINIA, THERE IS A SANTA CLAUS." Perhaps the first movie ever based on a newspaper editorial.
The movie dramatizes young Virginia O'Hanlon, who wrote her famous letter to The Sun in New York in 1897.
Richard Thomas plays her Irish immigrant father, James.
Edward Asner plays the editor, Edward P. Mitchell, who assigns the reporter Francis Church the task of writing an eloquent response.
And Charles Bronson rather startlingly plays the eloquent writer.
ABC, Dec. 8 at 9 P.M.
"MIRACLE MADE IN THE WILDERNESS." An original Christmas movie on cable.
A pioneer family is captured by an Indian tribe and witnesses a miracle in the forest as a doe gives birth out of season on Christmas Eve.
Kris Kristofferson and Kim Cattrall play the pioneer couple.
TNT on cable, Dec. 9 at 8, 10 P.M. and midnight.
"THE STORY LADY." A long-awaited television movie because it brings the Oscar-winner Jessica Tandy to television playing a widow who finds success reading stories in a children's hour on television, only to find herself exploited as "Granny Goodheart." NBC, Dec. 9 at 9 P.M.
"A CARNEGIE HALL CHRISTMAS CONCERT." The soprano Kathleen Battle and the mezzo-soprano Frederica von Stade join the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis in performances of classical works of the season, along with spirituals and traditional carols.
Andre Previn leads the Orchestra of St.
Luke's.
Simulcast on WQXR (1560 AM, 96.3 FM).
Channel 13, Dec. 11 at 8 P.M.
"NICK OF TIME." What happens if Santa Claus has to retire?
Lloyd Bridges as Santa decides to look for a replacement in New York City, of all places, and finds his man in a cynical newspaper reporter, of all people.
This is a Disney fantasy, in case you hadn't guessed.
Nice title.
It also stars Michael Tucker and Allison LaPlaca.
NBC, Dec. 12 at 9 P.M.
"CHRISTMAS ON DIVISION STREET." Making sure the entire family is employed during the holiday season, Hume Cronyn stars in this movie about a homeless man (another theme rears its head) befriended by a boy who, naturally enough, learns the true meaning of Christmas -- and a bit about himself as well.
Fred Savage is the astute boy.
CBS, Dec. 15 at 9 P.M.
"CIRQUE DU SOLEIL II -- A NEW EXPERIENCE." The Canadian circus troupe with new acts, including a serpentine contortionist, aerialists, cyclists, and long lists of others.
HBO on cable, Dec. 17 at 8 P.M., Dec. 21 at 6:30 A.M. and 5 P.M.; Dec. 27 at 6 P.M. and Dec. 30 at 5 P.M.


Horowitz: Posthumous Poetry (and Prose)
A year and a half ago, Sony Classical issued Vladimir Horowitz's "Last Recording," a recital including memorable performances of Chopin and Liszt taped within days of the pianist's death, on Nov. 5, 1989.
But Horowitz's celebrity was such that no recording could possibly be his last.
New this fall is "Horowitz the Poet," comprising previously unissued versions of Schubert's B-flat Sonata (D. 960), a 1986 studio recording, and Schumann's "Kinderszenen," a 1987 concert recording from Vienna's Musikverein (Deutsche Grammophon 435 025; CD and cassette).
Both performances prove illuminating -- in unintended ways.


All About/Pickup Trucks; Will Detroit Lose Control of the Reliable Pickup?
Automobiles go through a metamorphosis every new model year.
But pickup trucks are a constant.
Though options have been added, the basic models have changed very little through the years.
Such steadfastness has been good for Detroit.
Pickup trucks, which account for about 18 percent of all vehicles sold, are one of the last segments of the market in which the Big Three still hold a substantial edge.
Intensely loyal buyers make Ford and Chevrolet's full-size pickups their best-selling vehicles year after year, outselling even their most popular cars.
Detroit dominates the compact and intermediate pickup categories as well.


Baedeker
To the Editor: Karl E. Meyer's piece left out one of the more rewarding aspects of reading and relying on "pre-owned" travel guides.
A Denver acquaintance collects old travel guides and he prefers those with handwritten notations by previous owners.
In the days gone by, when people had time to enjoy leisurely travel, they had time to note their impressions in their guides.
Thus, one finds remarks like "Not worth the effort," or "Nothing compares to it at midnight with a full moon."


Gretchen Morgenson, Editor, to Wed
Rebecca A. Morgenson of Oxford, Ohio, and Dr.
Donald F. Morgenson of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, have announced the engagement of their daughter Gretchen Cooke Morgenson to Paul John Devlin Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Devlin of Gulfstream, Fla.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Morgenson, 35 years old, is a senior editor at Forbes magazine in New York and a co-author of "The Woman's Guide to the Stock Market." She graduated from St.
Olaf College in Northfield, Minn.
Her father is a professor of psychology at Wilfrid Laurier University in Waterloo.
Mr.
Devlin, 47, is a managing director at Bear, Stearns, investment bankers, in New York.
He graduated from the University of Notre Dame.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.
His father, now retired, was the director of surgery at St.
Elizabeth's Hospital in New York.


Mystery's Mystery
IT IS not difficult to avoid disclosing the plot of a mystery when writing about a play.
The reviewer concentrates on aspects of the production like acting or direction and on elements in the script like characterization or structure.
But in "Accomplice," the mystery thriller by Rupert Holmes at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale, to discuss even the play's structure is to give away something.
And so read no further if surprise is a key element to your enjoyment of theater.


Pittsburgh Holds Off Rutgers
Alex Van Pelt passed for 335 yards and a touchdown and ran for the go-ahead score today as Pittsburgh ended a four-game losing streak by holding off Rutgers, 22-17.
The Panthers (6-4) assured themselves of a winning season and improved to 9-0 against Rutgers, which has been outscored by 307-102 in the series.
The Scarlet Knights (5-5) lost their fourth in a row and must beat Temple on Saturday to avoid a losing season after starting 5-1.


OLD HABITS
Joe Sharkey's About Men column "Old Habits" (Sept. 29) struck a nostalgic chord.
I was educated at a Roman Catholic high school in New York City by teaching brothers who devoted their lives to seeing to it that we graduated with immeasurably more intellectual as well as societal and spiritual awareness than we might have thought ourselves capable of.
In response to the belittling potshots that you hear about Catholic schooling every now and then, I'd like to bear witness to its effectiveness in building character as well as love of country.
Sharkey's expression of the liberating and enlightening effects of that experience was, like the rest of his recollection, a fond remembrance of those formative and fun years.
RAYMOND T. FARRELL
New York, N.Y.


Dayton Tops Hofstra to Stay Unbeaten
Pat Hofacre's 3-yard touchdown run with 10 minutes 21 seconds to play in the game enabled undefeated Dayton to extend its streak to nine with a 14-7 victory over Hofstra (7-2) yesterday afternoon in Dayton, Ohio.
The Flyers, ranked third nationally in Division III of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, have won 36 successive regular-season games at home.
The defeat ended a Hofstra winning streak at five games.


'Not a Buffoon, Not a Criminal'
To the Editor:
In his article "Blacks on TV: Scrambled Signals"  [ Oct. 27 ] , John J. O'Connor articulated what many of us Afro-American viewers have long despaired of: that prime-time network television greatly fears the black man unless he is fat, funny, frightening or from the past.
Read that 4-F -- rejected.


'Death Solves All Problems,' He Said
STALIN
Breaker of Nations. By Robert Conquest.  Illustrated. 346 pp. New York: Viking. $25.


Eleanor Pollock Hughes, 91, Dies; Top Editor at National Magazines
Eleanor Pollock Hughes, former top editor of three national magazines and a public relations executive for several Federal agencies, died Friday at Sibley Hospital in Washington.
She was 91 years old and lived in Arlington, Va.
Mrs. Hughes died of heart disease, friends said.


Maude Muto to Wed
Anthony L. Muto and Laverne Dagras Levine, both of New York, have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Maude Mary Muto, and Richard Anthony Cangiolosi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony P. Cangiolosi of East Hampton, L.I.
Miss Muto, 31 years old, is an elementary-school teacher at the Hampton Day School in Bridgehampton, L.I.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received a master's in education from Hunter College.
Mr.
Cangiolosi, 32, is a masonry contractor in East Hampton.


Wedding Plans For Miss Gould
Dr. and Mrs.
Kenneth S. Gould of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Georgeanne Helen Gould to David Alexander Shotland, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles G. Shotland of Rye, N.Y.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Gould, 29 years old, is a lawyer at Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a J.D. from Yeshiva University.
Her father is a psychiatrist in private practice and a clinical professor of psychiatry at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School.
Her mother, Audrey Gould, is a first vice president with Merrill Lynch in Princeton.


Humming Along With Hyundai's Sonata
AS one afflicted with an oft-misspelled and usually mispronounced name, I am sympathetic to Hyundai.
The South Korean company has been sending cars to the United States for five years now, and you still hear some very strange renditions of its moniker.
To set the record straight (and this is a good day for it), the name is Hunday as in Sunday.
And the names of its products are Excel and Elantra, Scoupe and Sonata.


Lions Rampant; Royalty, Too
THURSDAY -- The New York Public Library honored 20 authors, columnists and poets at the 11th Literary Lions dinner at the library, Fifth Avenue and 42d Street.
The general book fund was the beneficiary of the evening.
WEDNESDAY -- David Rockefeller and his wife, Peggy, were the hosts at a private dinner at the Museum of Modern Art for the Queen and Crown Prince of Thailand.
Among the 120 guests were 24 from the royal entourage.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Freehold 123,000
14 Mead Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 33-year-old Cape Cod; 1-car garage, c/a, eat-in-kitchen, fenced yard; taxes $2,866.
Jackson 119,990
17 Princeton Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old split level; fireplace, patio, family room, w/w carpeting; taxes $3,400.
Lakewood 109,900
771 Coral Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 4-year-old ranch; eat-in-kitchen, full basement, deck, fenced yard; taxes $2,815.
Mahwah 318,000
16 Judith Court  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; h/w floors, fireplace, deck; taxes $3,541.
Morristown 189,000
47 Ralph Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old split level; enclosed porch, large bay window, fenced yard; taxes $3,755.
Waldwick 185,000
22 Durante Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 32-year-old split level; patio, new tile bath, remodeled kitchen; taxes $3,926.
OTHER AREAS Chappaqua, N.Y. 240,000
316 Quaker Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 64-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, covered porch, taxes $4,759.
Avon, Conn. 187,000
96 Moravia Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; central vacuum, new roof, 1 acre; taxes $2,697.
Coram, L.I. 141,000
21 Goodwin Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year- old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,900.


Democrats Upset Balance of Power
FOR Democrats, taking control of the County Board of Legislators was an impossible dream.
But for the first time in Westchester's modern legislative history, power shifted last week from the Republicans to the Democrats, bringing the possibility of profound change.
The transition from a seemingly comfortable 10-to-7 Republican majority to a 9-to-8 Democratic edge stunned political leaders.
Some saw it as an indication of growing anger among voters toward incumbents, most of whom are Republicans in a county that is becoming increasingly Democratic.
There are 151,147 enrolled Democrats and 142,449 Republicans in the county.


Stories With a Pointe
SWAN LAKE
Written and illustrated by Rachel Isadora.
Unpaged.
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)
OF SWANS, SUGARPLUMS AND SATIN SLIPPERS
Ballet Stories for Children.
By Violette Verdy.
Illustrated by Marcia Brown. 90 pp.
New York: Scholastic. $15.95. (Ages 7 to 11)


Data Update
VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
(Residential in millions of dollars)
Sept. 91
Sept. 90
Change
New York
396.4
511.1
-22%
New Jersey
151.2
99.8
+54%
Connecticut
96.8
90.9
+ 6%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.97
9.13
10.33
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.69
6.71
8.27
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.84
8.98
10.15
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.56
6.59
8.01
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.85
8.98
10.23
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.61
6.64
8.17
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.17
9.30
10.55
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.15
7.21
8.53
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
5.15
5.39
7.41
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.93
8.93
9.70
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


First Down


Review/Fashion; Distilling the Spring Trends
By its very nature, fashion has to change.
That's the name of the game.The question now is how drastically?
In the spring collections shown last week on Seventh Avenue, it was apparent that designers are grappling with the problem of how far to go.
Some designers have responded by making minimal refinements, cutting skirts fuller, say, or dropping a few hemlines as a teaser.
Others are making clothes tighter as well as longer.
And still others are going all-out sexy with see-through fabrics and crotch-high slits.


Miss Gay Weds R. E. Dailey Jr.
Suzanne Camilla Gay, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter A. Gay of Stuart, Fla., was married yesterday in Darien, Conn., to Robert Emmet Dailey Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dailey of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Frederick T. Bender performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Dailey, 30 years old, is a sales manager for the Gitman Brothers Shirt Company in New York.
She graduated from Sweet Briar College.
Her father, who is retired, was a sales executive with I.B.M. in New York.
Mr.
Dailey, 30, is an associate in municipal finance at Kidder, Peabody in New York.
He graduated from Georgetown University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
His mother, Louise S. Dailey, is the president of Jubilee Yacht Charters in Darien.
His father is the manager of treasury projects at the Xerox Corporation in Stamford, Conn.


Dr. Petty Weds W. J. Williams
Dr.
Leonora Kathleen Petty, a child psychiatrist, and Dr.
William James Williams, a professor of public administration, were married yesterday in a Quaker ceremony at the Centre Friends Meeting in Centreville, Del.
Dr.
Petty, who is 43 years old and is retaining her name, graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received an M.D. from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the medical director of the adolescent unit at the Spartanburg (S.C.) Regional Medical Center.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Leon E. Petty and Dr.
Hester S. Petty of Chadds Ford, Pa.
Her father is a psychologist in private practice in Centreville and her mother is a private investor.
Dr.
Williams, 55, is a professor at the University of Southern California at Los Angeles and the author of five books in his field.
He graduated from Morehouse College and has an M.A. from New York University and a Ph.D in public administration from the University of Southern California.
His first marriage ended in divorce.
The son of the late Eugene W. Phillips and the late Celestine Cooper, he took the name of Williams, after his maternal grandmother, the late Laura Williams.


The Beholder's Eye


RECORD BRIEFS
'Drunken Boat'
First Warning/B.M.G. 75704; CD only.


Corrections
An article last Sunday in Entertaining, part 2 of The Times Magazine, describing how Washington diplomats entertain, included an erroneous price supplied by the distributor, Gardener's Eden, for a 31-inch vase.
The correct mail-order price was $29, not $19.50, but the company says the vase is permanently out of stock.
A 30-inch version is available from Gardener's Eden for $32.


It's Not Too Late to Plant Some Bulbs
THE usual deadline for planting bulbs has passed.
Supposedly all bulbs should be in the ground by Election Day.
But this fall has been mild.
Many vegetables, like tomatoes and squash, and annuals like vincas and impatiens, seemed to last forever.
Lawns were still being mowed.
This sort of weather provided a sense of ennui that the planting chores could be delayed for another day or two.
And so the bulbs sat unplanted in the toolshed, garage or garden center's bins.
But as any gardener knows, winter is on its way.
Bulbs are better in the ground now, even at this late date, than left in the garage or toolshed, where they will eventually freeze or rot, or both.
Even if the blanket of leaves has to be pushed aside for the planting efforts, it is better that it be done, and done quickly.
Remember the basic bulb-planting rule: well-drained soil and a level base for the bulbs, so water does not sit under them.


Foreign Affairs; How to Beat the Democrats
President Bush's new campaign strategy of bashing Congress will defeat some Congressional Democrats, but it won't get him re-elected.
It leads only to blind alleys.
And if Mr.
Bush pushes it to extremes, as he did last week by canceling his trip to Asia, he will undermine his own great strength in foreign policy.
Mr.
Bush's outside political advisers plus his chief aide, John Sununu, advocate bashing.
"All he's got to do is to create an enemy, and the enemy is Congress," Charles Black, a Republican political consultant told me by way of explaining the strategy launched by Mr.
Bush two weeks ago in Texas.
"Even if the public doesn't like the President, they don't like Congress more," Mr.
Black said.
"He's got to become more confrontational."


Q and A
Disney Shareholders' Rates
Q.
I have heard that if you own any Disney stock you are entitled to a discount at Disney resorts.
Is this true? -- Emily A. Neer, Rifton, N.Y.
A.
It is true, but only if you bought the stock before Jan. 18, 1991.
The discount program, called the Magic Kingdom Club, is under review, according to Kim Wilson, its Eastern regional manager, and no decision has been made on whether the program will continue past Feb. 8, 1992, when the 1991 offerings end.
Disney is advising shareholders who now qualify not to depend on the discounts in making plans after that date, she said.
A decision should come in January, she added.


Things That Melt the Humbuggiest Heart
THERE are days and ways that New York City seems like not that nice a place to be.
Winters are the worst.
The wind whistles wildly down the avenues, slaps you on the cheeks like a spurned lover and leaves your eyes watering pitifully.
No matter how cold the air, the streets are filled with dirty slush.
You dream of Florida, but you're lucky to scrape together $7.50 for a movie.
The millionth homeless person, looking eminently capable of honest work, has asked you for just a dollar.
Everywhere you turn, somebody hustles to sell you something you don't need.
So you grit your teeth and remember the ancient Manhattan truth that only rats win rat races.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about the Connecticut Grand Opera's production of "The Magic Flute" misidentified the participants.
Robin Buck, who sings the role of Papageno, was at the left.
Tom O'Horgan, the director, was in the center.
Laurence Gilgore, music director, was at the right.


Sandinista Militants Riot Over Bombing of Founder's Tomb
Sandinista militants set fire to cars and the offices of Managua's right-wing mayor today after a bomb destroyed part of the tomb of a founder of the Sandinista National Liberation Front.
A bomb placed early today on the tomb of Carlos Fonseca, killed in 1976 fighting the army of the dictator Anastasio Somoza, took out a chunk of the concrete tomb in Managua's Revolution Plaza.


The Word On Hrbek
To the Sports Editor:
Claire Smith ("Morris Lifts His Game to Much Higher Level," The Times, Oct. 30) spotted a sign in Atlanta reading "Hrbek Buy a Vowel," and the Twins' first baseman's name certainly looks as though it was written on a broken typewriter.
Actually, it's a perfectly good Czechoslovak name (from the same Slavic root for "hunchbacked" as is the Russian "Gorbachev").
In Czech words, r and l often serve as vowels, e.g.
"drk"
(neck),
"hrdy"
(proud),
"vlk"
(wolf),
"plny"
(full).
LOUIS JAY HERMAN New York The writer is the author of "A Dictionary of Slavic Word Families" (Columbia University Press, 1975).


Margit R. Ahlin Has a Wedding
Margit Ruth Ahlin, managing director of the Third Step Theater Company in New York, and Alfred Anthony D'Andrea Jr., the company's artistic director, were married yesterday at Ye Waverly Inn.
The Rev.
Timothy S. Ives, a Congregational minister, officiated.
Ms.
Ahlin, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of New York University, she is, in addition to her position at Third Step, an actress, director and playwright.
She is a daughter of DeLoris Ahlin of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Jack T. Ahlin of Danbury, Conn.
Her father retired as the director of management development for I.B.M. in Armonk, N.Y.
Her mother is a psychotherapist in Chappaqua.
The bridegroom, 43, graduated from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and received a law degree from Catholic University School.
He is of counsel to the law firm of Jordan &amp; Hamburg in New York.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred D'Andrea of Holbrook, L.I.
His father is a retired printer's-machinist.


Roberta Curtis Weds Mark Ginsberg
Roberta Darby Curtis and Mark Emanuel Ginsberg, both architects in New York, were married yesterday at the National Academy of Design in Manhattan.
Judge Jose A. Cabranes of the Federal District Court in Connecticut officiated.
Ms.
Curtis, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is a daughter of Alan Curtis of Palm Beach, Fla., and Myrna Curtis of Suffern, N.Y.
A graduate of Washington University, she received a master's degree in architecture from Columbia University.
Her father is a retired managing director of Dillon, Read &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.
Her mother is a family counselor at the Volunteer Counseling Service in Rockland County.
Mr.
Ginsberg, 34, is an associate at Richard Dattner Architect in Manhattan.
A graduate of Wesleyan University with a master's degree in architecture from the University of Pennsylvania, he is a son of William R. Ginsberg of New York and the late Susan K. Ginsberg.
His mother was a lawyer.
His father is the Distinguished Professor of Environmental Law at the Hofstra Law School.


U.N.'s Nuclear Inquiry Exposes Treaties' Flaws
As the United Nations uncovers evidence of Iraq's far-reaching efforts to develop nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, it is also exposing the weaknesses of international agreements to halt the spread of such weapons.
The inaccuracy of Iraq's Scud missile attacks against Israel and Saudi Arabia during the Persian Gulf war is seen as evidence that a 17-nation agreement restricting sales of rocket technology prevented Iraq from acquiring modern guidance systems.
But even though President Saddam Hussein's success in getting around many other anti-proliferation pacts has led some to question their usefulness, that success has also heightened concern about the spread of dangerous technology and prompted new efforts to tighten existing curbs.


POSTINGS: Restoration; Desooting a Church's Facade
Scaffolding still extends along two sides of the Church of the Incarnation, at the corner of Madison Avenue and 35th Street, but a century of New York City soot no longer clings to its front facade and tower.
"One hundred years of dirt and grime hid the pinkish and reddish colors of brownstone," said the Rev.
J.
Douglas Ousley, the rector of the 127-year-old Murray Hill landmark.
"Water damaged the interior walls and stones fell off towards the street."


Sports of The Times; The Plague Finally Reaches the Box Scores
DURING the first decade of the plague, we learned that the obituary page had a lingo just like the sports page.
There were facts, and there were euphemisms, and there were hints.
Men were dying young.
Sometimes it was stated they had died of AIDS, and other times one had to guess from the wording, the sadness that hung like a telltale cloud: "Age 34, his companion was, no survivors, in lieu of flowers, research, etc. etc."


The House We Lived In
IT WAS APRIL OF 1990, JUST A FEW MONTHS after the toppling of the Berlin wall, when Paul and Christine Wallich first visited the family home they had never known.
They anticipated the worst.
From the reports they had received in the United States, they imagined the house fit only to be razed.
The house stood in Potsdam, just across the Havel River from Berlin's western edge.
The eerie silence of this spot a few dozen yards from the Glienicke Bridge, once a heavily guarded border zone and famous as the point for East-West spy exchanges during the cold war, had already been replaced by the clamor of a city busy making up for lost time.
Tourists stood on the river's shore, snapping photos of the palaces and grand houses across the water.
A construction crew was removing the remains of the wall and barbed wire separating Potsdam from West Berlin.


A Wedding in May for Dina Siegel
William and Priscilla Siegel of Wayne, N.J. have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dina Elaine Siegel, to Dr.
Ziv J. Haskal , a son of Dr.
Haim and Ruth Haskal of Brookline, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Siegel, 29 years old, graduated from Vassar College.
She is a freelance television news producer and writer in San Francisco.
Until recently, she was a producer and writer for CBS News in New York.
Her father owns H &amp; P Equipment Company, a process-machinery dealer in Montville, N.J.
Her mother is an artist based in New York.
Dr.
Haskal, 30, graduated from Boston University, where he also received a medical degree.
He is an interventional radiologist at the University of California, San Francisco.
His mother is an adult nurse practioner at the Lemuel Shattuck Hospital in Jamaica Plain, Mass.
His father, an electro-optical engineer, is a private consultant and research scientist in Brookline.


An American Dog in Paris
OOH-LA-LA
(Max in Love).
Written and illustrated by Maira Kalman.
Unpaged.
New York: Viking. $14.95. (All ages)


Old Yacht Club
To the Editor:
The Streetscapes column on Sept. 8 on the McFarlane-Bredt House ("The Old Yacht Club on Staten Island") concludes that the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation "is not keen on historic houses." This is simply not true.


Canadian Dollar Drops, Yen Off
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
130.38
129.85
129.80
per Dollar
German
Mark
1.6745
1.6460
1.4870
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1308
1.1200
1.1678
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7637
1.7675
1.9660
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$353.80
$366.00
$384.40
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


The Executive Life; When Shut-Eye Goes, So Does the Work Day
Gail R., a 42-year-old attorney with a New York real estate law firm, could not get a good night's sleep.
Day after day, she arrived at her office dog tired.
She tried everything -- gallons of coffee, pinching her legs -- and still dozed off at her desk.
"I felt tired and lousy all the time," she said.
"My work was uneven because my energy was sapped."


In Various Guises, the Human Form Endures as Inspiration
PHILIP VERRE was appointed director of the Hudson River Museum last year.
Now he is making his curatorial debut with "Experiencing Sculpture: The Figure in American Art, 1850 to 1990," assisted by Laura Hardin, curator of collections, and Kathryn Adamchick, director of education.
The title smacks a bit of Channel 9's admonition to "experience" the news, but the show it identifies is exceptional, not least for addressing its viewers as if they were capable of understanding.
It also presumes they are there to see more than to read, to be with the art and hence -- like the word or not -- to experience it.


Last U.S. Sub Leaving Scotland for Home
The last submarine from an American Navy base due to be closed left Scotland for home today to a final farewell from anti-nuclear demonstrators.
Protesters in a small launch followed the U.S.S.
Will Rogers, a Poseidon class Polaris nuclear submarine, when it moved out of the Holy Loch base in western Scotland for a last patrol before returning to its home port of New London, Conn.


CAMPUS LIFE: Michigan; A Philosopher Challenges Campus Crowds
When the wind blew the last of the fall leaves across the square, known as the Diag, that is the University of Michigan's central gathering place, it took along a man who for three months transformed Diag conversation every Thursday from the casual and often banal to the esoteric and sometimes philosophical.
Stoney Burke, the 38-year-old self-described "street philosopher" who departed 10 days ago, said he was heading South in pursuit of warmer weather.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 10, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $6.99.) The experiences of a couple on a trek across Europe during the ice age.
2
9
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
3
3
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
4
11
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
5
16
THE MUMMY, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Ramses the Great and Cleopatra return to life.
6
4
RENDEZVOUS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $4.99.) A freethinking British woman engaged to an earl has some second thoughts.
7
2
THE RIFT, by Peter David. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" novel.
8 *
20
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents; reclassified this week as fiction.
9
2
THE EAGLE HAS FLOWN, by Jack Higgins. (Pocket, $5.99.) A German attempt to rescue a paratrooper who tried to assassinate Churchill.
10 *
5
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Avon, $5.99.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.
11 *
5
SEASON OF THE SUN, by Catherine Coulter. (Onyx, $5.99.) A historical romance about an Irish belle and a Viking.
12 *
2
HOCUS POCUS, by Kurt Vonnegut. (Berkley, $5.99.) Life in the near future, as noted by a college professor and prison administrator.
13
3
HAWAII HERITAGE, by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam, $4.99.) The Holt family's activities in Florida, in New York and in Hawaii after the downfall of Queen Liliuokalani.
14 *
6
QUESTION QUEST, by Piers Anthony. (Avon, $4.99.) A woman is sent to hell to rescue a missing sorcerer; part of the "Xanth" fantasy series.
15 *
1
POSSESSION, by A. S. Byatt. (Vintage, $12.) A pair of British academics pursue the relationship between two Victorian poets.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
25
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
2
17
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
3
418
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
4 *
103
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.
5
2
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, touch, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
6
33
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
7
3
SEXUAL PERSONAE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $15.) The case for regarding all art as a pagan battleground between male and female, form and chaos, civilization and demonic nature.
8 *
18
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
9 *
1
A LIFE ON THE ROAD, by Charles Kuralt. (Ivy, $5.99.) The memoirs of the itinerant television newscaster.
10 *
26
WHEN RABBIT HOWLS, by the Troops for Truddi Chase. (Jove, $4.95.) A woman voices the 92 personalities that live within her.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
6
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
13
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
67
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
47
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
2
UNNATURAL SELECTIONS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) A collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Wall Street; Tarnish on the Bright Small-Company Outlook
There was evidence last week that there might be trouble ahead for small-company stocks, which have been the market darlings so far this year.
With most quarterly results in, it has become clear that most Wall Street analysts were far too optimistic about how strong small-company profits would be, said Randall Pearson, a vice president at the Institutional Brokers Estimate System, an earnings analysis firm.
While the analysts were fairly close to the mark in their cumulative estimates for large and giant-sized companies, they overestimated in their cumulative earnings projections for smaller companies by a whopping 22.2 percent, Mr.
Pearson said.


Coins
Some ideas are better than others.
Minting a gold dollar to celebrate the Louisiana Purchase was not such a good idea.
The idea arose in 1903 in connection with the St.
Louis World's Fair.
The proper title of the fair was the Louisiana Purchase Exposition.
But long before Americans started humming "Meet Me in St. Louis" plans were made to mint a coin that could be sold as a souvenir.


Orchestras and Soloists: Busy Week in New Haven
A BUSY week in New Haven starts this afternoon at 3, when the Yale Repertory Orchestra will give a free concert at Sprague Hall.
The program is a symphonic potpourri of overtures, suites and concerto movements, with podium honors shared by four conducting fellows at the School of Music.
For information, call 432-4157.
Tonight at 8, down the block at Woolsey Hall, one of the major figures in the world of organ music, Marie-Claire Alain, brings her prodigious memory (she usually travels without any scores) and enormous repertory (her discography of 200-plus recordings includes 14 winners of the Grand Prix du Disque) to the Sunday Evening Music Series at Yale.
On tap: music by Bach, Franck, Widor and the organist's late husband, Jehan Alain (432-4157).


Editorial Notebook; Poor Home, Great Track
New York City's largest shelters for the homeless are a gross official embarrassment, none more so than the huge Fort Washington Armory at the north end of Manhattan.
Some 600 men bed down there on cots set out on a vast open floor built for National Guard drills.
There's little security, less privacy and no dignity.
That's one reason to put Fort Washington high on the list of shelters to be closed or drastically scaled down under Mayor David Dinkins's new plan for the homeless.
But there's another reason, just as compelling.
Removing the homeless from the armory could revive a sports program of immeasurable value to the city, at virtually no public cost.


Wall Street; More Data, Less Time to Act On It
As they say on the sidelines, you win some and you lose some.
Last week, Wall Street's customers won a battle for more complete information about their brokers' past behavior, but were dealt a setback in a campaign for more time to sue over securities fraud complaints.
The "thrill of victory" belongs to the state-level securities regulators, the self-styled advocates of the small investor.
Their national organization, the North American Securities Administrators Association, has been battling for more than a year with the Securities and Exchange Commission and the National Association of Securities Dealers over how much of a brokers' disciplinary record should be made public.


OLD HABITS
Sharkey describes school years he spent dodging nuns' attacks.
My own grammar school was apparently a far more nurturing place, and I can recall only one instance of a nun reducing a child to tears.
It happened one day in sixth grade when we were told that Sister Rita Francis was being transferred to another school.
None took the news so badly as the class renegade, a veteran of countless after-school detention sessions spent multiplying fractions under Sister Rita's tutelage.
He marched to the convent door that afternoon in tears and pleaded with Mother Superior that Sister Rita be allowed to remain with us.
His display amazed us at the time, but I understood it years later when I became aware of the alcoholism in his family and could appreciate the valuable role this caring and committed adult must have played in his young life.
CHRISTOPHER R. LOWNEY
Bronx


A Pacific Cruise To Battle Sites
To mark the 50th anniversary of the landing of American troops in the Battle of Guadalcanal in World War II, Pearl Cruises has organized a voyage to the beachheads of Micronesia and Melanesia aboard the Ocean Pearl next summer.
A two-day call at Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands will allow time for passengers to visit beaches and other sites that figured in the 20-month-long battle and to see beached LST's (landing ship tanks) and Japanese destroyers.
The 27-day trip begins next July 21 with three nights in Manila, and during their stay there travelers will visit Corregidor, where American and Filipino troops, against great odds, held the Japanese at bay for 27 days.
Battle sites will also be seen during calls at Palau, and at Wewak, Madang and Rabaul in Papua New Guinea.
The Solomons visit will coincide with the dedication on Guadalcanal of a new battle monument on Aug. 7.
The monument will consist of a large granite obelisk, four walls pointing to major battlegrounds, and a granite map indicating the battle locations.


Cablevision Loses on Referendums
ONE of the most telling votes last week was cast in Huntington, where Cablevision came out the loser.
By a margin of 9 to 1, voters approved a proposal directing the Town Board to seek a competitor for the Woodbury company, which dominates the industry on Long Island.
In a vote on a second proposal, 65 percent voted against renewing the Cablevision franchise at the end of the year.


Silk on Lake Como's Shores
A SEDUCTIVE landscape is what draws most visitors to Lake Como, but little-known to the those outside the fashion industry, Como, rather than Milan, is the best place to shop for silk.
While visitors to other major Italian cities these days complain of a dearth of bargains visitors to Como and its environs can find fine goods -- some with designer names and some without -- at very favorable prices if they shop with a sharp eye.
Designer accessories like ties and scarves are particularly worth considering.


Chileans Pay Dearly For Economic Growth
There is an old fort in this dusty mill town near the center of the Chilean spine that overlooks the confluence of two majestic Chilean rivers, the Bio-Bio and the Vergara.
From there you can see two large pulp paper plants and get a good overview, too, of Chile's mixed blessing: an industrial economy that's the envy of other Latin American countries, and the environmental costs that go along with it.
One plant, a new $460 million operation owned by Santa Fe Forestal y Industrial, came on line last April.
It produces more than 600 tons of pulp a day and dumps its waste into the Bio-Bio, one of the country's largest rivers.
But the waste includes few pollutants, and they dissipate just hundreds of yards from where they are dumped.


Girl N the Hood
LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD
By Charles Perrault.
Illustrated by Beni Montresor.
Introduction by Luciano Pavarotti.
Unpaged.
New York: Doubleday. $16. (Ages 5 and up)


Zofia Mucha Weds William Smith
Zofia Barbara Mucha, a daughter of Wanda Mucha and the late Witold Mucha of Poznan, Poland, was married yesterday to William Neville Smith, the son of Mary Jo Smith and the late G. Lyle Smith of Oklahoma City.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Ms.
Mucha, who is keeping her name, has master's degrees from the Economics Academy of Poznan and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Until recently, she was a senior vice president of American Express in New York.
Mr.
Smith is a managing director of Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company in New York.
He graduated from Williams College and Harvard Divinity School.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did that of the groom.


Streetscapes: Sniffen Court; Mystery Shrouds Naming of Enclave
THE latest skirmish in the battle of Sniffen Court -- a tiny enclave on East 36th Street between Lexington and Third Avenues -- is over; part of an illegal roof addition has come down from stable No. 5.
But even if the rest of the addition is removed, something else will probably never be resolved: There is no evidence to connect Sniffen Court with its putative builder, John Sniffen, or anyone else by that name.


You Can't Score Without the Ball
Roger Craig took the handoff, and with the lead and the ball, the San Francisco 49ers were only a few minutes away from a bid for a record third straight Super Bowl title.
But when Giants nose tackle Erik Howard stripped Craig clean of the ball, Howard helped jolt a series of changes in the National Football League.
Howard's strip and Lawrence Taylor's recovery of the ball last Jan. 20 helped the Giants surge toward a victory in the National Football Conference championship game at Candlestick Park.
A week later, the Giants beat the Buffalo Bills to win Super Bowl XXV.


RECORD BRIEFS
Telemann: Orchestral Suites (3)
La Stravaganza. Denon 81757 9398 2; CD.


Rid American Sports of Racial Stereotypes; The Columbus Myth
To the Editor:
In "What Did Columbus Do to Deserve a Big Parade?" (news article, Oct. 15), you quote a Long Island high school teacher saying, "I'm glad I don't teach social studies."


At Tiny Airport, Even the Ground Is Friendly
TO catch a recent 9:05 A.M. flight to Boston, Maureen Fleming left her Westport home at 8:15 and arrived 15 minutes later at Sikorsky Memorial Airport in Stratford.
Encountering no traffic on Interstate 95 or at the airport, she parked in the ample lot in front of the small terminal and within moments could see her 19-seat Beechcraft plane waiting on the runway only a few hundred feet from where she had left her car.
"It's a perfect situation for me," said Ms.
Fleming, a communications consultant, who was bound for Fort Worth via Boston.
"It's great, because you avoid the hassle of going through all that southbound traffic on I-95 in the morning and paying all that money to park at the New York airports. I'm surprised more people don't know about this place."


A Duet and Mozart to Open Season
THIS week will see two season openers -- for the Fine Arts Symphony and the Hudson Valley Wind Symphony -- and more than a half-dozen duo recitals.
Today features a season-opening duet at 3:30 P.M. at the Ossining Public Library's "Great Music in a Great Place" series.
Paul Hsun-Ling Chou and Paul Salerni play violin and piano sonatas of Mozart and Beethoven and shorter pieces by Kreisler and Wieniawski (941-2416).


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'GIN GAME' FOR THE DEAF
D.
L.
Coburn's play "The Gin Game," the 1987 Pulitzer Prize winner, has been translated into American Sign Language and will be performed this evening at 8 o'clock in the Academic Arts Building of Westchester Community College in Valhalla.
Voice interpretation will be provided for the hearing audience through earphones distributed free of charge.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BOURGEOIS BLUES  An American Memoir. By Jake Lamar. Summit, $19.


Republicans Now Facing Daunting Challenge
SOON after he took office last year, Gov.
Jim Florio emerged from Drumthwacket, the Governor's mansion in Princeton, to tell reporters he had just had a meeting with legislative leaders.
When one reporter asked him which Republicans were at the meeting, Mr.
Florio looked surprised.
"Oh, there were no Republicans," he said.


Votes in Congress; Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
C.I.A.
Nominee : Vote to confirm Robert M. Gates to head the Central Intelligence Agency.
Approved 64 to 31, Nov. 5.
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
N
Lieberman (D)
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
N
Lautenberg (D)
N
New York
D'Amato (R)
Y
Moynihan (D)
N
House
1.
Banking Reform: Vote on passage of a bill to overhaul the nation's banking laws that would have made it more difficult than the Bush Administration wanted for banks to expand into the securities and insurance businesses.
Rejected 324 to 89, Nov. 4.
2.
Abortion Counseling: Vote on passageof a 1992 fiscal year Department of Health and Human Services spending bill including a provision that would block the Bush Administration from enforcing a ban on abortion counseling at federally funded family planning clinics.
Approved 272 to 156, Nov. 6.
3.
Civil Rights: Vote on passage of a compromise civil rights bill that makes it easier to sue in job discrimination cases.
Approved 381 to 38, Nov. 7.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Y
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D)
N
Y
Y
3. DeLauro (D)
Y
Y
Y
4. Shays (R)
N
Y
Y
5. Franks (R)
N
Y
Y
6. Johnson (R)
N
Y
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
N
Y
Y
2. Hughes (D)
N
Y
Y
3. Pallone (D)
N
Y
Y
4. Smith (R)
N
N
Y
5. Roukema (R)
Y
Y
Y
6. Dwyer (D)
A
Y
Y
7. Rinaldo (R)
N
N
Y
8. Roe (D)
N
N
Y
9. Torricelli (D)
N
Y
Y
10. Payne (D)
N
Y
Y
11. Gallo (R)
N
Y
Y
12. Zimmer (R)
N
Y
Y
13. Saxton (R)
N
N
Y
14. Guarini (D)
N
Y
Y
New York
1. H'brueckner(D)
Y
Y
Y
2. Downey (D)
Y
Y
Y
3. Mrazek (D)
A
Y
Y
4. Lent (R)
N
N
Y
5. McGrath (R)
N
N
Y
6. Flake (D)
N
Y
Y
7. Ackerman (D)
N
Y
Y
8. Scheuer (D)
Y
Y
Y
9. Manton (D)
Y
N
Y
10. Schumer (D)
Y
Y
Y
11. Towns (D)
Y
Y
Y
12. Owens (D)
N
Y
Y
13. Solarz (D)
Y
Y
Y
14. Molinari (R)
N
Y
Y
15. Green (R)
A
A
Y
16. Rangel (D)
N
Y
Y
17. Weiss (D)
Y
Y
A
18. Serrano (D)
N
Y
Y
19. Engel (D)
N
Y
Y
20. Lowey (D)
Y
Y
Y
21. Fish (R)
N
Y
Y
22. Gilman (R)
N
Y
Y
23. McNulty (D)
N
Y
Y
24. Solomon (R)
N
N
Y
25. Boehlert (R)
N
Y
Y
26. Martin (R)
N
Y
Y
27. Walsh (R)
Y
N
Y
28. McHugh (D)
N
Y
Y
29. Horton (R)
N
Y
Y
30. Slaughter (D)
N
Y
Y
31. Paxon (R)
N
N
Y
32. LaFalce (D)
N
N
Y
33. Nowak (D)
N
N
Y
34. Houghton (R)
N
Y
Y
KEY = Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


One-Stop Shopping
To the Editor:
Neal Gabler's point is well taken: "Life itself is gradually being transformed into a medium all its own like television, radio and print"  [ "Now Playing: Real Life, the Movie," Oct. 20 ] .
The media take a personality, mix art, reality and sometimes a dash of consumerism to present one homogenized package.


Baedeker
To the Editor: My interest in Baedekers and other older guidebooks began when my mother gave me the 1899 Baedeker "The United States With an Excursion into Mexico," which she had used on her wedding trip in 1904.
Baedeker's "Lower Egypt" made a most interesting companion when my wife and I visited Cairo and "Lower Egypt" in 1985, just 100 years after its publication. (Technically, it's "Egypt, Handbook for Travellers edited by K. Baedeker. Part First: Lower Egypt, with the Fayum and the Peninsula of Sinai.")


Farm Will Be Connecticut's First National Park
Tucked among sturdy oaks, a small farm here that was a gathering place for America's premier Impressionist artists is to become the first national park dedicated to the legacy of an American painter -- as well as the first national park in Connecticut.
The farm, once the property of J. Alden Weir, considered one of the founders of American Impressionism, straddles the border between this and another northern Fairfield County town, Wilton.
Both are popular residential areas, and development booms during the last few years brought new houses practically to the Weir farm's doorstep.
To preserve the farm, which had already shrunk from 238 acres to 62, its supporters sought the help of the Federal Government and won National Historic Site status for it late last year.


Russian Entrepreneurs Could Give Capitalism a Bad Name
To the Editor:
"Moscow's Brave Entrepreneurs," by Michael M. Weinstein (Editorial Notebook, Oct. 23) surprised me by a seeming lack of insight.
The article cites as an admirable example of entrepreneurial spirit a woman who sells her hats for 50 rubles, "about a quarter of the average Muscovite's reported monthly salary." She obtains the wool to knit these hats through black marketeers, who "bribe managers at state-owned enterprises to sell them yarn rather than send it to retail outlets."


Stephanie Blau Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey R. Blau of New York and Old Westbury, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Stephanie Elizabeth Blau to Ronald Jay Kramer, a son of Mrs.
Bernard Kramer of New Haven and the late Mr.
Kramer.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Blau, 26 years old, is an associate at the law firm of Blau, Kramer, Wactlar, Lieberman &amp; Satin in Jericho, L.I.
Her father is a senior partner of the firm.
She graduated from Columbia University and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father is also the chairman of the Instrument Systems Corporation in Jericho.


OUTINGS
Here is a sampling of outings in the New York metropolitan region during the holiday season.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
HITCHHIKERS, PARACHUTES AND WINGS, National Audubon Society, 613 Riversville Road, Greenwich, Conn.
A natural history walk focusing on seeds and how they travel. 2 P.M.
Fee: $2 ($1 for children).
Information: (203) 869-5272.
Nov. 16


Managing; Taking the Kids on Business Trips
Until he hired live-in help a couple of years ago, Darrell M. Radin took his toddler along on business trips.
"My wife works, so when the day care fell through I had no choice," said Mr.
Radin, a salesman for Gerber Children's Wear Inc.
Until recently, Bruce M. Goldstein's wife did not work.
But Mr.
Goldstein, an independent asset manager, often took his two oldest daughters on business trips, anyway.
"I got extra time with the ones with me, and my wife got a rare chance for one-on-one time with the baby," he said.


Are There Any Enforceable Limits On Academic Freedom of Speech?
As anger continued to swirl last week over racially charged remarks made by Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., chairman of the Afro-American Studies Department at City College of the City University of New York, a key issue was being debated: What are the limits of academic freedom?
Can a professor espouse any opinion or idea, inside or outside the classroom, without fear of reprisal?
Experts say that professors enjoy the same First Amendment rights as all American citizens, but that academic freedom is not a blanket protection -- especially against charges by peers that a professor's ideas are clearly untrue.
No such finding has been made -- or even formally requested -- in Dr.
Jeffries' case.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
SINGING FOR BIRDSEED
VITO the canary was warming up.
Soon he would take center stage and, it was hoped, belt out a few of his favorite songs.


Dinkins Has a 5-Year Plan; Critics Say It Doesn't Add Up
For New Yorkers numbed by repeated rounds of budget cuts and higher taxes, Mayor David N. Dinkins offered a road map toward decidedly partial relief last week: he pledged to freeze property taxes for two years but promised still more cuts in the work force and city services.
The decision to abandon $500 million in tax increases that he had planned for each of the next two years was a major policy reversal for a Mayor elected on a liberal platform promising social change, and one that would severely curb his spending options for the last half of his term.
That harsh political reality seemed all but lost in the immediate bickering over his five-year fiscal plan.


The Once-Distant Rose Beckons the Huskies
At the mere mention of the Rose Bowl, the players from the University of Washington seemed to shudder collectively today.
But their coach, Don James, smiled broadly and knowingly.
"It's always been my dream, ever since I came into this league 17 years ago, to go to the Rose Bowl and be 11-0 when we got there," said James.
"We're a little closer to it now."


Strategies of the Head
THE CONNOISSEUR'S GUIDE TO THE MIND
How We Think, How We Learn, and What It Means to Be Intelligent.
By Roger C. Schank. 272 pp.
New York: Summit Books. $20.


Duke: The Ex-Nazi Who Would Be Governor
The chant builds like a freight train and bounces off the walls in auditoriums and American Legion halls from Monroe to Metairie: "Duke, Duke, Duke, Duke."
It has become a familiar scene in Louisiana.
David Duke -- an open white supremacist and anti-Semite for most of his adult life, who sold Nazi literature from his legislative office in 1989 -- stands a chance of being elected governor next Saturday.


THEATER
Here is a sampling of arts and entertainment events in New York City during the holiday season, compiled by New York Times critics, writers and contributors.
Dates and times are subject to change.
November
"FROM THE MISSISSIPPI DELTA." Endesha Ida Mae Holland recalls some strong-minded Mississippi women who inspired her during her youth in the 1940's.
Previews started Oct. 29; opens Nov. 11.
Circle in the Square Downtown, 159 Bleecker Street, at Thompson Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 254-6330.
"RAGS." The 1986 musical flop by Joseph Stein, Charles Strouse and Stephen Schwartz in a new, intimate production by the group that worked wonders last season with "I Can Get It for You Wholesale," another musical that didn't fare so well the first time around.
Previews began Nov. 2; opens Nov. 21, American Jewish Theater, 307 West 26th Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 633-9797.
"BLUEBEARD." Everett Quinton and the Ridiculous Theatrical Company revive the Charles Ludlam farce about the mad baron hellbent on creating a third sex.
Previews began Oct. 31; opens Nov. 14.
Charles Ludlam Theater, 1 Sheridan Square, Seventh Avenue South and Fourth Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 691-2271.
"TUBES." The three performance artists known as Blue Man Group do wild things with music, kettledrums and paint.
Previews began Nov. 7; opens Nov. 17.
Astor Place Theater, 434 Lafayette Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 254-4370.
"PERICLES, PRINCE OF TYRE." In the continuing Shakespeare Marathon, this brings the total to 19.
Campbell Scott stars, and Michael Greif directs.
Previews began Nov. 5; opens Nov. 24.
New York Shakespeare Festival Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 598-7150.
"PETER PAN." Cathy Rigby, gymnast extraordinaire and the highest-flying of all the Peter Pans, returns in the musical evergreen.
Performances begin Nov. 27 and run through Jan. 5.
Minskoff Theater, 200 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 869-0550.
December
"NICK AND NORA." Nick and Nora Charles from Dashiell Hammett's detective novel "The Thin Man" find themselves grappling with a Hollywood murder in a new Broadway musical written and directed by Arthur Laurents, with music by Charles Strouse and lyrics by Richard Maltby Jr.
With Barry Bostwick and Joanna Gleason.
Previews began Oct. 8; opens Dec. 8.
Marquis Theater, 234 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 730-1022.
"MARVIN'S ROOM." A very funny, very moving comedy about a woman with leukemia, her estranged sister, her bedridden father, and 50 or so other problems.
Scott McPherson's play will be directed by David Petrarca.
Previews begin Nov. 15; opens Dec. 8.
Playwrights Horizons, Main Stage Theater, 416 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 564-1235.
"THE CRUCIBLE." Arthur Miller's drama about witchcraft and McCarthyism launches the National Actors Theater, the classical repertory company that has long been a dream of Tony Randall's.
Martin Sheen, Michael York, Martha Scott and Fritz Weaver are in the cast.
Previews begin Nov. 19.
Opens Dec. 10.
Belasco Theater, 115 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 239-6280.
"A CHRISTMAS CAROL." The English actor Patrick Stewart ("Star Trek: The Next Generation") takes all the roles in this one-man version of the Charles Dickens holiday classic.
That means he's Tiny Tim
and
Ebenezer Scrooge.
Performances run Dec. 17 to 29.
Eugene O'Neill Theater, 230 West 49th Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 518-3300.
"THE ROSE QUARTET." Mason Adams, Joan Copeland, Larry Keith and Anne Pitoniak are four longtime New Yorkers who gather on a rooftop and discover the value of friendship in this drama by Tom Cumella.
Directed by Tee Scatuorchio.
Previews begin Nov. 20; opens Dec. 3.
Circle Repertory Company, 99 Seventh Avenue South, at Fourth Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 924-7100.
"AS YOU LIKE IT." Shakespeare's version of "Into the Woods." Directed by Anthony Cornish.
Previews begin Dec. 13; opens Dec. 19.
Pearl Theater Company, 125 West 22d Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 645-7708.
January
"THE VISIT." Jane Alexander portrays the world's richest woman, who returns to the town of her birth seeking vengeance on the man who wronged her in her youth.
Ed Sherin directs Friedrich Durrenmatt's mordant drama.
Previews begin Jan. 1; opening date to be announced.
Roundabout Theater Company, Criterion Center, 1530 Broadway, at 44th Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 869-8400.


Some Shortcuts for Birds Chinese Style
ONE of the most attractive sights on a dinner table is a perfectly roasted bird with a crisp, bronzed skin.
The experts at cooking birds that turn out this way, of course, are the Chinese.
Pay a visit to Chinatown and you will see rows of glistening lacquered ducks hanging in shop windows, the perfect dish to serve on a day when you don't feel like cooking.
You can buy them ready to eat for as little as $10 each and take them home, along with a supply of pancakes, scallions, cucumbers and hoisin sauce, to eat in the Peking style.
Making a Peking duck the traditional way is a complicated process that will tempt few cooks to try at home.
Air is pumped under the skin through an opening at the neck so that it puffs up like a balloon (you can do this yourself by blowing through your mouth).
The ducks, which have their heads on, are hung on a hook, scalded with boiling water, coated with a syrupy mixture made with sugar and honey, before being left to dry in a cool, drafty place for several hours.
Then their cavities are filled with water and the birds are hung in an oven to roast.


Q and A
Evicting a Roommate Question: Three years ago I invited a boyfriend to move into my rent-stabilized, studio apartment.
This arrangement was supposed to be very temporary.
Despite his promises to move, he has not left.
His excuse is that he cannot find an affordable apartment because he is on a commissioned-based income and works in an industry where sales have been slow.


LAW ON THE FEMINIST FRONTIER
When I was a first-year law student, I was interested less in American law than in international law because I believed that the American legal profession had made its most dramatic achievements in the area of addressing society's ills during the 1960's and 1970's ("Defining Law on the Feminist Frontier" by Fred Strebeigh, Oct. 6).
Then I read Catharine A. MacKinnon's work and realized that the subtle but pervasive sexism in America must be solved by law.
I realize that some feminist legal theorists do not agree with her every word, but what she has provided for all of us is a language in which to discuss problems like sexual harassment.
MARJORIE A. ADAMS
Highland Park, N.J.


Greenwich Journal; Eviction Notice Hangs Amid Estates
During the 82 years Germaine Quentin has lived here, she has managed a dress-making business, worked in a local hospital and paid tens of thousands of dollars in taxes.
She still lives in the town's "back country," amid wooded multimillion-dollar estates, sharing a rambling turn-of-the-century house with 13 other elderly men and women.
But because of recent state budget cuts, she and her housemates are confronted with the prospect of losing their home, a publicly financed residence called Parsonage Cottage that has the curious distinction of being the state's last almshouse.
Miss Quentin has even written to President Bush, pleading for assistance and telling him that their fathers been friends here during the 1910's.


CHRONICLE
MARVIN S. TRAUB, chairman of Bloomingdale's, will be honored tonight at a black-tie dinner-dance in the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
More than 1,400 people are expected to attend the event, whose proceeds are to benefit the Marvin and Lee Traub Flexible Financial Aid Fund at Harvard.
The fund was founded in 1984 to help exceptional undergraduates from middle-income families who would not ordinarily qualify for financial aid.


Serving in Military May Cut Later Earnings, Studies Say
A study by two economists has concluded that "the earnings soldiers sacrifice are greater than first appears," continuing a debate over the impact of military service on income.
Joshua D. Angrist of Harvard University and Alan B. Krueger of Princeton University have been comparing the economic fortunes of veterans and nonveterans in a series of recently published papers.


An Indiana School Scores on the Ice
The people at Culver Military Academy like to call it cornfield hockey, their own little joke about being a small private school somewhere in Indiana that plays the game at a level that brings national recognition.
Culver has long been known for its academics and its prominent graduates, including JOSH LOGAN, GEORGE STEINBRENNER, HAL HOLBROOK, ADOLPHE MENJOU and ANDREW MALCOLM.
But now the school is prominent as a source of hockey players.
Since 1987 alone, the school of 650 (which includes 250 young women) has had 10 players drafted by the National Hockey League.
The last two years, the Culver varsity won the prestigious Lawrenceville (N.J.) Tournament, which attracts the top Eastern prep schools.


INSIDE
Yeltsin Defied
The leader of the Russian republic encountered defiance and criticism when he responded to surging nationalism in Chechen-Ingush.
Page A7.
AIDS Trials on Humans
Health officials will dispense with animal trials and begin testing experimental AIDS vaccines on humans in four countries.
Page A7.
Why the Bottles?
New York City water is tops in tests, but mistrustful residents are now turning to bottled water.
Page B1.
Difficult Choices Ahead
At his Senate hearing, the nominee for Attorney General faces decisions on leadership and loyalty.
Page A9.


Bishops and Liberals Split on Agendas
A group of liberal and radical Roman Catholics meeting to discuss changes in church structures only smiled and shrugged when they learned that a major item on the agenda at this week's meeting of Catholic bishops was whether to trim the number of days when the faithful are obliged to attend Mass.
"You can't even explain Holy Days of Obligation to most of our kids," said one of those attending the meeting here, Robert McClory of Evanston, Ill.
"It's hard enough to get them to go to church on Sunday."


Dance in Review
Beverly Blossom  Hunter College Studio Theater
It is a pity that the term "artist" has become so empty, for that is the best way to describe Beverly Blossom, a performer and choreographer who presented her work on Saturday night.
Ms.
Blossom sidles beyond steps, gestures and well-conceived notions to make her glancing, profoundly revealing commentaries on men and women, real and imagined life, and death.
Exuberantly, beautifully ravaged, she is daring and hilarious in the way she mocks and cossets sentimentality, drawing one into the moment with a wild silent laugh or rise of an eyebrow.


It's Wet, Free and Gets No Respect
In the tea department of Fortnum &amp; Mason, which has guided the palates of England for 300 years, a few rules must never be broken: drink only premium blends; keep air out of the canister, and brew your beverage with the finest water available -- New York City's if possible.
It may surprise the people who live in the city, having turned to bottled water in numbers that mystify even those who are paid to sell it, but New York's tap water remains as good as it gets.
Just ask an expert.


Review/Dance; Dancing Never Stops In Celebrating Mozart, Even for Intermission
Some of the best dancing occurred during the intermission on Friday night when the Juilliard Dance Ensemble presented works choreographed to Mozart as part of the Mozart Bicentennial at Lincoln Center.
That quirk of programming was intentional.
To make audience members feel like party guests in a ballroom, three brief social dances based on period sources were performed in the lobby of the Juilliard Theater.
The intermission thereby became part of the show.


Books of The Times; Long in the Making, a Long Book About One Mind
The Runaway Soul  By Harold Brodkey 835 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $30.
Harold Brodkey's first novel, "The Runaway Soul" -- 27 years in the writing and rewriting and rewriting (to judge from various excerpts that have appeared over the decades) -- is perhaps the most forbidding book this reviewer has ever come up against.


The Talk of Hollywood; The Rich and Famous Clamor to Experience A Taste of Poverty
In all probability, Mel Gibson and Dustin Hoffman will soon sit down on a straw mat and eat a dinner of rice and water, just as the impoverished people of Bangladesh and Ethiopia do.
So will Whoopi Goldberg and Daryl Hannah and Cybill Shepherd and Danny Glover and Jackson Browne.
At the moment, the hottest ticket in town involves, of all things, the Hollywood Hunger Banquet.


Michael Gabriel Weds Ms. Blass
Amy Blass, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Blass of Teaneck, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Gabriel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Gabrielides of Bayside, Queens.
Rabbi Michael Ehrlich officiated at the Water's Edge Restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
The bride, 31 years old, graduated from Rutgers University and is an account supervisor for Harvey Offenhartz, a New York sales promotion concern.
Her father is the vice president and creative director of DiFranza-Williamson, a New York sales promotion agency.
Her mother, Miriam Blass, is an estate liquidator and appraiser.


To Streamline Federal Criminal Cases
To the Editor:
President Bush's order to streamline litigation ("Bush Sets Rules to Curb U.S. Lawyers' Litigation," Oct. 24) ignores one major bottleneck in the Federal court system.
While the President's executive order requires Federal attorneys to provide more information to opponents in civil cases to encourage settlements, he orders no like exchange under the rules of criminal procedure.


TV Just for Women . . . and Men
NBC never promoted "L.A. Law" the way Lifetime does.
"Lifetime gives you five good reasons to watch 'L.A. Law,' " says the wry voice-over in a commercial for the series.
Then, along with their pictures, a list of five male lawyers who star in the series: "Becker. Kuzak. Sifuentes. Rollins. Brackman."


Havel Advances Slovak Autonomy Claims; Jewish Targets
To the Editor:
"Autonomy Issue Turns Slovak Against Slovak" (news article, Oct. 22) omits an important fact: Prof.
Fedor Gal, the former leader of the Slovak movement Public Against Violence, is a Jew and thus a special target for the ire of the right wing.


Elinor Kotzen Has Wedding
Elinor Louise Kotzen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin S. Kotzen of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Jeffrey David Spokes, the son of G. Neil Spokes of Marshall, Va., and the late Elizabeth Edelman Spokes, and the adopted son of Mrs.
G.
Neil Spokes.
Rabbi Hershel Portnoy officiated at Beth Emeth Synagogue.
Mrs.
Spokes, 28 years old, will begin working as the public affairs specialist for the Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation in Washington later this month.
She graduated with honors from William Smith College and is studying for a master's degree in arts management at American University.
Her father owns Mallory-Kotzen Tire Company in New Rochelle, N.Y.


Dinkins Defends His Fiscal Plan
As he prepared to depart for South Africa yesterday, Mayor David N. Dinkins strongly defended his long-term fiscal plan against the blunt criticism of Felix G. Rohatyn, the chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, who urged the Mayor over the weekend to abandon it.
"It is our plan," the Mayor said.
"It's not just Felix."


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
&lt;biAgricultural Minerals Co., 7.6 million senior preference units. Lehman Brothers.


Health Chief Plans Reforms in Hospitals
Cesar A. Perales, who was formally named by Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday to the newly created position of deputy mayor for health and human services, said his immediate priority would be to relieve the immense pressure on the overburdened emergency rooms of New York City's public hospital system.
Mr.
Perales, now the state's welfare commissioner, will take over central responsibility for the city's sprawling and troubled social service agencies on Jan. 1.
His portfolio will include the Health and Hospitals Corporation, whose president recently resigned in a swirl of controversy, as well as the Human Resources Administration and the Departments of Health and Mental Health.


Review/Music; Players in Jump Suits, An Audience Bemused
One could only wonder about the motives behind Friday night's Brooklyn Philharmonic concert at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
One hint, oblique perhaps, lay in its visual side: Dennis Russell Davies and his musicians dressed in black jump suits or bright blouses, offering a welcome melting away of stiffer dress codes.
Indeed, the alarming triviality of most of this evening may have been a form of hard-sell advertising -- a happy face put on for Next Wave subscribers used to the academy's more overtly glamorous experiments but unconnected to the symphony concert experience.
The attention spans of the latter were probably being underestimated.
Friday's audience, I think, was drawn deeply into this event by its beginning and then bemused to see the rest of it float away on a cloud of giggles.


Most Markets Open Today
The Government bond markets in New York will be closed today for the Veterans Day holiday, as will government offices and some banks.
But most financial markets in the United States will be open.


Fear of Political Moves Keeps Bond Rates Up
A weak economy and a marked slowdown in inflation usually occasion falling long-term interest rates.
Some credit market analysts say those factors could indeed be potent enough to induce bond yields to fall toward 7.75 percent within weeks.


CHRONICLE
When the New York Public Library on Fifth Avenue at 42d Street closes its doors at the usual time on Saturday, at 6 P.M., it will have to open them again right away for GARRISON KEILLOR.
He plans to march up the stairs with a big jazz band, past the noncommittal lions, and proceed to the library's august reading room, for what he says will be a raucous live broadcast of his American Radio Company.


U.S. Withholding Drug Aid to Peru
A United States plan to aid Peruvian Government efforts to reduce coca production, a $1 billion industry with connections to the Shining Path guerrilla group, has stalled over charges that the Peruvian Army and security forces are continuing to take payoffs to protect cocaine traffickers, Administration and Congressional officials say.
United States officials report that Peruvian Army units have repeatedly shot at police helicopters on drug interdiction and herbicide-spraying missions, including once last month when an agent of the United States Drug Enforcement Agency was on board.
Although no one was hurt, the incident revived the fears expressed by members of Congress who opposed the Administration's plan to send military advisers to Peru to train its security forces in antidrug techniques.


Dr. Joel D. Meyers, 46, An Expert on Infections
Dr.
Joel D. Meyers, a leading researcher of infections caused by suppression of the immune system in organ transplant and AIDS patients, died Oct. 27 at Swedish Hospital in Seattle.
He was 46 years old and lived in Mercer Island, Wash.
He died of colon cancer, his family said.


Health Plans That Cut Costs Gaining Favor
With reassuring advertisements starring Snoopy, Gene Kelly and New Yorkers themselves, insurance companies are urging employers and employees in the metropolitan area to join cost-conscious health plans.
And after years of resistance, they are finding many takers.
The health plans are built around networks of doctors and hospitals that have agreed to charge lower-than-normal fees and to allow reviews of their methods.


Bridge
The annual Ogust-Schenken competition, in memory of two New York stars of yesteryear, was played Saturday at the Young Men's Philanthropic League, at 4 East 80th Street.
The winners were Jim Sampson of Manhattan and Gene Saxe of Old Greenwich, Conn., with Marty Bergen of Farmingdale, L.I., and Bjorn Fallenius of Manhattan in second position.
These two pairs were in opposition on the diagramed deal played in the first of the two sessions.
It is easy to see that East-West can make four hearts, losing just three diamond tricks, and that North-South can make four spades, losing three tricks in the black suits.
The par result is therefore for East-West to play in five hearts doubled, losing 200.


Gina Burr Dailey and Mark J. Greeley Married
Gina Burr Dailey, a lawyer, and Mark Joseph Greeley, a software engineer, were married yesterday at the Four Seasons Hotel in Boston by the Rev.
Charles Forman, a Unitarian Minister.
Ms.
Dailey, 33 years old, graduated from Princeton University and New York University law school.
She is the daughter of Vera J. Dailey of New York and the late Burr Dailey.
Her mother is an editor at The Information Please Almanac in New York.


Starks Is Making Bianchi Look Like a Clairvoyant
It was just last year that Ron Grinker was trying to find a home in the National Basketball Association for a kid he had developed a special liking for.
The Cincinnati-based agent believed John Starks had the physical talent to play in the league, that he had been lost in a numbers shuffle by Golden State, which signed him as an undrafted free agent in 1988.
"It was the way he handled being cut and having to go play in places like Memphis and Cedar Rapids," Grinker said, referring to teams in the World Basketball League and Continental Basketball Association, respectively.
"He didn't see it as punishment. He saw it as a place to improve."


Essay; Inside the K.G.B.
"This work is not for me," said Vadim Bakatin, 54, the handsome and well-liked Gorbachev man, chosen with Yeltsin approval to reform the K.G.B.
"I don't like secrets, but here you are dealing with secrets all the time."
The way to dispose of the burdensome secrets of the monstrous past is to reveal them, I suggested during a two-and-a-half-hour session in his office on Lubyanka Square.
So I asked him about the K.G.B. family jewels.


Foxboro Follies: A Franchise on the Brink
When he was 8 years old, Victor Kiam peddled Cokes to people as they waited for streetcars in New Orleans' sweltering bayou heat.
Thus began the career of a man who through years of hustling, ingenuity, diligence and self-promotion crafted himself into a consummate entrepreneur.
Kiam's leveraged buyout of Remington Products from Sperry-Rand for $25 million in March 1979 and the strategies that then sparked Remington's worldwide sales from $43 million to $250 million in nine years are material for business-school courses.
But Kiam's purchase of the New England Patriots in October 1988 for $85 million could end up damaging his image as an adept businessman.


Quotation of the Day
"Edwin Edwards is a very proud man who has everything in life except his good name, and he wants it back, even if he has to give good government to do it." JOHN MAGINNIS, a biographer of the former Louisiana governor.  [ A12:4. ]


Adlai &amp; Mario &amp; Ike &amp; George
After watching Gov.
Mario Cuomo flirting with the Presidency and teasing the press with his mystifying soliloquies, one is reminded of how Gov.
Adlai Stevenson of Illinois handled similar doubts in the campaign of 1952.
They have some things in common: the most eloquent politicians of their times and the favorite candidates of their political parties.
But otherwise they seem quite different.


Dhahran Journal; Arid Times Now for Saudi Arabia's Modernizers
It was just a little item that appeared recently on the front page of The Saudi Gazette, proclaiming that from now on, flight attendants on the national airline would cover their heads with a veil and lengthen their dresses to reach their ankles.
Much of the country hardly paid attention, but for a liberal minority the news came as another blow to their hopes that Saudi Arabia might slowly shed its cocoon of Islamic conservative tradition.


Justice Dept. Nominee Faces Query on Ex-Boss
When his confirmation hearings start on Tuesday, William P. Barr, President Bush's Attorney General-designate, will face pointed questioning and an uncomfortable decision: how far to distance himself from his suddenly unpopular predecessor, former Attorney General Dick Thornburgh.
As Mr.
Thornburgh's second in command since the spring of 1990, Mr.
Barr helped carry out law-enforcement activities that many lawmakers say have moved much too slowly, like investigations of the collapse of the savings and loan industry and the scandal involving the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.


Breakthrough in Nuclear Fusion Offers Hope for Power of Future
After nearly a half-century of effort and many billions of dollars, scientists for the first time have produced a significant amount of power from controlled nuclear fusion.
The achievement is a major step in harnessing for constructive human use the kind of thermonuclear fire that lights the sun and produces the awesome blast of the hydrogen bomb.
The advance was made Saturday by researchers at the Joint European Torus, or Jet, an experimental fusion reactor in Oxfordshire, England.
The achievement puts a European team from 14 countries ahead of Russian, Japanese and American rivals.


Flamingos Have Landed, but Will Hialeah Fly?
After 23 months of silence and a generation of decline, Hialeah Park reopened its wrought-iron gates today with 800 horses in the barns, 650 flamingos on the lake and a record opening-day crowd of 30,472 as reminders of the days when it reigned as the showplace of American horse racing.
The crowd was twice as big as expected and the biggest for an opening here in 45 years, and it prompted exclamations from John J. Brunetti, the owner and chairman of the board of the track.


No Business Like Shoe Business: This Time, Oilers Win on a Kick
Oilers 26, Cowboys 23
HOUSTON, Nov. 10 (AP) -- Houston put a better foot forward today, and this time the Oilers won in overtime.


Rufus Z. Smith, Ex-Diplomat, 69
Rufus Z. Smith, a retired American diplomat, died Thursday at his home in Annandale, Va.
He was 69 years old and died of heart failure, his family said.
He was in the United States foreign service from 1946 to 1974, retiring as a deputy assistant Secretary of State.
He had postings to Canada, Panama, Thailand and the Netherlands and he served in Washington as the State Department's officer in charge of Burmese and Malaysian affairs and as director of Canadian affairs.
He was a founder of the Foreign Service Grievance Board for staff members' complaints and of the Association of Canadian Studies in the United States.


Press
AS the late Robert Maxwell's son Kevin begins the daunting task of filling his father's huge shoes at The Daily News, there is wide disagreement about just how daunting a task he faces.
Mr.
Maxwell said in an interview Friday that The Daily News would be operating profitably by March.
But the newspaper has not released any statistics on its operation.


Market Place; Bills Coming Due For Japan Inc.
WHEN a newspaper reported several weeks ago that the health-products division of the Meiji Milk Products Company had developed a drug that was "100 percent effective" in destroying AIDS-afflicted cells, the news was greeted as a miracle cure.
No matter that the untested drug was years away from approval and commercial development.
Meiji Milk's languishing stock price rocketed upward, peaking at more than 1,200 yen a share (about $9.23), from 777 yen shortly before the story hit the newsstands.
The timing was remarkable.
Meiji Milk had outstanding a large number of warrants -- a kind of long-term stock option -- that were about to expire worthless.
They gave the holder the right to buy shares at a preset price within a specified time.


Stabbing Victim's Brother Seeks Answers
The brother of the Hasidic scholar from Australia stabbed to death in the racial violence in Crown Heights has made a long, sad journey here "to get to the bottom" of his brother's death.
"No other person should ever suffer the miserable death my brother did, be they black, white, tall, short, Jewish or non-Jewish," Norman Rosenbaum said yesterday.
"To be set upon by a miserable mob, stabbed and then to suffer like he suffered in the hospital."


Suzanne Abels and Jeffrey Weinick Are Wed
Suzanne Abels, an associate at Winston &amp; Strawn, and Jeffrey Mark Weinick, an associate at Davis Hoxie Faithfull &amp; Hapgood, both New York law firms, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Lawrence Colton officiated at Temple Emanuel in New Hyde Park, L.I.


Carol Jablonski Weds
Carol Lynn Jablonski, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George E. Jablonski of Deer Park, L.I., and Grant Troy Glickson, the son of Rona and Lawrence Glickson, also of Deer Park, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Jonathan Glasser officiated at the Woodbury, L.I., Country Club.
The Rev.
Frank Nelson, a Roman Catholic priest, gave the blessing.


Ms. Love Weds Ronald Yusim
Victoria Love and Ronald Maxwell Yusim, psychotherapists in New York, were married yesterday by Dr.
Ronald B. Sobel, the senior rabbi of Temple Emanu-El, at the James Burden House in New York.
Ms.
Love, who is 30 years old and keeping her name, is in training at the American Institute for Psychoanalysis and practices at the Karen Horney Clinic in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College and has a master's degree in social work from Columbia University, as does the bridegroom.


Reopening of Guggenheim Museum Is Postponed Until May


Dance in Review
Marta Renzi and Amy Pivar  Danspace at St. Mark's
A woman who was slightly disfigured and a man who had learned he was HIV-positive went to an audition of dancers and nonprofessionals held by Marta Renzi in the summer.
Out of their experiences grew "Vital Signs," a group work performed on Friday night in a program shared with Amy Pivar.


Treating AIDS: One Hospital's Struggle - A special report.; Epidemic Changes All at Inner-City Medical Center
In New York City's largest municipal hospital, Kings County Hospital Center in Brooklyn, AIDS has left its imprint on almost every area of care.
There is now a clinic devoted to spinal taps, new procedures to evaluate workers who are pricked with a needle or cut with a scalpel, and a support group for those who deal too often with death.
Some changes -- new clinics, research programs, world-famous specialists -- are easy to spot.
Red plastic containers for the safe disposal of needles and other "sharps" are everywhere.
Mouth-to-mouth resuscitation is gone.
But other changes are more insidious.
Fear among resident doctors that AIDS will monopolize their training or make it more dangerous makes recruitment more difficult.
Veteran doctors and nurses say their work is more stressful and depressing.


Review/Opera; Prokofiev's Radical and Chilling 'Gambler' in Chicago
When Prokofiev's opera "The Gambler" comes to a close, its central figure, Alexey, whose impetuous, slightly mad earnestness gives much of the music its frantic character, has turned away from the woman he loves.
He is too enraptured with his winnings at the gambling casino of Roulettenburg to pay much attention to anything else.
He is feverish; his lines swoop with the remembered thrill; his laugh is chilling.
Then, with four dissonant chords, the composer slams Dostoyevsky's story shut.
This ending is abrupt, almost brutal in its finality. (Dostoyevsky, in fact, elaborately continued it.) So I am not sure if the audience at the Lyric Opera of Chicago had time to react when it saw the premiere of a new production of the work Saturday night -- the first ever offered by an American company.
The performance was so well prepared, the production (from the Teatro Communale in Florence) so cogently staged, and the singers so thoroughly committed, that this strong-willed, chilled and sometimes chilling opera deserved more than the few isolated bravos it received.


A New Venture In Familiar Place
WALT MICHAELS will be walking with the aid of a cane when he returns to the Orange Bowl next month to try out players for a new pro football venture.
At times, the 62-year-old Michaels admits, he is still unsteady as the result of recent surgery to remove a benign tumor from his ear canal, and then surgery on his back.


Marxist Revolt Grows Strong In the Shantytowns of Peru
Defying the drift of recent world history, a Marxist rebel movement is rapidly expanding in Peru, carrying the fight from its remote Andean strongholds to this coastal capital's impoverished and politically crucial shantytowns.
The rebel group, the Shining Path, has intensifed its program of killing anyone blocking its way -- Roman Catholic priests, Protestant pastors, foreign aid technicians and housewives running slum soup kitchens.
It has seriously disrupted aid programs that offered succor to some of Peru's poorest people.


Symbol of Day-Care Ills Struggles to Raise Child
A string of baby sitters who used drugs and ransacked her house and a stack of mounting bills left Chante Fernandez desperate enough to consider leaving her 5-year-old daughter home alone while she worked weekends at a shopping mall.
But in her crime-battered neighborhood in Elizabeth, N.J., thieves were known to watch residents come and go, timing their break-ins accordingly.
Her house had already been stripped once by burglars, and she knew that the risks of leaving her daughter there were far too great.
Instead, Ms.
Fernandez, a 24-year-old divorced executive secretary, did something that many would consider even more dangerous: She brought her only child, Anjuli, with her to the mall, parked near the entrance to Fortunoff's, where she made $6.50 an hour as a sales clerk, and left her child locked inside the car while she worked.


In Managua, Angry Reminder of Sandinista Power
Nicaraguans have come to realize the lingering power of the Sandinista Front after a daylong Sandinista rampage of burning, looting, stoning and shooting.
The Managua city hall, two radio stations and a peace monument were destroyed, dozens of trucks and cars were set ablaze, and the leader of an Organization of American States peace mission came under automatic-weapons fire during the fury on Saturday.
The police stood by and watched.


Abroad at Home; It Can Happen Here
I watched David Duke on NBC's "Meet the Press," and I was frightened.
Here was a man who two years ago was selling Nazi pamphlets from his office in the Louisiana Legislature.
Now he was a candidate for governor -- with a good chance to win -- and he was talking blandly about the trouble with welfare and affirmative action.
If the politics of hatred is going to take power in America at the end of the 20th century, that is the form in which it will come: not rabble-rousing but cold words and professions of Christian redemption.


Maxwell's Doctor Doubts Publisher Had Heart Attack
The personal physician of Robert Maxwell, the British publisher whose body was found last week in the Atlantic, said he doubted Mr.
Maxwell died of a heart attack, The Sunday Times reported here today.
Pathologists who examined Mr.
Maxwell's body last week in the Canary Islands, after it was recovered from the sea, concluded he had suffered a heart attack and probably fell off his yacht.
They said they found no evidence of foul play.


Greening of Parks Dept. Despite Red-Ink Budget
ONE day last year, an upbeat television interview with Parks Commissioner Betsy Gotbaum at the Alice in Wonderland statue in Central Park ended abruptly when reality starkly intruded: the body of a homeless man who had been stabbed to death bobbed to the surface of the nearby sailboat pond.
Last week, she sprinted from her third-floor office in the Arsenal in the park to help save a deranged man who was banging his head on a concrete bench post below her window.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-7 KHMER ROUGE ARMED FOR PEACE
Just weeks after a Cambodian peace agreement was signed, the Khmer Rouge is hiding troops and weapons in violation of the treaty, diplomats and relief workers say.
Page A1  SHINING PATH'S WIDENING SHADOW
Marxism is the message, bloodshed is the method, and the poor are listening as the Shining Path guerrillas gather support in Peru.
A1  The U.S. strategy in fighting the drug war there is being thwarted by corruption.
A6


Johnson Souvenirs Skyrocket in Price
Last Thursday, the day MAGIC JOHNSON announced he had the virus that causes AIDS, hundreds of people called a Lakers memorabilia specialist to buy almost anything with the great player's name on it.
"The day before the announcement we sold an autographed Magic Johnson Lakers' road jersey from 1982 for $2,500," said KEN SLATER, the bemused and saddened owner of California Numismatics Investment Inc.
"The next day, we were offered $3,750 for an autographed home jersey. We also sold two pairs of Magic Johnson autographed sneakers for $1,000 apiece on Thursday. On Wednesday, they would have gone for $650."


Wasteful Protest in the Bronx
Bronx-Lebanon Hospital's effort to improve its procedures for disposing of medical waste has aroused panicky fears that threaten to stop construction of a modern incinerator.
It would be a tragic mistake to allow those fears to delay a fair test of a facility that promises faster and safer waste disposal -- not only for Bronx-Lebanon but the borough as a whole.
Bronx-Lebanon will be the first user of a new high-technology, $20 million incinerator nearing completion in an industrialized area of the southeast Bronx.
The facility will process 48 tons of medical waste every day, about 10 times the amount produced by Bronx-Lebanon alone.
Individual institutions don't produce enough waste to cover the costs of a state-of-the-art facility; but joint use, involving the hospital, will solve that.


At Least 8 Wounded In Siege of Dubrovnik
At least eight people were wounded here today, including a London journalist, during more than 10 hours of heavy shelling and small-arms fire as the Yugoslav Federal Army tightened its noose around this historic Croatian port.
A sniper's bullet grazed the leg of Phil Davison of The Independent, and fragments of the same round struck a Dubrovnik policeman, a butcher and a waiter in the legs.


New Monopolies From Old
In 1968, Americans were finally allowed to make a basic choice: what kind of phone we could have in our homes.
In 1982, with the breakup of the A. T.&amp; T. monopoly, we were permitted to choose long-distance companies.
This freedom should be expanded in the 1990's: Americans should be given maximum choice of local telephone and information service companies.
But a decision by the Supreme Court on Oct. 30 could continue to limit our choices.
By affirming a lower court decision in the protracted A. T.&amp; T. case, the Court cleared the way for the seven regional Bell companies to use their $80 billion in annual telephone revenues to enter the information services market.
Unless Congress acts soon, the decision, and the consequent damage to competition, will probably be irreversible.


Anderson Eases the Pain (Kind of)
The Nets had lost their third straight game, Jud Buechler's locker was empty and there was obvious friction between Coach Bill Fitch and the team's owners about who was in control of the roster.
So why was Fitch in such a jolly mood on Saturday night after losing to the Pistons at Byrne Meadowlands Arena?
Why did the normally reserved Derrick Coleman, bad back and all, joke with a few reporters?
Why was Mookie Blaylock talking about a new attitude and a new direction for the team?


Notre Dame Still in Picture for Bowls
Tennessee's 35-34 victory over Notre Dame on Saturday afternoon knocked the Irish down but far from out of the New Year's bowl-game arrangements.
The result at South Bend, Ind., fractured the concept of a "national championship" that the Fiesta Bowl producers had in mind, one matching a Notre Dame team ranked second or third in the news-agency polls and the winner of next Saturday's big game between Florida State and Miami, both of which are undefeated.


Mary Holowinsky Weds W. Y. Chen
Dr.
Mary Holowinsky and Dr.
William Yuen Chen were married yesterday at the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary Ukrainian Catholic Church in New Brunswick, N.J.
The Rev.
Paul Labinsky performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Chen graduated summa cum laude from Rutgers University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.D. from the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School.
She has a practice in internal medicine and infectious diseases in New Brunswick.


W. G. Vorhaus Jr., 68, A Retired Executive
William G. Vorhaus Jr., a retired business executive, died Thursday at his home in Burke, Va.
He was 68 years old.
Mr. Vorhaus died of cancer, his family said.


Arriving in Tokyo, Baker Starts 3-Nation Asia Tour
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d arrived in Tokyo today at the start of a politically risky Asian tour likely to determine whether relations between China and the United States remain strained or can begin to recover in the aftermath of Beijing's violent crackdown on democracy advocates in 1989.
After stops in Japan and South Korea, Mr.
Baker is to travel on Friday to Beijing in the highest-level visit by a Bush Administration official since the Tiananmen Square killings of June 1989.
Although Mr.
Baker's trip is going ahead as planned, President Bush last week responded to domestic political concerns by canceling a planned Asian tour beginning late this month.


Miss Anderson, Lawyer, Is Wed
Lauren Anderson, a lawyer in Jersey City, and August Milton Jr., an assistant dean at the Tulane University Law School in New Orleans, were married yesterday at St.
Peter's Roman Catholic Church in Jersey City.
The Rev.
Damian Halligan performed the ceremony with the Rev.
Petero Sabune, an Episcopal priest, attending.
The bride, who is 39 years old and is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received a law degree from Rutgers University.
She is an associate in the law firm of Korona, Beides, Eaton, Mark &amp; Santiago.
Her parents are Laurence and Betty Anderson of Hamden, Conn.
Her father is a financial planner in Hamden for Waddell &amp; Reed, a financial services company.
Her mother retired as an elementary-school teacher in Hamden.


Trade-Talk Progress, but Still No Deal
Trade negotiations in the Netherlands on Friday and Saturday failed to produce a breakthrough in the deadlocked global trade talks, but American and European officials insisted today that progress had been made.
The sides said in a communique at the end of the discussions that they were in virtual agreement on an accord to protect copyrights, patents, computer chip designs, trade secrets and trademarks.
But no compromise was struck on Europe's lavish subsidies to farmers, which have become the biggest sticking point in the five-year, 108-nation negotiations intended to lower trade barriers.


New Trade Campaign For Time Magazine
An advertising agency with a penchant for print is finding that Time is easier the second time around.
Fallon McElligott, the Minneapolis shop known for creative print work for clients like Rolling Stone and Jim Beam, is introducing a trade campaign for Time that stresses the newsweekly's editorial content -- and the value to advertisers of readers attracted to that content.


Man Kills His Estranged Wife And Three Others in Kentucky
A man followed his estranged wife as she drove to a restaurant with acquaintances and killed her and three others before killing himself Saturday.


GERMANS TURN OUT TO FIGHT BIGOTRY
After one of the most infamous anniversaries from the Nazi era passed this weekend without major violence, German police officials greeted dawn today with relief that a threatened Saturday night rampage against Jews and foreigners did not materialize.
Neo-Nazis and other far-right groups had said they would observe the weekend anniversary of Kristallnacht by destroying property and attacking people.
Kristallnacht, or Crystal Night, was a night of anti-Semitic violence in 1938 during which Jews were beaten and killed or taken off to concentration camps, and synagogues and Jewish businesses were destroyed.
It got its name because of the shattered glass that lay in the streets.


Stephanie West Wed
Stephanie Nelson West, the daughter of Grace M. West of North Fort Myers, Fla., and the late David S. West, was married yesterday to Gregory Lewis Prince, the son of Charles H. Prince of Long Beach, L.I., and the late Sandra M. Prince.
Rabbi Irwin C. Lowenheim officiated at the George Washington Manor in Roslyn, L.I.


Medicaid Can't Cover Mobile Van Health Services for Children
To the Editor:
Re "Medical Vans" (letter, Oct. 23) by Family Court Judge Stella Schindler:


Robert Maxwell Is Buried in Jerusalem


It Doesn't Compute
He learned to use a computer for work, and wound up loving it.
He mastered his 20-megabyte I.B.M.-compatible laptop computer and became a bore on the subject.
Then he bought an Apple Macintosh for home and spent hours with his children exploring its feats.
After that, frustration set in.
He realized how much simpler life would be if he could do work from his laptop on the Mac.
But that's complicated.
For years, Apple and I.B.M., jealously protecting their markets, refused to collaborate on standard software and hardware.
To make the machines compatible, consumers need special software.


Rightist Party Gains in Vienna Election
Alarmed by the prospect of a huge influx of East European immigrants, Vienna lurched to the right in voting today for a municipal legislature.
The result is expected to cause strains between left and right in Austria's national coalition Government, which links the conservative People's Party with the Socialists of Chancellor Franz Vranitzky.
There is speculation that such tensions may force the Chancellor to call early elections next year.


The Jets Need to Groom Nagle
ON the stat sheet, Ken O'Brien completed 23 of 36 passes for 329 yards and one touchdown with no interceptions in a raw rain.
Impressive.
But when the Jets needed a big play in the final minutes of their 28-27 loss to the Indianapolis Colts yesterday, their 30-year-old quarterback misfired on four passes and was sacked once.
Not impressive.
Over his seven seasons as the starter, Ken O'Brien has taken the Jets as far as he could, but that's never been far enough.
Only two playoff seasons in 1985 and 1986, only one wild-card victory.
O'Brien's performance yesterday was typical of his career.
Good, but not good enough.


Georgetown in a Battle Over Its Image of Wealth
For many people, Georgetown still conjures up visions of gracious dinner parties where the most influential members of a city of policy makers toast to the success of the latest conference of leading industrial nations with Waterford crystal.
For others, however, the enclave of neat brownstones and ritzy shops nestled along narrow streets that slope upward from the Potomac River evokes another image: the neon-studded, honky-tonk night life that provides the area's primary cash flow.
As many as 50,000 visitors pass through Georgetown on a weekend night, an influx that has prompted some of the more exclusive stores and restaurants to move to other locations, to be replaced by bars and sometimes seedy shops.


Rogue or Reformer, Edwards Seeks Louisiana Vindication
Even in Louisiana, where politics has always resided in a steamy limbo somewhere between stern moral drama and ribald fruitcake theater, there is something extraordinary in the vision of Edwin W. Edwards as penitent seeking redemption.
"I can't tell you how important this is to me," Mr.
Edwards, who faces State Representative David Duke in the Nov. 16 election for governor, told a packed fund-raising event in Lake Charles on Monday night.


Question Box
Tigers' Productive Fielder
Q.
Last season, Cecil Fielder of the Detroit Tigers hit 51 home runs and drove in 132 runs.
This season, Fielder had 44 homers and 133 runs batted in.
How many other major league players have exceeded 40 homers and 130 r.b.i. in successive seasons and who was the last to do it?


Insect Threatening Survival of Hudson Valley Hemlocks
Michael Birmingham stood under a drooping branch of a hemlock tree here in northwestern Dutchess County, using a magnifying glass to examine its needles.
"Yes, here they are," he said, holding a twig with about a hundred tiny white spots on it.


Cardinals Not Among Critics of Hostetler
The game had ended almost an hour earlier, but Jeff Hostetler was still standing in a corner of the Giants' locker room, his back pressed against a wall, his right shoulder wrapped tightly in ice, his questioners wanting to know if a productive afternoon like this would finally end the scrutiny he seems to face every week.
Hostetler listened intently, then looked into the camera lights and shook his head.


Guggenheim Postpones Reopening Until May
The reopening of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum has been postponed until mid-May, its deputy director, Michael Govan, said last week.
The museum at 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, closed on April 27, 1990, for renovations to its building, designed by Frank Lloyd Wright, and construction of a 10-story annex that will house galleries and offices.
Museum officials originally said the renovation and new construction, carried out by Gwathmey Siegel &amp; Associates, would take about 18 months, but the completion date has since been postponed several times.


Dr. Meldrum Has Wedding
Dr.
Melissa Lynn Meldrum, an ophthalmology resident, and Dr.
David Mark Jablons, a surgeon, were married yesterday at the Central Presbyterian Church in New York by the Rev.
William Pindar.
The bride, 28 years old, is a daughter of Mrs.
Duane Petrie of Grayling, Mich., and Richard Meldrum of Tawas, Mich.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Michigan, where she also received her M.D. degree.
She is a resident at the Bascom Palmer Eye Institute of the University of Miami in Florida.
Her father retired as an engineering operations executive for General Motors in Detroit.


Miss Maher Has Wedding
Marie-Helene Maher, the daughter of Thomas Woodrow Maher of Brooklyn and the late Helen Maher, was married yesterday to James Peter Lofland, the son of the late James R. and Margaret Lofland.
The Rev.
Peter Colapietro performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Immaculate Heart of Mary Church in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Lofland, 39 years old, is the nursing care coordinator in cardiac care at Cabrini Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from the Hunter College-Bellevue Hospital School of Nursing and is completing a master's degree in health administration at the New School for Social Research.


Lack of Immunization Claims Young Victims
To the Editor:
You report on lagging immunization of children in the New York City area (news article, Oct. 16).
According to the Public Health Service, 20 percent to 30 percent of children 2 years old and younger lack basic immunizations.
Conditions are worse in many poor inner-city neighborhoods, where as many as half of all children younger than 2 are not fully immunized.
Children in our country are dying because of measles epidemics.


Grief Ripples Over Bronx for 6 Youths in Crash
Margaret Moriarty stood in a rumpled housedress in her living room, wanly scanning the smiling faces of her sons -- Patrick, Robbie, Michael and Danny -- in photographs chronicling weddings, school games and parties.
Her oldest child and only daughter, Theresa Ann, died in a fire 22 years ago, and her communion picture commands a place of honor on the wall.
Until Saturday, the Moriartys had looked forward to a small reunion two weeks from now to celebrate Patrick's wedding.
Instead, this week, they will attend a grimmer church service and bury their youngest son, Danny, next to his sister.


Havel Advances Slovak Autonomy Claims
To the Editor;
"Czechoslovakia Reaches Out Despite the Pressures Within" (The Week in Review, Oct. 20), on resurgent nationalist tensions in Czechoslovakia is uncommonly perceptive.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
ITT Corp., New York, priced $125 million worth of notes due in 1996 through Lazard Freres &amp; Co. at 99.505 to yield 7.37 percent.
The coupon rate is 7 1/4 percent.
Ratings are A-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
Preferred Stock  *
Ford Motor Co., Dearborn, Mich., may sell as much as $1.5 billion in convertible preferred stock today, Bloomberg Business News reported.
It said the shares, to be offered through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. would be priced at $50 each and bear a dividend rate of 8 1/4 to 8 1/2 percent.
Common Stock  *
Seagull Energy Corp., Houston, has filed for two million common shares through First Boston Corp.
Ratings  *
New York State has received an A rating from S.&amp; P. on $225.7 million worth of bonds scheduled to be offered this week. *
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.'s senior debt has been raised to A+, from A, by Fitch Investors Service Inc.
The investment and financial services company is based in New York.


Ogilvy to Promote Tourism in Illinois
After a lengthy review, the Illinois Bureau of Tourism has awarded its $11 million advertising account to Ogilvy &amp; Mather, Chicago.
The two other finalists in the review, which began with 25 agencies, were also Chicago agencies: the incumbent, McConnaughy Stein Schmidt Brown, which had handled the account for two and a half years, and Foote, Cone &amp; Belding.


Anti-Fascists March in Memory of Victims of Dachau


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday None Tuesday  Housing Completions . . .
Sept.
Wednesday Producer Prices . . .
Oct. 10-Day Auto Sales . . .
Early Nov.
Thursday  Consumer Price Index . . .
Oct.
Retail Sales . . .
Oct.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  Industrial Production . . .
Oct.
Capacity Utilization . . .
Oct.
Business Inventories . . .
Sept.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- ADDENDA
Accounts  *
Radius Inc., San Jose, Calif., which makes graphics computing systems, to Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco.
The account, with billings estimated between $2 million and $3 million, had previously been handled by Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco.


People
*
Ellen Abramowitz has been promoted to the newly created position of director of corporate sales at Lang Communications, New York, from director of advertising at Working Woman, a Lang magazine.
She is succeeded by Ann Morrow, who had been the magazine's advertising manager-business group.
Also at Lang, Barbara J. Cooper has been promoted to corporate marketing director of its Working Woman, Working Mother and Success magazines, from corporate promotion director. *
Alfred L. Schreiber has been named senior vice president and director of marketing at Festival Productions Inc., New York, a firm specializing in corporate sponsorship of musical events.
He had previously been executive vice president and director of event sponsorship marketing at Burson-Marsteller, New York.


An Effort To Salvage Bank Bill
In the face of increasingly partisan wrangling on the verge of an election year, Congress will take one final stab this week at passing banking legislation.
After several days of negotiations last week, Administration officials and lawmakers from both parties said the chances were about 50-50 that a key proposal from President Bush, to allow banks to open branches nationwide, would be enacted.


Amy Briskin and Robert James Wallace Marry
Amy Briskin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Briskin of Boynton Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Robert James Wallace, a son of James Wallace of Cape Coral, Fla., and the late Mariella Wallace.
Rabbi Charles Lippman officiated at the New York Academy of Art.
The bride, 35 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Brown University, she is the national director of public relations in New York for the Ronkin Educational Group, a counseling and test preparation organization.


'Baby Bells,' Newspapers In a Brawl
A long-simmering feud between two industries has escalated into a high-priced lobbying duel, as the nation's newspaper publishers fight to keep the regional Bell telephone companies out of their business.
The brawl, which broke out in the wake of a Federal appeals court decision last month, has drawn legions of well-connected lobbyists and media advisers to both sides and is certain to cost millions of dollars before it is over.


Dance in Review
Foot and Fiddle Dance Company  McGinn/Cazale Theater
The word has deservedly gone around about the Pat Cannon Foot and Fiddle Dance Company.
Miss Cannon's fun-filled but serious amalgam of Appalachian clog-dancing, tap, country music and square dances tends to pop up in unexpected venues in New York City.


Hostetler Man on Move As Giants Win
The Giants finally got well today. Or at least they got better.
They played aggressively on offense, with Jeff Hostetler, their quarterback, running for two touchdowns and Rodney Hampton carrying 24 times for 99 yards.
Their running game gained 180 yards.
They played aggressively on defense, with Leonard Marshall getting three of their four sacks of Tom Tupa.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Historical Moment  Martina Navratilova made tennis history the hard way yesterday, defeating top-ranked Monica Seles, 6-3, 3-6, 6-3, in the California Virginia Slims for her 157th tournament title.
Navratilova matched the titles won by Chris Evert during her career.
"To beat the No. 1 player in the world is enough," Navratilova said.
"But tying the record was a huge bonus." (AP) Applemans Defeats Adams: Sabine Applemans of Belgium defeated Katrina Adams, 6-2, 6-4, to win the Virginia Slims of Nashville in Brentwood, Tenn. (AP) Chang Wins in England: Michael Chang won his first title of 1991, beating unseeded Frenchman Guillaume Raoux, 6-3, 6-2, in the final of the Birmingham men's indoor tournament in England.
Neumann had four birdies and only one bogey yesterday.
She finished 54 holes at five-under 211. (AP) CRICKET  South Africa at Bat Again  South Africa returned to international cricket yesterday after a 21-year banishment when Clive Rice, the team captain, tossed a 1901 gold-plated silver coin to begin a one-day limited overs match against India in Calcutta.
Rice lost the toss to the Indian captain, Mohammad Azharuddin, who invited the South Africans to bat first. (AP) MARATHON  Reifsnyder Wins  Bill Reifsnyder got a little help from a friend to win the Columbus Marathon, run in frigid weather yesterday in Ohio.
Reifsnyder, 29, of Albuquerque, was aided by a fast pace set by his fellow New Mexican Aaron Ramirez in winning in 2 hours 12 minutes 39 seconds.
Janine Aiello of Taos, N.M., made it a sweep for the state of New Mexico, winning the women's division in 2:37:33.
Aiello overtook Barbara Moore of New Zealand, one of the favorites, near the 21-mile mark and held on to win by more than a minute.
Moore finished second. (AP) SOCCER  Seton Hall Triumphs  Gerson Echeverry scored with 23 minutes left as Seton Hall beat St.
John's, 1-0, yesterday in Storrs, Conn., to win the Big East title and a spot in the N.C.A.A. tournament.
Echeverry scored for Seton Hall (14-3-2) on a 4-yard shot through the legs of diving goalkeeper John Urbom.
St.
John's finished the season with a record of 12-5-2.
Rutgers (18-2-1) also earned a bid to the tournament, beating Rhode Island (8-9-2) by 6-0 in Kingston, R.I., for the Atlantic-10 title.
Lino DiCuollo recorded one goal and an assist for Rutgers.(AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Sealy Leads St.
John's  Malik Sealy scored 25 points, including 7 in overtime, as St.
John's beat Marathon Oil, 97-92, last night in an exhibition game at St.
John's.
Rob Werdann added 15 points for St.
John's.
Eric Turner of Marathon sent the game into overtime with a 3-pointer that tied the score at 83-83 with 26 seconds to go.
Buchanan was called for an offense foul with 11 seconds left.
For Boston, Larry Bird missed 12 of his first 15 shots and wound up 5 for 18 and Kevin McHale was 5 for 15 from the field. (AP)


IMAGES SHOW BRAIN RECALLING A WORD
By making the first photographs of the human brain as it performs the simple task of recalling a word, researchers have made unexpected discoveries about memory and the way the mind works.
The findings, resulting from X-ray research led by Dr.
Marcus Raichle of Washington University in St.
Louis, are to be presented today at a conference of neuroscientists in New Orleans.
In interviews, the researchers and other scientists said the work was both significant and surprising.


Boston Ignores a Trend In Re-Electing a Mayor
It was just an impulse, as it often is for Raymond L. Flynn, that prompted him to take a break from campaigning for re-election as Mayor one recent morning to drop in at the Gavin Middle School in South Boston.
How are things going?
Mayor Flynn asked the principal, Joseph Lee.
Fine, said Mr.
Lee, except that the school had no books; the School Department had failed to deliver them.
Outraged, Mr.
Flynn was soon making a blizzard of phone calls and eventually tracked down the missing volumes.


Ruddock May Have to Go a Few Rounds in Court
MARVIN MITCHELSON is squaring off against another boxer today.
The Los Angeles lawyer, noted for a celebrity clientele that has included the wives or companions of four world champions, will file a palimony and paternity suit today against DONOVAN (RAZOR) RUDDOCK on behalf of one ANGELA FRAZIER.
Ruddock has never been the heavyweight champion, but he did fight MIKE TYSON twice, although never for the title.
Tyson, SUGAR RAY LEONARD, MARVIN HAGLER and THOMAS HEARNS have all faced Mitchelson across a table.


Maxwell Is Buried In Jerusalem
The shrouded body of Robert Maxwell was lowered today into a rocky grave on the Mount of Olives, where Jews since biblical times have found permanent rest.
His funeral, then burial, as the sun set purple and gold over Jerusalem's imposing walls, was a remarkable farewell by Israel to the powerful international publisher, who died on Tuesday at 68 under circumstances that are still not fully clear.


Tackling the Law; Turning the Pages
"The law firm of Rosenfeld, Meyer &amp; Susman takes pleasure in announcing that MARVIN POWELL JR.  has become associated with our firm," read the card from Beverly Hills.
Yes, it's the former Jets right tackle, who will now specialize in sports and entertainment law. . . .
MATT BAHR, ARTHUR ASHE and REGGIE WILLIAMS will read to third-graders this week as part of New York City's Read Aloud School Volunteer Program.
Bahr, the Giants' kicker, will be at P.S. 1, on Henry Street, tomorrow, reading WILLIAM STEIG's "Shrek." On Wednesday, Williams, the general manager of the Stars of the World League of American Football, will read "Be a Perfect Person in Three Days" by STEPHEN MANES, at P.S. 189 on Amsterdam Avenue.
Ashe will read "Shrek" on Thursday at the River East School on East 116th Street.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The appetite for American goods and services remains robust around the globe, a sign that exports are likely to remain a bright spot in the otherwise lackluster American economy.  [ Page A1. ]


Moliere From Paris
Le Studio Classique, a theater company based in Paris, will present French-language performances of "Le Misanthrope" at Gould Hall (55 East 59th Street, Manhattan) on Thursday, Friday and Saturday evenings at 8 o'clock.
Irene Jacob, who won the best-actress award at the 1991 Cannes International Film Festival for her role in "The Double Life of Veronique," plays the role of Celimene in the Moliere comedy.
Simultaneous translation will be available.
Tickets, at $15 ($12 for members of the French Institute/Alliance Francaise), may be ordered through Ticketmaster, (212) 307-7171.
Information: (212) 355-6100.


A 2d Storm on the Coast Lacks Punch of the First
The second Atlantic storm in 10 days lashed coastal areas of New Jersey, Long Island and Connecticut with high winds and heavy surf yesterday, causing some flooding and beach erosion, but nothing to compare with the Halloween blow that devastated the coasts of New England and the Mid-Atlantic states.
The storm -- hundreds of miles across and packing winds of up to 50 miles an hour -- was centered yesterday off North Carolina's Outer Banks and was wobbling slowly up the coast, hurling 14-foot waves at ocean-front homes and crumbling barrier dunes.


Holiday Delays This Week's Bill Auction
The Treasury's auction schedule this week is limited to its regular offering of three- and six-month bills, which will be delayed until tomorrow because today is Veterans Day.
On Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 4.61 percent, and the six-month bill was bid at 4.67 percent.


Baby Hurt in 35-Foot Fall After Subway Doors Trap Stroller
As his parents watched, a baby boy fell through the tracks of an elevated platform in Brooklyn and was critically injured late Saturday after the doors of a subway train closed on his stroller and began to drag it away.
"I was yelling, I was crying, but nobody heard me," the boy's father, Francisco Martinez Sr., said yesterday.
As Mr.
Martinez struggled frantically to free his son, 20-month-old Francisco Jr., the boy was thrown from the stroller, flipped between two cars and fell to the ground 35 feet below.


In Black Churches, Coming to Terms With AIDS
In crowded Sunday school classes, in formal Sunday-morning services and in quiet conversations on the steps of black churches around the New York region afterward, some pastors urged compassion.
Others preached abstinence.
Their congregations continued the struggle to come to terms with the news that Magic Johnson had tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS.
At the Mount Olive Baptist Church in Hackensack, N.J., the sermon, delivered by a visiting minister, the Rev.
Joan S. Parrott, focused on how "man's extremity can become God's opportunity." She told the congregation at one of the largest black Baptist churches in Bergen County that Mr.
Johnson's announcement was "a great opportunity for the black church to deal with the issue of AIDS."


American Express Pushes Idea of Consumer Freedom
THE American Express Company will spend substantially more than usual in the next six weeks to present its new advertising campaign from Chiat/Day/Mojo Inc., which will try to convince consumers, as Chiat did for Reebok sneakers, that American Express lets you be you.
Advertising executives who insisted on anonymity said American Express would spend $20 million to $25 million before Christmas on the campaign, which replaces the "membership has its privileges" campaign by Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.


WORLD'S APPETITE FOR U.S. PRODUCTS IS STILL INCREASING
The appetite for American goods and services remains robust around the globe, a sign that exports are likely to remain a bright spot in the otherwise lackluster American economy.
Japanese newspaper readers want color photos.
Venezuelan households want top-loading washers.
The residents of Indonesia want cleaner air.
And American companies are reaping the benefits.


John Kirkpatrick Is Dead at 86; A Pianist Who Popularized Ives
John Kirkpatrick, a professor emeritus at Yale and a pianist who popularized the works of composers like Charles Ives and Carl Ruggles, died on Friday at his home in Ithaca, N.Y.
He was 86 years old.
In 1939 Mr.
Kirkpatrick gave the first performance of a piece that had been lying around, unplayed, since Ives finished it in 1915, the "Concord" Sonata, with its four movements: "Emerson," "Hawthorne," "The Alcotts" and "Thoreau."


Gun Bill Didn't Include Massacre Weapon
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb states (column, Oct. 27) that the House of Representatives voted against a ban on semiautomatic assault rifles the day after "the Texas massacre in which a madman used such a weapon to kill 22 people."


Ms. Conescu Weds Francis Barany
Rachel Victoria Conescu, the publications coordinator at Trinity School, and Dr.
Francis Barany, an associate professor of microbiology at Cornell University Medical College, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Martin S. Rozenberg officiated at Rockefeller University in New York.
The bride, 33 years old, graduated from Wesleyan University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.A. in American civilization from New York University.
She is the daughter of Marcia and Arthur Conescu of Port Washington, L.I.
Her father is a real-estate broker with Charles E. Hyde Realty Ltd. in Port Washington.
Her mother is a librarian at the Manhasset (L.I.) Public Library.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Activated Steve Gabbard, offensive tackle, from the practice squad.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Activated Marcus Allen, running back, from injured reserve.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Activated Bill Musgrave, quarterback, from the practice squad.
Placed John Johnson, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW YORK RANGERS -- Sent Jeff Bloemberg, defenseman, to Binghamton of the American Hockey League.
Loaned Greg Millen, goaltender, to Maine of the American Hockey League.


Aid for Homeless Focuses on Veterans
Four years ago, when Ken Smith made his first trip to the Vietnam memorial, he saw something in its black granite reflection that he did not like: homeless veterans camped in the nearby bushes.
Mr.
Smith, a Vietnam veteran himself, returned to his home in Boston and last December started the nation's largest shelter exclusively for homeless veterans.
It is a 10-story, 200-bed center where the homeless are organized in squads and platoons and where the cook calls himself a mess sergeant.


At Expense Of the Jets, Colts Win One
The Jets got into a shootout with the Indianapolis Colts here this afternoon, but with their offense and special teams misfiring, they shot themselves in the foot.
For the Colts (1-9), who hadn't won a game in nine attempts this season and hadn't scored a touchdown in 20 quarters coming into this game, their 28-27 victory was tantamount to winning the Super Bowl, as quarterback Jeff George said afterward.


Split by Muslim Region Rattles the Yeltsin Camp
The move by the Russian republic's President, Boris N. Yeltsin, to impose emergency rule in a breakaway Muslim enclave within his republic has run into a storm of criticism from his liberal allies and heightened nationalist fervor in the northern Caucasus.
In Grozny, capital of the enclave, the Chechen-Ingush Autonomous Republic, Gen.
Djokhar Dudayev, elected the region's president last month, defied Moscow's order today with a mass rally, dotted by the green flags of Islam.
He promised to press ahead for independence from Russia and to avenge "any provocative acts of state terrorism."


Khmer Rouge Said to Conceal Arms for Future
The Khmer Rouge, the Communist guerrilla group that once brutally ruled Cambodia and has now joined the new coalition government under a peace accord, is hiding troops and a huge cache of weapons in preparation for the possible resumption of the Cambodian civil war, diplomats and relief workers say.
The move, they say, violates disarmament provisions of the United Nations peace treaty that the Khmer Rouge signed in Paris only last month along with Cambodia's Vietnamese-backed Communist Government and two non-Communist guerrilla groups.
The treaty, which is seen as the best hope for ending the long civil war in this shattered nation, requires partial demobilization by all sides under the supervision of the United Nations.
Peacekeeping Force Due
Diplomats said that in drafting the treaty, they took into account the possibility that the Khmer Rouge or other factions would try to hide troops and weapons.
With the first soldiers of a large United Nations peacekeeping force arriving in Cambodia today, the diplomats expressed hope that adequate safeguards would soon be in place to prevent any new use of force.


Coming Back; Hide the Homeless?
Last June, police in riot gear tore down a shantytown in New York's Tompkins Square Park and evicted the homeless.
Then they swept through nearby vacant lots to tear down a new shantytown and evict the homeless again.
Can't the city do better than chase the homeless from one block to another?
The answer is yes, given common sense and political courage.
The homeless on New York City's chilly streets bear witness to dramatic failures of social policy affecting the mentally ill and abusers of drugs and alcohol.
They constitute two of every three homeless people.


Veterans' Groups Turn to Homeless
Groups that have traditionally helped military veterans with counseling and job training are increasingly turning their attention to homelessness.
While no precise count of homeless veterans is available, these groups say the number is rising.
In response, they are opening shelters and drug-abuse clinics, exclusively for those who have served in the armed forces.
Article, page A8.


For Veterans, a Prouder Time
Today, for the first time in years, America celebrates Veterans Day with a sense of relief and even pride.
Last Veterans Day was an anxious time for Americans of every opinion about war, peace and the national interest.
The United States, in its immense buildup for battle in the Middle East, awaited a showdown over whether to use that mighty fighting force.
Many people who had never come to terms with Vietnam were concerned about loved ones, nervous about American abilities, fretful about a bellicose national character.


Duke Recasts His Religious Claims
New doubts were cast today on the assertion by State Representative David Duke that he shed his racist and anti-Semitic beliefs as a result of a Christian conversion.
Mr.
Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan leader who says he has changed because he is a "born again" Christian, conceded to reporters today that he could not pinpoint a specific conversion in recent years.
Several days ago Mr.
Duke admitted that he did not belong to a church he had claimed to attend.


Redskins Spend the Afternoon Dining on Blitzes
Here comes the Atlanta Falcons' blitz.
There goes the ball.
There go the Washington Redskins' receivers sprinting into the end zone.
Blitz. Bomb. Touchdown.


Full-Court Press With Questions
The college basketball season starts next week.
And that means the phone calls from people requesting obscure information will increase at the National Collegiate Athletic Association's offices in Overland Park, Kan.
GARY JOHNSON, the assistant statistics coordinator there, has been intrigued by the variety of these requests over the years, and he has compiled a list of the most unusual.
Here's a sampling:
"Can you send me all the basketball box scores of every game playes in the 1980's"
"What is the percentage of baserunners hit by a center fielder's throw when running from second to third?"
"Wat is the N.C.A.A. record for number of players with palindromic names on one team?"
"What teams wore the light-colored uniform for the last 25 championship basketball games?"
"Can you send me the game-by-game football scores since college football started?"
"How many N.C.A.A. schools don't have athletic programs?"


The New Republic's Editor Brings a Fresh Perspective
In its 77 years, The New Republic has been tagged with many labels, from Stalinist to neo-conservative.
Now, the appointment of a 28-year-old British editor, who describes his views as "post ideological," and a renewed business partnership with its longtime conservative political adversary, The National Review, are expected to reposition the feisty little journal of opinion once more.


George Finally Puts Victory in His Pocket
Looking at the statistics from today's game between the Jets and the Colts, it would appear that Ken O'Brien had a slightly better day than Jeff George.
The statistics didn't exactly lie, but the scoreboard told a more important truth: Indianapolis 28, New York 27.
O'Brien completed 23 of 36 passes for 329 yards; George completed 16 of 26 for 239 yards.
But O'Brien threw only one touchdown pass and was sacked once for an 11-yard loss, while George threw three touchdown passes, breaking wide open a five-game Indianapolis touchdown drought and going sack-free for the first time in his two-year career.


Mississippi's New Chief Fought Race-Based Plans
When Kirk Fordice was driving home his campaign theme of passionate opposition to quotas and government affirmative-action programs in general, he was not just engaging in idle sloganeering.
Nor was the new Governor-elect of Mississippi running a copycat campaign, despite what some opponents said about his injecting race into the election and echoing the approach of David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader and neo-Nazi who is running for governor in neighboring Louisiana.


METRO DIGEST
A SECOND STORM LASHES COAST
A second nameless Atlantic storm swept across coastal areas of New Jersey, Long Island and Connecticut, causing some flooding and beach erosion.
But the storm -- hundreds of miles wide, with winds of up to 50 miles an hour -- lacked the destructive force of the Halloween blow that wreaked hundreds of million of dollars in damage.
Page B5.
CHURCHES STRUGGLE ANEW WITH AIDS
In Sunday sermons and school classes throughout the New York region, pastors and their congregations struggled to come to terms with the news that Magic Johnson has the virus that causes AIDS.
For some, it was an opportunity to address a neglected issue.
For others, it was a chance to reaffirm a belief that only abstinence prevents infection.
Page B2.
NEW YORK CITY


CHRONICLE
New York City public school third graders will hear a lot of stories from an illustrious crew of readers today through Nov. 21.


Thinking Big, Japanese Are Buying Berlitz
No one can call Soichiro Fukutake a man of half measures.
During the summer, this energetic executive decided to drop everything and move to New York for six weeks to study English at the Berlitz language school.
He liked the program so much that like the man in the Remington razor ad, he decided to buy the company.


Review/Opera; 'Don Carlo' Accompanied by a Pair of Pianos
With a glitzy operatic production thrown in jeopardy by labor problems, company management pushes ahead, mounting the show in severely curtailed form over the protests of picketing employees: thus the scenario of Istvan Szabo's film "Meeting Venus," which is to arrive on Friday in New York and sometime later here.
This city doesn't need the film just yet, for it experienced the real thing on Saturday evening, when the Washington Opera opened its season with a monumental production of "Don Carlo" at the Kennedy Center.
Missing were the company's 61-member orchestra and two of its star performers, the bass Nicolai Ghiaurov and the conductor Rafael Fruhbeck de Burgos.
With a paltry two pianos in the pit for Verdi's grand and richly scored creation, this was almost as bizarre an affair as that depicted in Mr.
Szabo's film.


AIDS Vaccine to Be Tested on Human Volunteers, Bypassing Animal Trials
Discouraged by their inability to stem the spread of AIDS, world health officials are bypassing the usual animal trials and plan to begin testing in Brazil, Rwanda, Thailand and Uganda to find out whether experimental vaccines can prevent people from becoming infected.
The step reflects almost a complete reversal in attitude.
Until now, many experts had favored the traditional approach of exhaustively testing vaccines on animals.


Review/Television; Glancing Back at the Innocent World War II Years
Veterans Day is getting the television equivalent of a 21-gun salute tonight on cable's American Movie Classics channel.
At 8 (with a repeat at 11:30), there's "Stars and Stripes: Hollywood and World War II," a chronicle of how the movie industry and its stars worked to support the war effort.
Then at 9 (with a repeat at 12:30), there's the 1943 film version of Irving Berlin's patriotic musical, "This Is the Army," newly restored through a collaboration of American Movie Classics with the University of California at Los Angeles Film and Television Archive.
Written and produced by Marcia Ely, "Stars and Stripes" is a warm tribute to the Hollywood community that did its bit on several fronts.
Stars like Douglas Fairbanks Jr. and James Stewart wasted no time in putting on a military uniform.
Entertainers like Bob Hope and Jack Benny toured military camps at home and abroad.


Miss Slosberg Wed in Boston
Jessica Lee Slosberg and James J. Benjamin Jr., 1987 graduates of Dartmouth College, were married yesterday at the Ritz-Carlton in Boston.
Rabbi Benjamin Rudavsky and the Rev.
Daniel Graham, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.
Mrs.
Benjamin, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from Dartmouth and received an M.A. in journalism from Northwestern University.
Until recently she was an associate producer at WPRI-TV in Providence, R.I.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Myles J. Slosberg of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Her father is an Assistant Attorney General in Massachusetts.
Her mother, Joyce Slosberg, is a psychotherapist.
The bride is a great-granddaughter of the late J. A. Slosberg, the founder of the Stride Rite shoe company.


Gail Bassen, Manager, Weds
Gail Bassen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nat Bassen of Woodbury, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert Seiden, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Seiden of Manhattan Beach, Brooklyn.
Rabbi Ezra Finkelstein officiated at Temple Hillel in North Woodmere, L.I.
Mrs.
Seiden, 26 years old, graduated from New York University, as did her husband.
She is a merchandise manager in the Hicksville, L.I., headquarters of Fabric Bonanza, a chain of fabric stores in the New York metropolitan area.
Her father is the chain's chief executive.


Apple Gives A Blueprint For Future
In an unusual move to help customers, Wall Street and the computer industry to comprehend its strategy, Apple Computer Inc. has prepared an extensive document outlining its product directions for the future.
The "Blueprint for the Decade" does not discuss new products in detail, and some of its contents have been stated publicly by Apple executives in the last year.
Nevertheless, the document contains some new information, particularly in light of Apple's recent cooperative agreement with the International Business Machines Corporation, and is another sign of a new openness at Apple, which has been reluctant to talk much about its future plans.
Two-Part Strategy
As Apple executives have suggested, the company seems to be separating its strategy into two parts -- one focusing on products for individuals and the other on more complex networks of computers for large corporations.
The document further stresses that Apple will continue to seek alliances with other companies and "will no longer go the distance alone."


Veterans Day
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
PARADE Begins at 9 A.M. on Fifth Avenue at 39th Street and proceeds south on Fifth Avenue to 24th Street, ending around noon.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and Special Delivery only.
Post offices will be closed with the exception of the emergency window at the Main Post Office, 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Option to close.
PARKING Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open.
TRANSPORTATION Regular weekday service. NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Local option.
TRANSPORTATION Regular weekday service. CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Regular weekday schedules. TRAFFIC ALERT
The Brooklyn-bound lanes of the Brooklyn Bridge will be closed for repairs until 3 P.M.


Office Glut Spreads in California
For the last decade, downtown Los Angeles stood as a gleaming testament to Southern California's seemingly boundless economic growth.
In rapid succession, new office towers sprouted to house banks, law firms, stock brokerages and others that poured into the city as the region boomed.
But today, downtown Los Angeles stands awash in vacant office space, a grim reminder to developers and lenders that no region, and no real estate market, is immune to economic dowturn.
With new buildings still opening and the recession in California showing no signs of ending soon, the vacancy rate here will only worsen in coming months.


Dividend Meetings


Havel Advances Slovak Autonomy Claims; Hungarian Bratislava
To the Editor:
"Autonomy Issue Turns Slovak Against Slovak" (news article, Oct. 22) describes Bratislava as "a fine old Slovak capital."


Duke Campaigns on Distorted Facts Despite Rebuttals and Clarifications
Whether he is rallying his supporters or defending himself on a talk show, State Representative David Duke often twists the statements of others and distorts facts to make his point.
The subjects of his false claims include his record of fighting in Southeast Asia, his criminal record, his positions on the environment, the structure of welfare payments, the potential effect of his election on tourism in Louisiana, and the record of his Democratic opponent, former Gov.
Edwin W. Edwards.


Drug Delays Onset of Heart Failure
A drug used to treat congestive heart failure can prevent the onset of symptoms in the first place, scientists announced today.
This is the first time a drug has been found to delay the onset of the condition, a major cause of death in the United States.
Experts said the findings could lead doctors to prescribe the drug, enalapril, to hundreds of thousands of Americans.
They said they expected the drug to improve and extend patients' lives.


Suit Over Sex in Beer Ads Comes as Genre Changes
A LAWSUIT filed last week, linking alleged sexual harassment of women workers at the Stroh Brewery Company to the brewery's advertising campaign featuring young women in bikinis, has focused attention again on what some critics call the last bastion of sexism in advertising.
For decades, critics have complained that beer advertising is the most flagrant among all product pitches in using sex as a selling tool.
The objections to portrayals of women as sex objects, dating to the Miss Rheingold beauty contests sponsored by Rheingold beer in the 1950's and 1960's, have accelerated since the women's liberation movement emerged.


Prices Up in Light Day Overseas
Prices of Treasury securities moved a bit higher in light trading yesterday.
The gains were recorded during trading in Asian and European markets.
Activity in the cash market for Government securities was closed in the United States in observance of Veterans Day.


Is Harwell Coming? Well, Stay Tuned
Reports of a return to New York for ERNIE HARWELL may be premature.
Harwell, who was unceremoniously dumped by WJR as the voice of the Detroit Tigers, said there had only been third-party contact about coming to WABC Radio, where he would do play-by-play of Yankee games with JOHN STERLING.


Price Is Activated
The Cleveland Cavaliers activated point guard MARK PRICE yesterday, bringing him back from last year's knee surgery a month ahead of schedule.
Price, who was injured last Nov. 30, has averaged 15.6 points and 6.9 assists in four-plus seasons. (AP)


Shorter Men More Prone To Have Heart Attacks
Heart attacks strike short men more often than tall men, a new study reported here today has found.
The apparent reason is that short men have smaller arteries that are more vulnerable to the damage from fatty deposits that lead to most heart attacks.
Men 5 feet 7 inches or shorter had a 60 percent greater risk of developing a first heart attack than men 6 feet 1 inch or taller, researchers from Boston said at a meeting of the American Heart Association.


Felix E. Larkin, 82, Ex-President Of W.R. Grace and a U.S. Counsel
Felix E. Larkin, the former president and chairman of W. R. Grace &amp; Company and a lawyer at the Defense Department who oversaw the development of a uniform Code of Military Justice, died Sunday night at New Rochelle Hospital.
He was 82 years old and lived in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Mr.
Larkin died of pulmonary failure, said a spokesman for W. R. Grace, the chemical, natural resources and retailing conglomerate based in New York City.


Believe It Or Not: Kocur's Shot Wins Game
Nobody ever accused Joe Kocur of being Houdini with a puck, until he mystically parted the netting last night to lead the Rangers past the Penguins, 3-1, at Madison Square Garden.
With time running down in a tie game, the burly Ranger forward fired an open shot from the slot that appeared to beat Pittsburgh goaltender Tom Barrasso and pass directly through a corner of the taut, new rope net while producing no visible hole.


Pittsburgh Builds Airport of Future Now
Through a haze of dust stirred up by earth movers, one of the most innovative major aiport terminals in the United States is nearing completion in a clearing twice the size of downtown Pittsburgh.
Scheduled to open in October 1992, the collection of new buildings, their centerpiece an unusually designed X-shape, is being counted on to redefine the 39-year-old Greater Pittsburgh International Airport.
Planners hope the terminal, with its vaulted ceilings and driverless underground trains, will complete an image transformation begun decades ago.
Once known as a gritty old steel town of blue-collar workers, Pittsburgh has become a commercial center of office towers and high-technology industries.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
It is hard not to expect too much from Robert Shaw simply because he does certain things so very well.
Mr.
Shaw, who is conducting the current subscription series of the New York Philharmonic, is, of course, a master at training and conducting choruses.
And to make matters more enticing here, he is joined by Joseph Flummerfelt's fine Westminster Symphonic Choir in Mozart's C-minor Mass (K. 427) and Barber's "Prayers of Kierkegaard."


Music Notes; Despite Illness, Conductor Perseveres
There has been much speculation lately about the health of Roger Norrington, the English conductor who has attracted considerable attention in recent years with his period-instrument recordings of 18th- and 19th-century works.
Mr.
Norrington is also the music director of the Orchestra of St.
Luke's.
In March, illness forced the 57-year-old conductor to cancel his Brahms Experience weekend in London, in which he was to explore the German Requiem using, as in all of his Experience programs, an array of concerts, lectures and exhibitions.
Mr.
Norrington's illness was diagnosed as melanoma, a form of skin cancer, and although he brought his London Classical Players to New York in July there were reports during the summer that he was going to disband the group.


Egyptian Leads Voting for U.N. Post
The Egyptian Deputy Prime Minister, Boutros Ghali, moved into the lead today in the race to become the next Secretary General of the United Nations, winning the support of 11 of the 15 Security Council members.
But with three members abstaining, it was not clear whether the single vote cast against Mr.
Ghali in this informal secret ballot came from one of the five permanent members with a veto over decisions or from Zimbabwe, the only council member running a candidate for the $185,000-a-year post.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about newspapers' efforts to keep regional telephone companies out of their business misidentified the American Newspaper Publishers Association's general counsel.
He is W. Terry Maguire.


Bond Markets Closed in U.S.
The Government bond market in New York was closed yesterday for the Veterans Day holiday, as were government offices and some banks.
Other financial markets in the United States were open.
An article on bond trading overseas appears on page D20.


Hope Seems to Rise on Giants' Horizon
Is this another false start for the Giants, another victory over a team without great expectations?
The Giants have given Ray Handley false hopes this season, the coach admitted today.


Havel, a Czech, Signals Concern for Slovaks
Underscoring that he is President of the Slovaks as much as of the Czechs, his own national group, Vaclav Havel arrived here today to spend an entire working week in Slovakia.
The temporary shift of his office from Prague is clearly intended to confront and appease the feelings of many Slovaks whose complaints of second-class citizenship in the federation have been growing more vocal.


Market Place; Mixed Signals On Westinghouse
WHEN the Westinghouse Electric Corporation unexpectedly announced last month that it was taking a $1.68 billion write-off because of problems with property loans at its credit subsidiary, it became part of the real estate mess of the early 1990's.
The price of the stock dropped steadily from the low 20's to the midteens.
It bottomed out -- at least temporarily -- at $15.75 in late October and then began a slow recovery, closing at $17 yesterday, down 25 cents.
But a lot of uncertainty remains.


Erbil Journal; B-o-o-m! It's Bush's Message and Sweet to Kurds
President Bush woke up this Kurdish capital at 4:30 A.M. one day recently with a sonic boom from a United States Air Force jet that shattered glass and startled the residents.
But it was difficult to find a Kurd who was angry about it.
"In spite of all the broken windows, we would like them to come even more," said a 60-year-old Kurdish elder, who smiled and offered his hand and a blessing to a visiting reporter instead of giving his name.


Man Is Killed in Shootout
One man was killed and two others were critically wounded during a dispute that began in a bar in Queens, spilled out onto the street and then involved two police officers on patrol, the police said.
Witnesses told the police that the three men began arguing in the bar around 10:25 P.M., drew guns and began firing as the dispute moved out the door and onto the street at 30-14 36th Avenue in Jamaica.
Two officers interceded and got caught up in the exchange of gunfire, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


Poland's New Climate Yields Bumper Crop of Corruption
In the days when Poland's Communists had a monopoly on power, Government corruption was prevalent but petty.
An apartment, a villa, a winter trip to Monte Carlo: Marxist-Leninist graft typically amounted to a few thousand dollars, maybe hundreds of thousands in some egregious instances.
The advent of a market economy has brought rough and tumble capitalism, and Poles are proving quick learners at the school for scandal.
Like so much business in this country, theft these days is done wholesale, often costing the hard-pressed Government millions, even hundreds of millions of dollars in one case.


Corrections
An article on Friday about proposed term limits for elected officials referred incorrectly to Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s political activities recently in Washington State.
Mr.
Brown, the former California Governor, campaigned in favor of Washington's unsuccessful initiative to limit terms.


Subway Blind Spot Blamed in Baby's Fall
Transit investigators have found that the conductor of an L train whose doors closed on a stroller, leading to a fall that badly injured a baby boy, could not see the door from his post in the middle of the train, a Transit Authority spokesman said yesterday.
The accident occurred Saturday night at the Broadway Junction station in the East New York section of Brooklyn.
An agency spokesman, Bob Slovak, said that the conductor could not see all the cars at the curved station.
The authority will survey all curved stations this week, he said.


In Fish, Social Status Goes Right to the Brain
AMONG males of many species, from elephant seals to human beings, the struggle to prevail over competing males often seems to dwarf all other tasks -- and perhaps with good reason.
A scientist has discovered that how a male fish interacts with other males, and whether it is socially dominant or a tremulous wimp, has such a profound effect on the creature that it changes the brain cells in charge of the fish's capacity to breed.


Disney and Mattel Expand Toy Alliance
The Walt Disney Company and Mattel Inc. said today that they had expanded their relationship to give Mattel a greater role in selling toys based on Disney's theme-park attractions and animated characters.
The companies said they had agreed to a 10-year extension of their existing deal, signed in 1987, under which Mattel sells a line of Disney pre-school and infant toys.
Mattel will now also be able to develop and sell new toys based on Disney characters not covered by the original agreement.
The additional characters include Pinnochio, Bambi and Dumbo.


Northwest's Midway Pact In Jeopardy
Midway Airlines, one of the few remaining upstart carriers in the industry, may soon be forced to shut down because a deal with Northwest Airlines has run into problems.
Northwest, a unit of NWA Inc., had proposed to pay $153 million for Midway assets in return for assuming debt and providing money to allow Midway to keep operating.


Taking Over C.I.A., Gates Is Challenged by Its Anxious Mood
As Robert M. Gates is sworn in as the 15th Director of Central Intelligence on Tuesday, a crucial question is what effect his arrival will have on morale.
Late one night during Mr.
Gates's confirmation hearings, Senator Frank H. Murkowski, the Alaska Republican who is vice chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, described the mood in the Central Intelligence Agency as one of "low morale and high indigestion." Already, an in-house publication at the State Department has complained that the C.I.A. is trying to tailor an interagency report to suit Mr.
Gates's presumed views.


Woosnam Seeking Better Grip on No. 1
In the year of John Daly, the United States' reclamation of the Ryder Cup, a comeback by Seve Ballesteros and a dropoff by Nick Faldo, the best golfer in the world has been Ian Woosnam.
Woosnam, the No. 1 player in the Sony Ranking for the last seven months, is the only man this year to have won a major championship, the Masters, along with regular events on both the PGA Tour and the European tour.
And beginning today, the 5-foot-4 1/2-inch, 33-year-old Welshman will be trying to cap off the year with a victory at the $1 million PGA Grand Slam of Golf in Kauai, Hawaii.


Doctors View Health Plans As Eroding Their Autonomy
In Dr.
Stephen P. Kelly's red-brick office building here, medicine's past shares space with medicine's future.
This is a doctor who still makes house calls.
Yet as he leaves to visit ailing patients, he passes a computer that contains the billing requirements of 16 health-care networks, each of which has different rules about how much he can charge and what procedures he can perform.
Dr.
Kelly cannot continue in this medical time warp much longer.
He feels an obligation to join the networks, he says, because his patients' employers have joined them, and this is the only way he can keep his patients.
But the networks pay less than his customary fees, which means that he has to see more patients, going farther afield in Westchester County, to maintain his income.
That leaves him less time for the patients he was trying to serve in the first place.


LEADERS IN ALBANY DRAFTING NEW PLAN ON BUDGET DEFICITS
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and New York State's legislative leaders are considering an unusual multiyear fiscal plan that could remove the state's budget woes from the political spotlight until after the 1992 election.
In talks that began over the weekend in Albany, budget negotiators have been discussing a plan that would simultaneously attack this year's budget gap of $689 million and the gap of more than $2 billion projected in the next fiscal year's budget.
They would then draft a grand budget solution that would stretch into 1993, thus spreading the pain, proponents argue, over a longer period.


South African Gold Mine Closed After 69 Die in Ethnic Violence
In the wake of the worst mining violence in South Africa's recent memory, 2,500 dispirited black miners were sent home today and gold production curtailed at a major mine here after 69 men were killed and up to 180 more injured in a week of factional clashes.
The fighting, in which residents of the mining camp dormitories attacked each other with knives, staves, hammers, sharpened iron bars, chunks of concrete and clubs fashioned from tree branches, added a new dimension to the political violence afflicting South Africa.
It demonstrated the volatility besetting the crowded hostels, in which thousands of men live far from their families, and illustrated how easily one ethnic group could be set against another in the aftermath of apartheid.
Miners Bused Home
Today at the President Steyn Mine on the outskirts of Welkom, the mine workers, some wrapped in blankets against the cool drizzle, lined up to be paid and then laid off.
Policemen carrying riot helmets and gas masks monitored the sullen crowd.
Four tan armored cars from the mine's security force parked in the hostel yard, which was littered with bundles and cheap suitcases to be carried aboard the waiting buses back to the distant rural areas from which the miners were recruited, most of them from the Xhosa homeland of Transkei or from the neighboring country of Lesotho.


Trying Early-Bird Tax Programs
THIS year, honest, we're going to get organized.
We're going to get a head start on preparing our 1991 taxes while we can still do something about them, instead of waiting until after Jan. 1, when it's too late.
The first batch of "head start" tax preparation packages have begun to arrive in stores.
These early-bird programs cannot be used to file actual returns, since Congress and the Internal Revenue Service are still, shall we say, fine-tuning the laws and forms.
However, the head-start programs are very useful for organizing and forecasting.
They can lessen the chance of nasty surprises just before April 15, 1992.


Rehabilitating the Concept of Forever
"When I was starting out," Dwight Gooden was saying, "they told me: 'You've got perfect mechanics; you've got the perfect body. You'll pitch forever.' Here I am."
For Gooden, the Mets' ace, "here" is a physical-therapy center, where he is spending his off season, pulling and pushing on every machine ever devised, strengthening his body to recover from shoulder surgery last Sept. 7.


Topics of The Times; Who Are Mel Miller's Friends?
Barry Feinstein, the head of teamsters' local 237, admits that his union is helping Mel Miller.
But what other individuals and special interests have contributed to the special fund set up by Mr.
Miller, New York State's Assembly Speaker, to raise money for his legal defense?
And how much?
Mr.
Miller, whose trial opens today on Federal mail fraud charges arising from his work as a private attorney, still refuses to say.
Why the secrecy?
Revealing the donors might have discouraged giving.
But that's no excuse.
Mr.
Miller wields powerful influence over state business.
He knows the names of his benefactors, and so should the public.


RESULTS PLUS
PRO HOCKEY Capitals Top Canadiens Dmitri Khristich started a three-goal outburst early in the second period as the Washington Capitals beat the Canadiens, 4-2, last night in Montreal in a showdown between two of the National Hockey League's hottest clubs.
Khristich, Alan May and Al Iafrate scored in a span of 2 minutes 43 seconds to turn a 1-0 deficit into a 3-1 lead.
Kevin Hatcher added an insurance goal in the third period as as Washington (13-4-0) won for the fifth time in six games. (AP) Jets 6, Kings 2: Winnipeg chased Daniel Berthiaume of Los Angeles with three goals in the first 4 minutes 3 seconds while breaking a six-game streak without a victory, and rookie Stu Barnes had a hat trick in a victory yesterday over the Kings in Winnipeg, Manitoba.
Dean Kennedy scored just 1:36 into the game and Russ Romaniuk 29 seconds later.
Then Ed Olczyk finished a nifty passing play by tapping in a rebound from in front of the net for his 10th goal. (AP) PRO BASKETBALL 76ers Hold On at Home Hersey Hawkins scored 21 points and Charles Barkley had 17 points and 15 rebounds as the 76ers won their fourth consecutive game, 102-99, over the Milwaukee Bucks last night.
The Bucks trailed by as many as 23 points in the second period, but closed to 81-80 on a 3-point play by Jeff Grayer with 7:05 remaining.
The 76ers rebuilt their advantage to 89-83, but the Bucks rallied once again, and a 3-pointer by Jay Humphries made it 94-93 with 1:18 left.
A jumper by Johnny Dawkins and a hook shot by Manute Bol gave Philadelphia a 5-point lead with 17 seconds to play. (AP) HORSE RACING Rally by G'Day Mate G'Day Mate came from far back in an eight-horse field, took the lead in deep stretch and went on to a 1 1/4-length victory in the $116,800 Gen.
Douglas MacArthur Handicap at Aqueduct yesterday.
The victory was the fourth in 12 starts for G'Day Mate, ridden by Herb McCauley, who covered a mile and an eighth over a muddy track in 1:501/5 .
Study Hard finished second and his entrymate, Zee Best, was third. (AP) Ravensmoor a Winner: Day 2 in the "new era" at Hialeah Park was a lot less clamorous than Day 1, when 30,472 fans crowded the track and 5,000 more were let in free for a record opening-day attendance.
On Day 2 at Hialeah, the track let everybody in free and 7,344 persons accepted.
The feature of the 11 races, the $30,000 Hibiscus Stakes, was won by the 3-to-1 favorite, Ravensmoor.
"I'm still basking in the excitement of yesterday," said John J. Brunetti, the track's owner.
"But the numbers today are still better than they used to be, and we even have more horses being entered now. From the Latin community in Hialeah, I get the idea that weekends at the track will be our strength, more like carnivals, as opening day was."


After Magic, the Extra Mile
A chastened President Bush now concedes that he hasn't done enough in the fight against AIDS, and says he's ready "to go the extra mile." Those are welcome words from a man whose listless leadership on AIDS was thrown into sharp relief by Magic Johnson's bold disclosure that he was infected with the virus.
But if Mr.
Bush is serious, he'll need to transform the way his Administration views the epidemic.
It's not enough to ask Magic Johnson to become a member of The National Commission on AIDS, which the President did yesterday.
True, that's an important gesture.
Mr.
Johnson holds special significance to Americans, particularly young blacks, the group among whom the epidemic is spreading the fastest.


Bridge
A victory is a victory, but some are sweeter than others.
This is particularly true for those who qualify for the national final of the Grand National Pairs and have their fares paid by the American Contract Bridge League.
A year ago the qualifiers from New York and Long Island were subsidized for a trip all the way to Atlantic City.
But the qualifiers this year are luckier: they will travel free to the Spring Nationals in Pasadena, Calif., in March.
The Flight B winners, in play Sunday at the Landmark Education Center, Fifth Avenue and 38th Street, were Elliot Sternlicht of Forest Hills, Queens, and Joel Salinger of Manhattan.
Runners-up, and also going to Pasadena, were Bert Kulic of Nesconset, L.I., and Arthur Haley of Centereach, L.I.


Bailout Agency's Goal
The Resolution Trust Corporation said last week that it was exceeding its targets for disposing of the assets of failed savings and loan institutions it had acquired.
Resolution Trust said it had disposed of assets with a book value of more than $91 billion between January and September.
That exceeded the nine-month goal of $75 billion set by the agency earlier this year.
Cash recoveries from the sales, the agency said, amounted to $86.3 billion, or 94 percent of the assets' book value.


Squaring Traffic Circles With Lights and Bridges
Parisians call them ronds-points and dignify them with monuments at their centers.
Londoners speak of them in Latin, as in Piccadilly Circus.
They are rotaries in Boston, where some people seek good luck by driving around them.
But in New Jersey, traffic circles are "just a complete nightmare," as John Barczak put it after pulling a 40-foot trailer loaded with chlorine through the Somerville Circle here the other day.
Traffic circles, which appeared in this state 60 or 70 years ago as elegant solutions to the problem of moving traffic through three or more intersecting roadways, have by now become snarling, bruising bottlenecks in the crowded landscape of north and central New Jersey.
No law rules the right of way in these bumper-car arenas where the cars are real, where safety may lie with the fast and aggressive, where the careful and slow get bumped or at least pinned in the inside ring, circling once, twice, maybe three times before finding an opening for escape.


One Woman's Quiet Battle Against Child Abuse
TUCKED in among all the junk mail dumped at her house here the other day, Norma Lemily got a letter with neat but unfamiliar feminine handwriting.
The postmark was from Maine, of all places.
"Dear Norma," it began, "you may not remember me."
It went on to recount some problems the woman had experienced with her young children.
Now, they are in high school, the woman reported, and she regularly receives compliments on their behavior.
"I can't hear those compliments," the woman wrote, "without thinking of you."


Olivetti Head Takes Control
Ing.
C.
Olivetti &amp; Company S.p.A., the Italian office equipment maker, said today that Carlo de Benedetti would "reassume the direct and complete management" of the company.
Mr. de Benedetti, the chairman and controlling shareholder, made the decision because of the "further worsening of the worldwide crisis in the information-technology industry," the company said.


BRITON UNSWAYED ON UNITED EUROPE
Chancellor Helmut Kohl dined on Sunday night with Prime Minister John Major of Britain as the two sought to resolve their differences over European unity, but they agreed only to meet again before the end of this month.
Hours before Mr.
Major arrived here, officials of his Government said in London that the latest proposed unity treaty was unacceptable to them because it stated the goal of creating a "federal" Europe.


A New Unit For Merrill
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company yesterday announced that it was forming a new subsidiary to engage in the complex swaps business with large clients, including foreign countries and Government agencies.
Swaps transactions are used to adjust the currency rate, interest rate or other characteristics of a security.
They involve a promise to make certain payments for up to seven years, so only those with the best credit ratings can participate.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the business community in the Mott Haven section of the Bronx misstated the timing of New York City's approval of a loan to American International Medical Equipment Sales.
The city's Financial Services Corporation approved the loan in December 1989, before a similar approval was given by a state agency, the Urban Development Corporation.


Dollar Off in Light Trading As U.S. Banks Take Holiday
The dollar settled lower in light trading on world currency markets yesterday.
Gold prices rose across the board.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold bullion for current delivery settled at $355.30 an ounce, up $1.10 from Friday.
The Republic National Bank said gold rose $1.30 an ounce, to a late bid price of $355.10.


BOSTON-AREA FIRES DAMAGE BUILDINGS
Three separate fires Sunday night and early today damaged several buildings in the Boston area, including the Boston police headquarters and the city's 92-year-old Symphony Hall.
The police charged a 38-year-old mental patient found inside the concert hall with arson, but the causes of the other fires are still under investigation.


401(k) Specialist Tapped For New Equitable Unit
Giant brokerage firms, huge mutual fund houses and large insurance companies are all competing to manage and administer employee 401(k) accounts for corporate America -- a pool of capital estimated at $300 billion.
And all three industries, as of yesterday, have called on Mary Rudie Barneby to help them.
Ms.
Barneby, who helped Merrill Lynch &amp; Company inaugurate its 401(k) services in 1986 and left in 1988 to oversee a similar effort at the Dreyfus Corporation, began serving yesterday as president of Equitable Capital Group Retirement Services, a new unit of the capital management arm of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States.


Sports of The Times; The Amazing Colt With The Gearshift
AN item in the newspaper last week reported that Arazi, the 2-year-old race horse, had undergone surgery to remove bone chips from an arthritic knee.
Nothing terribly serious was the implication.
The saying among humans, anyway, is that any operation, regardless how minor, is serious.
And one would have to think that any surgery regarding this particular horse, regardless how minor, is serious.


Investigator Says Kenyan Official Was Slain to Cover Up Corruption
The Foreign Minister of Kenya, whose charred body was found in the bush 20 months ago, was murdered because he knew too much about high-level corruption in the Kenyan Government, the British detective in charge of the investigation into his death said today.
The detective, John Troon, who was with Scotland Yard at the time of his investigation, told an official Government inquiry, "I ascertained there was a corruption motive, and I explicitly say so."


Legislators Block Yeltsin Rule of Breakaway Area
The Russian Parliament refused today to endorse President Boris N. Yeltsin's order imposing emergency rule in a Muslim enclave within the Russian federated republic, and instead authorized him to pursue negotiations with nationalists who have taken control of the region.
In the last days, the question of independence for the 1.3 million people of the Chechen-Ingush autonomous region, less than 1 percent of the Russian republic's 150 million, has become a central political issue in Moscow, as Mr.
Yeltsin faces his first major crisis on an ethnic issue.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 4 about the sale of television rights to the book "Scarlett," as well as a brief report in the Book Notes column on Wednesday and a correction in this space on Friday, included erroneous identifications of the purchasers, supplied by the owner.
RHI Entertainment Inc. is the sole owner.
The Kirch Group of Germany and Silvio Berlusconi of Italy have licensed film and television rights abroad; CBS has licensed the American television rights.


Iraqi Weapons Had Chemical Warheads
Austrian experts who recently returned from Iraq have said they found large numbers of Iraqi weapons outfitted with chemical warheads that could have been used in the Persian Gulf war.
They also said some of the weapons included Soviet-built Scud missiles. .
But they said that primitive ballistic technology and warheads that were unevenly filled with deadly liquid chemicals made it unlikely they could have been fired accurately, if at all.


Classical Music in Review
Goliard Concerts  Merkin Concert Hall
Goliard Concerts is an amalgam of attractive young talent headed by Patricia Handy and devoted, judging by Sunday evening's program, to the idea that new music is not necessarily a bitter pill for audiences.
Communicativeness and ingratiation, however, are not the same.
Sunday offered both.


New Technique Stores Images More Efficiently
ENGINEERS devising new methods of storing information electronically have long used as their standard test the photograph of a certain young woman.
She is wearing a floppy straw hat with a feather on it.
She is gazing over her right shoulder with a sultry expression.
And her dark hair is cascading down on either side of her face.
The trick is to put the minimum amount of information needed to reconstruct that photograph into a computer and then pull it back out.
And the problem has been that when the picture was reconstructed, the feathers on the hat were blurry, or a strand of hair was indistinct or a highlight in the right eye was lost.
Or, in many cases, it took too much data to reconstruct a clear image.


Oklahoma Hurting
Oklahoma quarterback CALE GUNDY underwent emergency hernia surgery Sunday and is not likely to play Saturday against Oklahoma State.


Review/Theater; Defeating Racism, Violence And Want
Dr.
Endesha Ida Mae Holland is 47 years old and has already lived enough fascinating lives to fuel a half-dozen autobiographical plays.
But was it a good idea to write all of them at once?
"From the Mississippi Delta," Dr.
Holland's staged memoir at the downtown Circle in the Square, lurches between vivid anecdote and confusing shorthand as its author tries to pack in the many chapters of her own remarkable up-from-poverty story and the several decades of violent American racial history that serve as its tumultuous backdrop.
"From the Mississippi Delta" arrives as a finished Off Broadway production after an odyssey through the nation's resident theaters that began four years ago at New York's own New Federal Theater and that has included stops at the Goodman Theater in Chicago, Arena Stage in Washington and the Hartford Stage.
One wonders if the play has been fattened up rather than refined by this artistic journey.


New York Parents Fear Letting Go
Every weekday morning, Lillian Lopez, who lives in a Brooklyn housing project, escorts her 14-year-old daughter, Sherie, on one of the most dangerous parts of the girl's route to school where muggings and worse are common: the elevator ride down from their 10th-floor apartment.
Once out of the building, all Mrs.
Lopez, a single mother of three, can do is fret as Sherie takes three different subways to her high school on the East Side of Manhattan.
When Sherie and her siblings return to Red Hook in the evening, Mrs.
Lopez heaves a sigh of relief and keeps the children inside.


Yugoslav Forces Advance on Two Croatian Cities


Japan Plans New Drive To Buy More U.S. Goods
In the surest sign that American trade officials are about to arrive in Tokyo, the Japanese Government said tonight that it would soon announce another program to encourage companies here to buy more components and materials from the United States and to enter more strategic alliances with American companies.
Details of the program, called the "Business Global Partnership," were sketchy, although it seemed less specific than last year's effort, which included a tax credit to companies that increased their overseas purchases by 10 percent or more.


Argentina Films a French Classic
It is enough of a risk anywhere to try to create a popular movie out of a monumental work of literature.
But to attempt it in this country with its history of hyperinflation, social turmoil, horrible telephone system and military uprisings would seem to guarantee disaster.
Yet three small production companies, from the United States, France and Argentina, have persuaded William Hurt, Raul Julia and Robert Duvall to team up with this country's most celebrated director, Luis Puenzo ("The Official Story"), to create a screen version of "The Plague," by Albert Camus.
Since early August, this polyglot production has been working 6 days a week, 14 hours a day in the Bohemian section of La Boca, the quaint 19th-century Plaza Dorrego and the elegant residential neighborhood Palermo Chico, to transform Mr.
Puenzo's script into a movie.
Hope for Future Films
With a budget of $14 million, the project is small by world standards but large for Argentina, and possibly significant to the country's future as a center for filming.


CHRONICLE
In JACKIE MASON'S book, widows and orphans of New York City police officers who died in the line of duty are the forgotten needy.
Tonight he has rented the Paramount Theater at Madison Square Garden for a benefit show with the Lionel Hampton orchestra, the Drifters and, of course, Jackie Mason quips.
"I consider this one of the most neglected forms of charity," he said yesterday.
"We give so much for AIDS, for cancer, for the heart fund, but the plight of widows and orphans of cops is never dramatized. I can think of no greater hero than the New York cop. He is on the battlefield as much as the person in a war zone and as likely to lose his life."


Top Officials Leave Unit At Citicorp
The president and several senior executives of Citicorp's credit card processing division have left the company amid allegations that they fraudulently overstated revenue, a bank spokesman confirmed yesterday.
The Wall Street Journal reported yesterday that Bruce M. Weber, president of Citicorp Establishment Services, and at least 11 other senior and middle-level executives were dismissed for inflating the unit's revenue by about $23 million.


Bishop H. Donegan, Episcopal Leader, Dies at 91
Bishop Horace W. B. Donegan, the Episcopal Bishop of New York from 1950 until 1972 and an early church advocate for the rights of blacks, women and the poor, died yesterday at his home in Sanibel, Fla.
He was 91 years old.
His longtime chaplain, the Rev.
Geoffrey R. M. Skrinar, said the Bishop died of cancer of the throat.


Goldman Sells Mirror Shares
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company said today that it had sold two million shares of Mirror Group Newspapers P.L.C. on Wednesday, but emphasized that the shares were not among those held as collateral for loans to the Maxwell family.
In a telephone interview from New York, a Goldman, Sachs spokesman said the sale -- an off-exchange block trade -- was part of the regular market-making activities of a New York unit.
"It was normal trading," he said.


Unilever Appoints Pohl
Unilever P.L.C., the British-Dutch food and household products group, said today that Karl Otto Pohl, the former president of Germany's central bank, had been appointed an advisory director.
His appointment takes effect on Jan. 1.
Mr.
Pohl stepped down as Bundesbank president last summer.
He was succeeded by Helmut Schlesinger.


Joseph Ratner Is Dead; Ex-Attorney Was 83
Joseph Ratner, a Manhattan lawyer since 1934, died on Saturday at his son's home in El Paso.
He was 83 years old and lived in Harrison, N.Y.
He died from complications of a stroke, his family said.


Virus Halted in Mouse Brain
IN experiments on mice, scientists say they have shown for the first time that antibodies can clear certain viral infections from the brain.
Researchers at Johns Hopkins University Medical School said the work showed that the immune system stopped the reproduction and spread of viruses in the nerve cells of the brain in a different way than in the rest of the body.
The results raise the possibility that some viral brain infections may eventually be cured by targeted antibody therapy, according to a report in the current issue of the journal Science.


Voters' Courage on Guns
Last week, voters in Washington, D.C., reversed their City Council's craven repeal of a law that would make gun makers and dealers liable for injuries caused by assault weapons.
That sends a message to all jurisdictions where voters are fed up with gun violence and official reluctance to confront it.
Late last year the Council enacted a law imposing "strict liability" on purveyors of 14 types of semiautomatic rifles and pistols designed for military use but prized by criminals.
Strict liability allows victims to recover damages from the manufacturers and dealers even though they had nothing to do with gun crimes.
The law already recognizes such liability for other businesses engaged in "abnormally dangerous" commercial activity, like shipping explosives or disposing of toxic wastes.


Fetal Cell Transplants Show Early Promise In Parkinson Patients
After 10 years of experiments with animals, and just three years with humans, scientists say they are tremendously encouraged by fetal cell transplants as a treatment for Parkinson's disease, a devastating condition that has no cure.
Of the estimated 100 patients worldwide who have been implanted with fetal brain cells over the last three years, they said, nearly all have shown at least minor improvement in their symptoms and many have gotten dramatically better.
Although no one has been cured of Parkinson's disease and scientists do not yet understand how fetal cells exert a therapeutic effect, those conducting the transplant experiments should forge ahead, according to researchers who are presenting their latest findings here this week at the annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience.


Bonilla Heads Class Of '91 Free Agents
When the results of last year's chase were complete, seven free agents had attained contracts worth $3 million or more a year.
This year's chase begins today, and Bobby Bonilla will try to reach $5 million, perhaps $6 million, a year.
Jack Morris, Frank Viola and Danny Tartabull are other free agents seeking the stratosphere of the salary scale.
This is the first day free agents can negotiate and sign with any of the 26 teams, and after expiration of last night's midnight deadline, a record 98 players made up the free-agent class of '91.


Topics of The Times; The Singer and His Song
A long time ago a woman who was very young and very eager to improve her French listened hour after hour to a recording of a song titled "Les Feuilles d'Automne." The singer was a man named Yves Montand, and if her French disappeared a few years after college graduation, her love affair with him lasted until his death last week.
True, she saw Montand in the flesh only twice: in the New York theater in which he was giving a one-man show, and in the Paris restaurant in which he was dining with Simone Signoret, his wife.
Most famous people look smaller in person.
He -- perhaps because he resembled Joe DiMaggio, which doubled his impact -- looked bigger.


BAKER ASKS JAPAN TO BROADEN ROLE
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d called on Japan today to assume a more active role in protecting democracy and advocating free trade, instead of relying on "checkbook diplomacy" to protect its narrow interests or waiting for foreign pressure to force it into action.
"We recognize that Japan's leaders, and its people, are now grappling with a difficult adjustment in Japan's world role," Mr.
Baker said in an address to the Japan Institute for International Affairs.


Q&amp;A
Bee Stings
Q.
How do you treat a bee sting?


Amid Insult and Injury, Urban Forests Hang On
IN the middle of the Bronx, buffeted and poisoned by the worst environmental insults that urban America can dish out, stands one of the last remnants of the lush forest that once covered New York City: 40 acres of hardwoods and hemlocks contained within the public grounds of the New York Botanical Garden.
If any patch of old-growth woodlands was going to sicken and succumb to urban stress, this would be it.
But ecologists, who have belatedly begun to study urban and suburban ecosystems, have found, to their surprise, that naturally occurring city forests -- there are 6,000 acres of them in New York City alone -- are adapting in unsuspected ways and appear healthier than might be expected.
In fact, they say, the woodlands of the inner cities seem to be performing ecological functions as efficiently as do forests in the more salubrious suburbs, and may even be retaining more of their original character.


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
A Federal agency will provide partial insurance against expropriation, political violence and currency convertibility problems for an American investment fund that plans to buy $250 million worth of minority stakes in the affiliates of Soviet military companies.
The agreement by the Overseas Private Investment Corporation is its first involving investments in the Soviet Union.  [ Page D1. ]
The advent of a market economy in Poland has brought rough and tumble capitalism, and Poles are proving quick learners at the school for scandal.  [ A1. ]


Power in Albany Is at Stake In Assembly Speaker's Trial
ALBANY, Nov. 11 --
Assembly Speaker Mel Miller steps into a Federal courtroom in Brooklyn on Tuesday to face fraud charges, with the outcome set to determine not only his guilt or innocence but also his survival as the second most powerful Democrat in New York State government.
The case has consumed the attention of Assembly lawmakers here, several of whom are privately jockeying to succeed Mr.
Miller should the trial end in a conviction, even as they publicly support him with words and donations to pay his legal bills.


Power of the Mortgage Twins
In a spacious office just north of Georgetown, James A. Johnson has the latest technology: a video monitor that flashes both the news and prices from Wall Street and displays a small window with a television screen showing live debates from Congress.
It is a neat symbol for Mr.
Johnson, whose job as chairman and chief executive of the Federal National Mortgage Association bridges political and financial circles.
Fannie Mae, as it is informally known, and its smaller brother, Freddie Mac, a second Government-created mortgage financing company, have scored their greatest successes this year in both worlds.


TriBeCa at Odds Over a New Drug Center
Nimby, or the not-in-my-backyard syndrome, has struck TriBeCa.
And largely because of the neighborhood -- known for its artists' lofts, trendy restaurants and liberal residents -- what would ordinarily be a debate of the most ordinarily local sort has evolved into some high-profile mudslinging.
On one side is a social-services agency that wants to set up a center for recovering drug addicts.
It is represented by Sid Davidoff, a friend of Mayor David N. Dinkins and one of the city's most influential lobbyists.


Charting a Poor Community's Future
There are business people and homeowners, a nurse and a police officer, people who live on Social Security and the president of Hartford's Board of Education.
There is the owner of a body repair shop, who is also coach and mentor to the 360 teen-agers of the Martin Luther King Soccer League.
Together they are charting an ambitious plan to restore one of Hartford's poorest neighborhoods, Upper Albany, and improve life for the 10,000 people who live there.


No Luck of the Draw for Scarlet Knights
The selection committee for the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I soccer tournament was unkind to Rutgers when it announced the 28-team field yesterday.
Rutgers (18-2-1), which was ranked first in the country two weeks ago and fourth this week, not only wasn't awarded one of the four byes in the first round, it was also placed in a bracket that could be especially tough.
The chances that the Scarlet Knights will be able to reach the semifinals for a third consecutive year seem greatly diminished.
They will most likely have to meet Indiana University in Bloomington, Ind., if they win their opening two games in the tournament.


O.E.C.D. Lowers Outlook On Growth in U.S. for 1992
Because of longer-than-anticipated economic weakness in the United States, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development has significantly reduced its forecast for American growth for next year but does not foresee the economy slipping into a recession.
The revised forecast places growth in the United States in 1992 at about 2.5 percent, down from the 3.1 percent predicted six weeks ago.


Graf Splits With Her Longtime Coach
Bringing about an abrupt end to one of the most stable coach-player partnerships in the often fickle tennis world, Steffi Graf is expected to announce today in Germany that she has dissolved her relationship with Pavel Slozil, her coach for the last five years, effective immediately.
No replacement for Slozil has been named.


Resident Physicians Must Learn to Think
To the Editor:
I disagree with "Need for Supervision" (letter, Oct. 21) by Bertrand M. Bell, M.D.
Resident physicians are doctors, not graduate medical students who become doctors after at least three years of graduate medical education.
All thinking physicians remain graduate medical students until they cease the practice of medicine.


Palestinian Elder Statesman at the Talks; Jordanian Resettlement
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal is right to state (column, Oct. 29), "the Palestinians have one homeland already," and "Jordan is Palestine."


Remembering His Brethren on Veterans Day


A Neighborhood's Outlook Brightens With a Field's New Lights


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.50
4.50
n.a.
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.63
4.62
n.a.
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.69
4.69
n.a.
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.03
7.06
n.a.
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.86
7.87
n.a.
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
8.90
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.81
6.81
7.56
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Chess


Women and Survival
A new analysis of a human catastrophe has proved once again that in times of disaster, women are more likely to survive than men.
An anthropologist (male) from the University of Washington in Seattle reached this conclusion after a detailed study of the diaries and fate of the Donner party, a group of 87 pioneers who tried to get by wagon train from Illinois to the Sacramento Valley in California in the summer of 1846.
The group was trapped for the winter by heavy snows in the Sierra Nevada.
As the members of the party perished one by one -- only 47 of the original group survived -- they became part of a "natural experiment," as the anthropologist, Prof.
Donald Grayson, put it.
The party's devastation demonstrated survival of the fittest, "natural selection in action," he reported in The Journal of Anthropological Research.


BRIEFS
DEBT *Argentina plans to sell $150 million in bonds later this week, according to a spokesman for Credit Suisse First Boston.
The price is expected to be about 350 to 375 basis points above two-year Treasury notes that yielded 5.64 percent yesterday.
A basis point is one-hundredth of 1 percent.
COMMON STOCK *
Pharmaceutical Marketing Services Inc., of Scottsdale, Ariz. has filed for an initial public offering of 3.5 million common shares, through Lehman Brothers.
The company is a subsidiary of Walsh International.
RATINGS *
Century Communications Corp.'s $500 million shelf registration of debt securities has been given a preliminary rating of B for senior debt and B- for subordinated debt, by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
Century is based in New Canaan, Conn. *Walt Disney Co.'s $420 million zero-coupon senior notes, due 2006, have been rated A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's, which also affirmed an A rating on about $1 billion of subordinated debt.
Disney is based in Burbank, Calif.


A Day Later, Jets' Loss Remains a Nightmare
Jets right tackle Irv Eatman, a Plan B acquisition from Kansas City, has a knack for keeping his finger on the pulse of the Jets.
In the aftermath of Sunday's 28-27 loss to the Indianapolis Colts, possibly the worst team in the National Football League, Eatman surveyed the Jets' gloomy locker room here and declared all is calm.
"Nobody's panicked," Eatman said today.
"We have no need to panic. We're still in good condition."


Observer; Hiatus in the Fun
Reality dropped in on America twice last week.
One visit any time is remarkable; two in a week, extraordinary.
Press and television were flabbergasted.
They are so benumbed by make-believe that so much reality was bound to make them giddy.
The first visit occurred at midweek.
Scattered election results, subjected to intense scrutiny, revealed that, yes -- yes! -- there really was a middle class.
What a commotion in the press.
What an upsetment in television.
"Middle Class Lives!"


Playing in a Treehouse, For Learning's Sake
THERE is a treehouse that never was, a secret hideaway of games and explorations and learning.
The Treehouse, from Broderbund Software of San Rafael, Calif., was inspired by the earlier Playroom, a successful program recommended for children 3 to 6 years old.
The Treehouse is for 6-to-10-year-olds.
Adults who have kept a childlike quality may be enchanted with it, too.


INSIDE
U.S. Agency Will Insure Investment in Soviet Union
A Federal agency will provide partial insurance against expropriation and violence for a $250 million investment in Soviet defense affiliates.
Page D1.
Of $45 billion pledged to Eastern Europe by wealthy nations since 1989, 20 percent has been paid out.
Page D9.
Parliament Overrides Yeltsin
The Russian Parliament overturned Boris N. Yeltsin's declaration of emergency in Chechen-Ingushetia and authorized talks.
Page A10.
Questions at the C.I.A.
The Central Intelligence Agency gets a new leader today, and his effect on morale at the agency remains very much in dispute.
Page A20.
Ex-Episcopal Bishop Dies
The Right Rev.
Horace W. B. Donegan, the Episcopal Bishop of New York from 1950 until 1972, is dead.
He was 91 years old.
Page B8.
Gotti Aide Said to Defect
John Gotti's right-hand man will testify against him at a Federal racketeering trial, law-enforcement officials said.
Page B3.


U.S. Says Top Gotti Aide Will Testify Against Boss
In what law-enforcement officials described as the American Mafia's highest-ranking desertion, John Gotti's right-hand man in the Gambino organized-crime family has defected and is expected to be a Government witness against Mr.
Gotti on charges that he is nation's top Mafia leader, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The Gotti confidant, Salvatore Gravano, who was indicted last year as a co-defendant with Mr.
Gotti on murder and racketeering charges, has entered the Federal Witness Protection Program and was secretly transferred last week from a Federal jail in Manhattan where he had been held without bail with Mr.
Gotti, the officials said.


On My Mind; Mideast Decision Time
The future of the Middle East is being determined right now and the days of decision are dwindling down.
Like most bone-deep problems in the Middle East, this crisis point has nothing to do with Arab-Israel feuds or Palestine.
Like so many realities that have made peace in the Mideast an interlude between wars, this one grows from the conflicts within Muslim society, the enmities between Muslim nations and the never-ending struggle of Mideast dictators to preserve their rule and their heads.


Environmental Claims For Damage by Iraq Go Begging for Data
DESPITE a United Nations resolution calling upon Iraq to pay for the environmental damage it caused in the Persian Gulf war, scientists in the region are still going begging for the data that would support eventual claims.
Ten months after a series of oil spills polluted the waters and shores of the gulf while smoke from hundreds of oil-well fires darkened the skies, the scientific research that could support claims for compensation has barely begun, Government and private witnesses told a House committee recently.


To Revive Crop, Baymen Sow Maine Seed Scallops
Baymen here tell a tale of 60 million scallops growing plump for harvest on the bay bottoms of Long Island's East End, and of how most were lost to ruinous worms and murderous algae before this year's scallop season opened.
Whether scallops can be revived in waters that once teemed with them now hangs on hopes for thumbnail-sized seed scallops imported from Maine last week, and sown by small groups of baymen in selected underwater plots here in Flanders Bay and in five other locations.


BRIEFS
*
Comprehensive Care Corp., St.
Louis, a provider of behavioral medicine programs, sold its 104-bed hospital in Orange, Calif., for $4.8 million to an unidentified buyer. *
Computer Associates International Inc., Garden City, L.I., a software developer, bought most of the assets of Access Technology Inc., a computer software operation, from H &amp; R Block Inc., Kansas City, Mo.
Terms were not disclosed.


Senate Bank Bill's Support Is Shaky, Riegle Finds
Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr., the Banking Committee chairman tarnished by his association with an indicted savings and loan executive, clearly hopes to use the banking bill headed for the Senate floor this week to rehabilitate his reputation.
But Mr.
Riegle, a Michigan Democrat, sits at the fulcrum of a political seesaw, where balancing would be difficult even for a lawmaker with an unimpeachable reputation.
Other senators, Democrats as well as Republicans, see significant political gains from shaping the measure.


Cuomo Takes a Shot At Clinton Proposal
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is still debating whether he should run for President, but he is already sparring with an announced Democratic candidate: Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
Governor Cuomo, in the Nov. 18 issue of New York magazine, finds fault with Governor Clinton's plan to create a trust fund to make college loans available to people willing to repay them or work them off with public service.


Eerie Glow of Shuttle Explained
AS space shuttles swing around the Earth into the cold blackness of space, they sometimes emit an eerie orange ghost-ship glow.
Scientists now think they know why.
While conducting a military experiment for the "Star Wars" anti-missile program last spring, shuttle astronauts unexpectedly found that the glow appeared to arise from a chemical reaction between nitric oxide molecules on the spacecraft's skin and fast-moving oxygen atoms in the upper atmosphere.
The reaction creates an energetic form of nitrogen dioxide gas that gives off light as it comes off the shuttle's surfaces, according to a report in the current issue of the British journal Nature.


Quotation of the Day
One of the reasons I went into medicine in the first place was I didn't want to work for anyone else.
They're going to win eventually, but at least I'm putting up a fight." -- DR. RICHARD FASS of Yonkers, on the pressure to join doctors' networks.  [ A1:2. ]


President of Troubled Bridgeport University Quits
Janet D. Greenwood resigned last night as president of the financially ailing University of Bridgeport.
A spokesman for the university said she would remain as a tenured faculty member and president emeritus.


Veto of California Job-Bias Bill Unites Gay-Rights Forces Against Governor
For most of his adult life, Scott Greig has been building his career and, though homosexual, seldom paid much attention to the gay-rights movement.
A Republican, he voted last year for Pete Wilson for Governor, seeing him as a moderate Republican who was sympathetic to gay people.
But these days Mr.
Greig, a 30-year-old executive with a computer manufacturer here, regularly marches in demonstrations denouncing Mr.
Wilson and has joined forces determined to hound the Governor at every turn and to drive him from office.


University in Beirut Reopens After Bombing
With security tight after a car bombing on Friday, students returned to classes today at the American University of Beirut as professors rummaged through the rubble of the devastated administrative building, searching for valuable records and manuscripts.
"The turnout was total, and we have recorded no absences," said Laila Knio, adminstrative secretary of the faculty of arts and sciences.
"We are proud of the sense of community shown by all in facing this tragedy."


EXECUTIVES
*
Allied-Signal Inc., Morris Township, N.J., named Ralph E. Reins president of its automotive unit and corporate executive vice president.
He succeeds John W. Day, who has been named president of the company's international operations. *
Amtech Corp., Dallas, an insurance holding company, named Russell Mortenson chief executive.
He succeeds Michael R. Corboy, who continues as chairman.


Palestinians Begin Working to Speed Up the Transition to Self-Rule
Palestinian leaders, fresh from a triumphant return home after the Middle East peace talks in Madrid, said today that they had begun work on a transition to self-rule without waiting to resume their negotiations with Israel on autonomy for its occupied territories.
The Palestinians announced the formation of so-called political committees to advise their negotiators and to explain the peace process to the 1.7 million Arabs living in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Prague Postpones Big Privatization Auction
Czechoslovakia has decided to postpone by about two months the start of a privatization plan to auction shares of about 3,000 companies.
The distribution of shares in state-owned companies has been pushed back from the beginning of the year to at earliest mid-February.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the role of exports in the American economy misstated the number of stores planned abroad by Toys "R" Us.
It is 29 this year and 40 in 1992.


Aid to East Europe Put at $45 Billion
The world's major industrialized countries estimated today that they had pledged $45 billion since 1989 to help the economic recovery of Eastern Europe, of which a little more than 20 percent had actually been disbursed.
Representatives of the 24 nations of the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development as well as officials of international financial institutions met here to assess the progress of their aid program begun in haste when the Soviet bloc began to disintegrate two years ago.


Mitterrand Says He Wants Constitution Changed
Besieged by rising unemployment, a wave of strikes, falling popularity and a general mood of public irritation, President Francois Mitterrand has made an effort to recover the political initiative by announcing plans to reform the French Constitution.
Never one to admit he is bending to pressure, he disclosed his intention over the weekend by recalling that he voted against the Constitution drawn up by de Gaulle in 1958 and that he pledged to change it when he himself entered Elysee Palace in 1981.


Miami Suspends Two
The University of Miami's current starting fullback, MARTIN PATTON, and JONATHAN HARRIS, a reserve wide receiver, were suspended indefinitely from the team yesterday after a weekend motorcycle accident that led to charges being filed against them.


Tour Returning To South Africa
After a two-year absence, the men's professional tennis tour is returning to South Africa.
The first event there will be the Association of Tennis Professionals' world doubles final, which will be held Nov. 18-24.
"We felt the time was right on this, and we had the unanimous support of the players," said Mark Miles, chief executive officer of the tour.


Congress's Influential Aides Discover Power but Little Glory on Capitol Hill
As senators paraded before the television cameras last Wednesday in a struggle for the political high ground on national health insurance, an aide worked behind the scenes to draft the Republican bill.
She met every day last week with Richard G. Darman, the White House budget director, and with the chief sponsors of the legislation: Senators Bob Dole of Kansas, the minority leader; John H. Chafee of Rhode Island; Dave Durenberger of Minnesota, and John McCain of Arizona.
When the bill was announced at a news conference on Thursday, television viewers saw several lawmakers take credit, but they were given no hint of the efforts of Sheila Burke, Mr.
Dole's chief of staff.
The cult of anonymity of Congressional aides remained intact.


2 Dozen Newspapers Omit 'Doonesbury' Quayle Series
Universal Press Syndicate said yesterday that about two dozen of the 1,400 newspapers that carry the "Doonesbury" comic strip by Garry Trudeau were not publishing the current two-week series, whose theme is an investigation by the Drug Enforcement Agency of allegations of drug use by Vice President Dan Quayle.
While there was such an investigation in the early 1980's, the allegations were found to be untrue.


California Advertising For Chevy Is Switched
Chevrolet has moved its advertising account aimed at California consumers from a Los Angeles agency, Vic Olesen &amp; Partners, to the agency that handles all other Chevrolet advertising, Lintas Campbell-Ewald, Warren, Mich.
The account is estimated to have billings of $15 million.
Confirming a report in this week's issue of the trade publication Adweek, Frank Raine, Chevrolet's director of area marketing, said yesterday that executives of the General Motors division thought it would be more cost-effective to have one agency handle all of their advertising.


Classical Music in Review
New York Chamber Symphony  92d Street Y
The future of Aaron Jay Kernis's arresting new "Symphony in Waves" lies with the ability and will of the orchestras that must deal with its horrendous performance problems.
The St.
Paul Chamber Orchestra commissioned the piece but has ventured only two of its five movements in public.
In an act of skill and courage, the New York Chamber Symphony under Gerard Schwarz gave a Saturday night audience the full-faced view of Mr.
Kernis's fearless originality and powerful voice.


Suddenly, End Zone Is a Popular Place Again
Earlier this season, National Football League scoring was down and everyone wondered why.
On Sunday, three of the victorious teams did indeed muster 17 or fewer points.
But nine winners scored 26 or more and eight of the losers in those games scored at least 20.


Patterns
Designers' Credos
It was a week for fashion manifestos, some of them pips, some of them squeaks.


Ex-Head of C.F.T.C. Eager to Begin Fed Job
Susan Meredith Phillips, the former chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and a proponent of free markets, has sailed through the Senate confirmation process to become a governor of the Federal Reserve Board.
"This is every economist's ultimate dream," she said in an interview yesterday.
"I'm thrilled."


Business and Health; Potential Savings Of National Care
ALTHOUGH business lobbyists generally oppose national health insurance, it could bring substantial savings to many companies, according to a new study by the Economic and Social Institute, a nonprofit research organization in Washington.
The institute looked at medical costs in the steel and electronics industries and the additional taxes that these industries would face in a Government-financed system like Canada's.
The study found that under a Canada-style system, USX and Bethlehem Steel would have net savings of $2,300 to $3,200 for each union worker in the first year.
It estimated smaller savings for technology-oriented companies like Xerox, Motorola and Hewlett-Packard, which typically have relatively young employees who have accepted the cost-slowing disciplines of health maintenance organizations and other managed care groups.
The institute put the average savings for the three companies at $1,000 to $2,300 for each employee.


Discussions of Poverty Can't Leave Out Race; Value of Comparisons
To the Editor:
In an Oct. 29 article reporting research findings on how badly the United States compares with other advanced industrialized countries on poverty, you quote Douglas Besharov stating that European comparisons are meaningless ("I think it's hokum," he says).


Classical Music in Review
Without Frank Zappa  The Ritz
Frank Zappa was to have been the host of "Zappa's Universe," a four-night 50th-birthday tribute to this rock composer and sometime symphonist.
But on Thursday, Mr.
Zappa's family confirmed long-circulating reports that the musician was battling prostate cancer and said he was too ill to attend.


By Design; Tattoos as You Like Them
A tattoo is no longer taboo, at least in fashion circles.
At the recent spring showings it was hard to miss the little tattoos decorating the ankles of several top models, and a few designers made a point of tattoos in their collections.
"I use them to emphasize bareness," Anna Sui said, explaining why a small inky butterfly showed up on the knee of a model wearing a short skirt, while a rose peeked over the low-slung back of a pair of hip huggers.
In Paris last month, much of the Comme de Garcons collection was accompanied by what appeared to be drawn-on necklaces and bracelets.


Dow Dips 3.36, to 3,042.26, in Thin Trading
Most stocks traded higher yesterday on light volume, while the Dow Jones industrial average slipped 3.36 points, to 3,042.26, pulled down by General Motors.
The Nasdaq index, meanwhile, reached its third high in as many days.
Without the influence of the Treasury bond market and banks, both closed for Veterans Day, stocks traded in a narrow 10-point range most of the session.


Belt-Tightening Crimps Westport Dining
There is no Indelicato's now, no old-fashioned spaghetti house like the one in the 1964 novel "Reuben, Reuben," where working-class locals and New York commuters uneasily encountered each other at tables topped with red-and-white checked tablecloths in a Westport that was disguised as the town of Woodsmoke.
These days, the commuters
are
the locals, and places like Indelicato's and the coffee shops that once represented the range of restaurants in bedroom communities were long ago overwhelmed here by Francine's and Pancho Villa's, Onion Alley and Soup's On, the Pompano Grill and Panda Pavilion.
There are more than 60 restaurants in Westport, making this wealthy town of 24,000 -- the home of celebrities, artists, advertising executives and writers -- the dining capital of Fairfield County and the restaurants themselves one of its largest industries.
Feeling the Tax Bite
But not all is well.
Just as restaurateurs from midtown Manhattan to Southampton, L.I., have found that people are staying home -- and eating less when they do dine out -- those in Westport have seen the region's recession enter their dining rooms.
The always-sharp competition has become sharper, especially since the state's first income tax kicked in last month, and the gulf between the winners and the hangers-on has widened.


U.S. Restores Diplomatic Presence in Cambodia After 16 Years


Walter Mordaunt, 72, Aide to Appeals Court
Walter J. Mordaunt, a former spokesman for the New York State Court of Appeals and a press aide to Gov.
W.
Averell Harriman in the 1950's, died on Sunday at Samaritan Hospital in Troy, N.Y.
He was 72 years old and lived in East Greenbush, N.Y.
He died of stomach cancer, said his wife, Peggy Ann.


Bethlehem Ends Talks With British Steel
The Bethlehem Steel Corporation said yesterday that it had ended talks to establish a joint venture with British Steel P.L.C. to develop and market structural steel products, because the companies were unable to reach a labor agreement with the United Steelworkers union.
Under the proposal, British Steel, the world's fourth-largest steelmaker, would have become joint owner of Bethlehem's structural and rail steel business.


Ralph Harvey Is Dead; Congressman Was 90
Ralph Harvey, a former Representative from Indiana, died Thursday at North Beach Hospital in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 90 years old and lived on his family farm near Mount Summit in east central Indiana.
Mr.
Harvey, a Republican who had been on the House Agricultural Committee, died from a stroke that he suffered last week at his winter home in Fort Lauderdale, said Sam Hall of the Macer-Hall Funeral Home in New Castle near Mount Summit.


Corrections
A map last Tuesday with an article about fighting in Yugoslavia mis located the Croatian town of Karlovac.
It is southwest of Zagreb, not northeast.


Johnson's Influence A Study Of Class
There isn't a player in the National Basketball Association who hasn't been touched -- or beaten off the dribble, for that matter -- by Magic Johnson.
But none more so than the young point guards of the league, grade-schoolers when Johnson first appeared as a 6-foot-9-inch curiosity in Los Angeles and proceeded to revolutionize the position.
There hasn't been another point guard like Johnson, the body so big, the leadership so strong, the package so complete.
But those who followed Johnson, if they had any vision to their game, learned their trade from the manual he wrote.


Recycling Claim by Biosphere 2 Experiment Is Questioned
CRITICS have long contended that the Biosphere 2 project in the Arizona desert has more to do with showmanship or cultism than science, despite its repeated assertions to the contrary.
Now, a newspaper says the $150 million effort is not the environmental experiment it claims to be.
The project began with much fanfare in September when four men and four women, accompanied by 3,000 species of plants and animals, sealed themselves inside a eight-story, glass structure for a two-year experiment in biological recycling.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  BAKER PRESSES JAPAN
The Secretary of State asked Japan to move to promote free trade and democracy instead of relying on "checkbook diplomacy" or waiting for foreign pressure.
Page A1  VIOLENCE CLOSES MINESHAFTS
A gold mine in South Africa sent workers home and curtailed production as the number of deaths rose to 69 and injuries to 180 in a new theater for factional fighting.
A1  BIG-TIME POLISH CORRUPTION
The advent of a market economy in Poland has brought rough-and-tumble capitalism, and quick learners at the school for scandal.
A1  U.S.
BACKS SOVIET VENTURE
A Federal agency will provide partial insurance against expropriation and violence for a fund planning a $250 million investment.
D1  A SOVIET BATTLE OF THE ARMIES
The future of the national Army may hold the answer to how much of a Soviet national image will survive in the post-Communist era and how peaceful the republics might remain toward one another.
A1  Will recruits be serving the Ukraine or what remains of the union?
A10  A CRISIS FOR YELTSIN
The Russian Parliament overturned President Boris N. Yeltsin's order imposing a state of emergency in the Chechen-Ingush region and authorized him to negotiate with nationalists there.
A10  CHEMICAL ARMS FOUND IN IRAQ
Inspectors say that they found large numbers of Iraqi weapons outfitted with chemical warheads that could have been used in the gulf war, but that it is unlikely they could have been fired accurately, if at all.
A3  PALESTINIANS PREPARE FOR FUTURE
Palestinian leaders have begun work on a transition to self-rule without waiting to resume negotiations with Israel on autonomy for its occupied territories.
A6  KENYA SLAYING TIED TO CORRUPTION
An investigation reveals that a Kenyan Foreign Minister whose body was found last year was murdered because he knew too much about high-level corruption.
A8  EGYPTIAN AHEAD IN U.N.
POLLING
The Egyptian Deputy Prime Minister, Butros Ghali, is leading the race to become the next Secretary General of the United Nations.
A3  Canada has revoked the citizenship of a Nazi collaborator.
A15  It's a plane, it's Hajji Bush, and it's a comfort to Iraq's Kurds.
A4  German and British leaders met to discuss European unity.
A15  The response to the French President's moves toward constitutional reform is cautious.
A11  Aquino's repeated denials that she will run again have not removed her name from speculation.
A12  Havel arrived in Bratislava to spend a working week in Slovakia.
A14  National A16-22  SOARING HOPE IN PITTSBURGH
The City of Pittsburgh is counting on an innovative new airport terminal, nearing completion, to complete a transformation of the city begun decades ago and to lift the economy of the region.
A16  A MOVEMENT REVITALIZED
The California Governor's veto of a gay-rights bill has energized the gay-rights movement in a way that has not happened in years.
A16  TRUTH AND DAVID DUKE
False claims, about his record, his opponent's and Federal policies, are a standard feature of David Duke's campaign speeches.
A18  CUE FROM THE BALLOT BOX
The Senate victory of Harris Wofford in Pennsylvania has thrust health insurance policy to the fore in Washington.
A20  INFLUENCE AND ANONYMITY
Aides to lawmakers on Capitol Hill labor for long hours over legislation and often have considerable power over a bill's fate, but rarely do they enter the spotlight.
A22  UNCERTAINTY AT THE C.I.A.
As Robert M. Gates is about to be sworn in as Director of Central Intelligence, considerable worries remain about the morale of employees at the C.I.A.
A20  Three fires damage major buildings in the Boston area.
A19  A mea culpa from the University of California.
A19  Metropolitan Digest, B1 BUDGETING PAST '92
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders are considering an unusual multiyear fiscal plan that would remove the state's budget woes from the political spotlight until after the 1992 election.
Proponents say it clearly would help Mr.
Cuomo as he considers a Presidential bid.
A1  TOUGH CHOICES FOR DOCTORS
More and more doctors are joining the health-care networks that are gaining popularity in the region.
But doctors say the shift means lower fees, less independence and less time for patients.
A1  SPEAKER'S TRIAL STARTS
Assembly Speaker Mel Miller goes on trial in Brooklyn today on Federal fraud charges.
Hanging in the balance is not only a determination of his guilt or innocence but also his standing as the second most powerful Democrat in New York State government.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Science Times Forests in the city show surprising resilience.
C1  The mind-body connection is striking in one fish species.
C1  A new mathematical approach to compressing data.
C1  Transplants show promise in fighting Parkinson's disease.
C3  With Kuwait oil fires out, damage is still to be measured.
C4  Arts/Entertainment  Christo after the umbrellas.
C13  Argentina films Camus novel.
C13  Theater: Fighting racism in "From the Mississippi Delta." C13  Music: Music Notes.
C13  Word and Image: "Franz Kakfa:  Representative Man." C17  The psychiatrist as a lover.
C18  Obituaries B8  Horace W. B. Donegan, former Episcopal Bishop of New York  Fashion Page B7  Spring styles, tailored or soft  Patterns By Design Sports B9-14  Baseball: Unfamiliar setting for Gooden.
B9  Bonilla heads class of '91 free agents.
B14  Basketball: Praise for Magic.
B13  Bush asks Johnson to join AIDS commission.
B13  Football: Jets' bad loss worries Coslet.
B9  Hockey: Rangers beat Penguins B9  Tennis: Graf splits with her longtime coach.
B14  Editorials/Op-Ed  Editorials A24  Wake up to reform in Russia After Magic, the extra mile Voters' courage on guns Topics: The singer, the song Letters A24  A. M. Rosenthal: Mideast decision time.
A25  Russell Baker: Hiatus in the fun.
A25  Jude Wanniski: Blame Bush for the recession.
A25  Bianca Jagger: Save the rain forest in Nicaragua.
A25


TRANSACTIONS
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
CHICAGO BULLS -- Signed Scott Williams, forward-center.
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Activated Mark Price, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Jimmy Oliver, guard, on the injured list.
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Waived Kennard Winchester, guard-forward.
Activated Carl Herrera, forward, from the injured list.
MIAMI HEAT -- Signed Milos Babic, forward.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Activated Manute Bol, center, from the injured list.
Placed Kenny Payne, forward, on the injured list.
Continental Basketball Association
GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Signed Darryl Odom, guard. Waived Aaron Mitchell, guard.
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Traded Marvin Alexander, forward, to the Birmingham Bandits for Doug Roth, center.
Activated Jarvis Basnight, forward.


Wake Up to Reform in Russia
By its odd sudden diffidence, the West is now squandering a remarkable opportunity to advance a free market in Russia.
The Russian President, Boris Yeltsin, has announced a program of genuinely radical economic reform, just about everything outsiders could have hoped for -- yet nobody in the West seems to notice.
Perhaps Western leaders have become jaded, having heard Mikhail Gorbachev back down from one promised economic reform after another.
Or perhaps they were put off by Mr.
Yeltsin's declaration of emergency powers, fueling fears that he's a closet autocrat.


Books of The Times; Franz Kafka, a Theory in Flesh and Blood
Franz Kafka  Representative Man  By Frederick R. Karl  Illustrated. 810 pages.
Ticknor &amp; Fields. $40.
As the title of his new book clearly announces, the scholar Frederick R. Karl has not set out to write a simple biography of Kafka, but a huge sprawling thesis that looks at Kafka through a wide-angle lens.
He wants to prove that the author of "The Trial" is, "in the Emersonian sense," the "representative man" of the 20th century.


Snows of Antarctica
The average annual snowfall in Antarctica was heavier in the mid-1980's than at any time since 1806, the earliest year for which records exist, Australian scientists report.
Because Antarctic ice melts more slowly than the snow accumulates, the scientists say, more water has been kept locked up on the continent in recent years.
This resulted, they calculate, in a drop in sea level of four-hundredths to six-hundredths of an inch a year below what the level would otherwise be.


Goldman Reported in Talks To Sell $275 Million in Stock
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the investment banking firm, is in discussions with a group of insurance companies to sell as much as $275 million worth of equity in the privately held firm, sources at Goldman said yesterday.
The talks were described as early and preliminary.
If completed, the sale would mark the third time since 1986 that Goldman has sold stock outside of its partnership.
The securities will be like preferred stock with a dividend yield, based on certain Treasury securities' yield.


Studies (and Politics) Guided Switch on Needles
In approving a needle-exchange program in New York City, Mayor David N. Dinkins has gingerly embraced a weapon against AIDS that has gained wider acceptance in the last year but still has staunch opponents among minority groups and drug treatment experts.
On Thursday the Mayor said he would endorse a privately financed pilot program to be run by community organizations as part of a more aggressive approach to fight both AIDS and drug abuse in the city.
His support will enable groups that have long wanted to offer the programs to obtain financing, as well as waivers from a New York State law that makes the exchanges illegal.


Mennen Family To Sell Company
The Mennen Company, the privately owned manufacturer of toiletries and baby-care products, said it was seeking a buyer.
Leonard J. Sichel, Mennen's vice chairman and chief financial officer, said the Mennen family wanted to help diversify its holdings by selling the concern, which makes Skin Bracer after-shave lotion, Speed Stick deodorant and other brands.


Bush Asks Johnson to Join AIDS Panel
President Bush has asked Magic Johnson to join the National Commission on AIDS, the Federal agency established to develop a consensus on AIDS policy.
Johnson's agent, Lon Rosen, is expected to discuss the proposed appointment Tuesday, said Connie Horner, a White House personnel officer.


Palestinian Elder Statesman at the Talks
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 31 sketch of Heidar Abd al-Shafei, head of the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks in Madrid, understates the significance of his choice for that role.


A Large Birdlike Shape Circled the Bedroom
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 29 Science Times article on bats does not mention bats in New York City, to my surprise.


The Fallout Of the Demise Of Shoreham
As the Shoreham Nuclear Power Station nears its demise, it is leaving behind it a school district that has counted on its tax revenue for everything from library books to a new auditorium to a working farm where sixth graders shear sheep, collect eggs and make goat cheese.
For 15 years the power plant, which has never been allowed to operate, has paid millions in school taxes that have built the district into one of the richest in the country, drawing the envy and resentment of other Long Islanders, who complain that their electric bills are paying for someone else's schools.


Soybeans Drop for 6th Day; Energy Prices Fall Sharply
Soybean futures prices fell for the sixth straight session yesterday, leading the grain markets lower in anticipation of a Government report today that is expected to increase the size of harvest estimates.
In other commodity trading, energy futures fell sharply on the New York Mercantile Exchange in a selloff inspired mainly by technical factors rather than supply-and-demand fundamentals.
Light crude oil for December delivery dropped 43 cents, to $22.58 a barrel.
December home heating oil fell 2 cents, to 67.57 cents a gallon.
Unleaded gasoline sank 2.3 cents, to 62.59 cents a gallon, and December natural gas fell 1.2 cents, to $2.07 for 1,000 cubic feet.


Voter Registration Bill Will Boost Turnout
To the Editor:
As a citizen concerned about low voter turnout, I applaud "A Vote for Democracy" (editorial, Oct. 31), which urges passage of a bill permitting eligible voters to register when applying for driver's license or by mail or at public agencies.


Philharmonic Director To Meet the Public
Kurt Masur, the music director of the New York Philharmonic, and Deborah Borda, the orchestra's general manager, will discuss plans for the Philharmonic's future, tomorrow at 6 P.M. as part of the Lincoln Center Off Stage series.
A wine-and-cheese reception will follow the informal conversation and question-answer session in the Stanley H. Kaplan Penthouse on the 10th floor of the Samuel B. and David Rose Building, 165 West 65th Street.
Tickets are $13.
Information: (212) 875-5444.


Review/Fashion; Word for Spring: Options
Fashion is by its very nature unpredictable.
Still, it was a surprise that one of the best-accepted groups of styles in last week's spring showings was Ralph Lauren's serious man-tailored suits.
He enhanced the rather severe tailoring with suspenders, tailored shirts and silk ties, knotted the way men's are.
While he showed softer variations on the mannish look with skirts in thin, soft fabrics, for example, or no skirt at all, the most memorable versions were austere trouser suits.


British Theater's Plethora of Directors
In what one British newspaper described as "the Great British Fudge," the Royal Court Theater has appointed a new artistic director while making provisions for the incumbent artistic director to remain for the next few years.
After several months of reportedly fierce debate, the Royal Court's council announced on Friday the appointment of Stephen Daldry as artistic director-designate of the theater's resident English Stage Company.
For 18 months starting in April, Mr.
Daldry, currently the artistic director of the Gate Theater, a respected company on London's fringe, will work alongside Max Stafford-Clark, who has run the theater for 11 years and who had sought to retain the directorship.
For two years after that, Mr.
Daldry will be the artistic director, with Mr.
Stafford-Clark staying on as associate director.


McDonnell Keeps Its Finance Unit
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said it had decided not to sell its finance subsidiary, a move that had been under consideration for the last year.
The aerospace company, based in St.
Louis, said it would instead focus the subsidiary on two core areas -- aircraft financing and commercial equipment leasing -- while selling off unrelated operations.


Canada Revokes Citizenship of Nazi Collaborator
The federal Cabinet has revoked the citizenship of a convicted Nazi collaborator, a retired University of British Columbia botany instructor who helped German occupiers, in the war years in his native Netherlands, search for Jews and members of the Dutch resistance.
The order, which is expected to spur formal deportation proceedings and accelerate pursuit of other war criminals in Canada, follows a decision last month by the Federal Court of Canada that Jacob Luitjens, 72 years old, had obtained his citizenship fraudulently.


New Energy Bill Held Unlikely Soon
Despite optimistic predictions by proponents of conservation and renewable fuels that major new energy legislation would be on the Senate floor by Thanksgiving, Congressional officials say it may be impossible to pass anything more than a limited alternative for months.
Ten days ago, liberal Democrats and an unlikely coalition of environmental groups, small utilities and the automobile industry derailed the Bush Administration's energy bill.
Building a coalition for a substitute will be much more difficult.


Discussions of Poverty Can't Leave Out Race
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 29 article about studies comparing poverty rates in Europe and the United States confuses and misleads on two counts.
Though race is the throbbing reality underlying the conflict, you never address it directly.
That omission oversimplifies our social problems and makes them substantially more difficult to solve.


'Umbrellas' Closing Leaves Christo With Empty Palette
The umbrella project that the artist Christo once called "a symphony in two parts" has become a tragedy in two acts.
On Oct. 26, a sudden wind uprooted a 485-pound umbrella in the Tejon Pass north of Los Angeles and struck Lori Keevil-Matthews, 33 years old, of Camarillo, Calif., crushing her to death against a boulder.
Christo ordered the entire project of 1,340 yellow umbrellas in California and 1,760 blue umbrellas in Japanto be taken down "out of respect to her memory." But during the dismantling in Japan, a 51-year-old worker, Masaaki Nakamura, died when the arm of the crane he was operating touched a 65,000-volt power line.


CHRONICLE
JOHN W. KLUGE studied at Columbia College on a scholarship, graduating in 1937.
He became one of the nation's wealthiest men and has given his alma mater the two largest gifts in its history.
Tonight, he is to receive the Alexander Hamilton Medal, the school's highest award.
Mr.
Kluge, the chairman of Metromedia Inc., will receive the medal at a dinner in the Low Memorial Library.
"It's not just that he has given money, but the way he has given it," said MICHAEL I. SOVERN, Columbia's president.
"He has been interested in support of students," he said, referring to Mr.
Kluge's 1987 gift of $25 million for aid to gifted and needy minority students.


Review/Television; When a Psychiatrist Becomes a Lover
Relax.
Despite a few steamy descriptions, "My Doctor, My Lover" is not a made-for-television titillater.
Tonight's 90-minute "Frontline" documentary, at 9 on Channels 13 and 49, is a sober account of a 1989 sexual abuse case brought by a Denver woman against her sometime psychiatrist.
Dr.
Jason Richter admitted beginning an on-and-off, 18-month affair with Melissa Roberts-Henry a few days after he abruptly ended her therapy, despite his own note on her chart, "If we had a physical relationship, it would only end up being destructive to her." The issue for the jury was essentially how much money she deserved.
Tonight's report goes beyond the generally accepted rule that a psychiatrist should not indulge in sex with a patient (about 7 percent of them do anyway, says the narrator) to the way the law and the psychiatric establishment treat such cases.


Soviet Army on Defense, in Ukraine
The tank battalion that has defended the Soviet motherland for 50 years from a woodsy outpost here in the western Ukraine is holding its ground uneasily these days amid a fusillade of fresh nationalist laws being passed by the Ukrainian republic's Parliament.
"It's all an illusion so far," said Maj.
Gennadi Zaitsev, a career officer, measuring the legislative onslaught.
He spoke as the republic's feisty Parliament, determined to achieve the fullest possible independence from the Kremlin, was enacting plans for creating a huge and separate army of the Ukraine, and for extending Ukrainian control over Soviet Army units -- one of the sharpest challenges a republic has made to the army's unity and Moscow's control over it.


Mobil Securities
The Mobil Corporation, the diversified oil company, yesterday filed for $1.5 billion of debt securities.
Underwriters and terms of the securities, probably medium-term notes, will be announced later.
Proceeds will be used for general corporate purposes, according to the registration statement.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
AD HOC COMMITTEE OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO U.N.H.C.R. -- 3-5 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


An Immigrant's Field of Dreams Transforms a Dingy Patch of the Bronx
Entranced by the vision of an innocent era, a man transforms a field into a shrinelike ball park that attracts hundreds of eager visitors.
Kevin Costner acted the role in "Field of Dreams."
Astin Jacobo lived it in the Bronx.


METRO DIGEST
PAINFUL CHOICES FOR PHYSICIANS
As more and more companies in the New York region join "managed care" networks -- organizations that require patients to choose from a set list of physicians, and physicians to charge certain fees for certain procedures -- doctors are facing painful choices: personal care vs. volume, autonomy vs. income.
Like so many other changes in health care, this one reminds doctors of something many prefer to forget: medicine is a business, and a difficult one at that.
Page A1.
NEW YORK CITY U.S.
REPORTS MOB DEFECTION
In what some law-enforcement officials describe as the American Mafia's highest-ranking desertion, Salvatore Gravano, identified as the No. 2 leader in the Gambino organized-crime family, is expected to be a witness against John Gotti.
Page B3.


Nynex Mobile Consolidates
After a three-month review, the Nynex Mobile Communications Company, Orangeburg, N.Y., has consolidated its $10 million advertising account at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York.
Saatchi was selected yesterday over two smaller finalists, Ammirati &amp; Puris and Amil Gargano &amp; Partners, both of New York.
With 300,000 customers in New York, New Jersey and New England, Nynex Mobile's new emphasis is to "speak with one voice" throughout its market, said Lorraine Pirro, a company spokeswoman.
Previously, the Nynex Mobile market was divided into three regions, each assigned to a different agency: Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly, Providence, R.I.; Lohmeyer Simpson Communications, Morristown, N.J., and Schnurr &amp; Jackson, Troy, N.Y.


Its Eye on Election, White House To Propose Health Care Changes
Bush Administration officials say Senator Harris Wofford's victory in Pennsylvania will force them to propose significant changes in the health care system sooner than they intended, but they insist that the election results last week cannot be read as an endorsement for any specific proposal, and many Democrats agree.
Thus, Mr.
Wofford's success guarantees an impassioned debate on health policy by candidates for President and Congress in 1992, but it does not necessarily mean that successful candidates must follow him in advocating a comprehensive program of national health insurance with a major new role for the Federal Government.


U.S. Plans To Insure Soviet Deal
A Federal agency has agreed to provide partial insurance against expropriation, political violence and currency convertibility problems for an American investment fund that plans to purchase $250 million worth of minority stakes in the commercial affiliates of Soviet companies in the military industry.
James D. Berg, executive vice president of the agency, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, which is known as OPIC, said today that the agreement was reached on Friday and represented the agency's first dealings on investments in the Soviet Union.


Careers; For Nurses, Travel and A Job, Too
TO fill their nursing vacanies, hospitals around the country can draw on Travcorps Inc. of Malden, Mass., and its data bank of 10,000 nurses willing to travel.
"At any one time we have 1,200 to 1,500 nurses actively placed in hospitals around the country." Bruce M. Male, 49 years old, the president and owner of the company, said last week.
"This is a people business."


How a Soviet Tank Outfit Sits Out Deepening Peace
Like so much else as the cold war unravels, the Yavorovo tank post is noteworthy for its sense of anticlimax, for the sight of young soldiers looking very innocent and very inexperienced as they sit and wait for imagined combat.
A platoon jogs by in double-time, the recruits grinning in the cold past the statue of Lenin, a mantle of snow atop his head.
An officer gravely leads a visitor through the "dog and pony" commonplace of showroom classrooms and spit-polished barracks, just as visitors to Fort Dix, N.J., have long been shown through the state of homefront readiness.


With Aquino Saying No, Violent Voting Is Feared
It is only when her mischievous side takes over that President Corazon C. Aquino hedges on her promise not to seek a second term in May, according to one of her close supporters.
But when she does so, other politicians tremble.
Six years after declaring her improbable candidacy against Ferdinand E. Marcos, Mrs.
Aquino has lost much of the popularity on which she rode to power, but she remains, like her predecessor, the only major political figure in the nation.


Indonesian Troops Open Fire on Timor Mourners
Indonesian soldiers opened fire on mourners at a funeral procession in the capital of East Timor today, and rebels fighting for the former Portuguese colony's independence said more than 100 people had been killed or wounded.
A diplomat here said more than 20 people were killed in Dili, the capital of East Timor.
The Portuguese news agency Lusa quoted a Roman Catholic priest in East Timor as saying the Indonesian troops killed more than 50 people and wounded dozens of others.


When New Player Steps Up to Bat
When Magic Johnson took his plight to the public last Thursday, most notable for his place at the side of the National Basketball Association superstar was the N.B.A. commissioner, David Stern.
The announcement of the player's retirement after testing positive for the HIV virus was a well thought-out, coordinated effort in which entities from both labor and management came together as one when the sport most needed a solid front.


Corrections
A correction in this space on Friday, referring to the obituary of Robert Maxwell last Wednesday, was published in error.
As the obituary correctly stated, the afternoon newspaper he started in 1987 was The London Daily News.


Barings to Try Where Other British Firms Failed
Peter Baring has watched as one non-American investment bank after another has tried to break into the United States and reaped only losses and frustration.
Mr.
Baring, the 56-year-old chairman of Barings P.L.C., the venerable British merchant bank, is trying to avoid that experience by buying a 40 percent stake in Dillon, Read &amp; Company.
He hopes the link between the two small but prestigious investment banks will help privately owned Barings make inroads in a business he sees as crucial: cross-border corporate finance in general and mergers and acquisitions in particular.


Foul Play in Kenya
When Kenya's Foreign Minister, Robert Ouko, was found dead 20 months ago, an official inquiry suggested that he had somehow shot and burned himself to death in the bush country.
A long-suppressed report by a retired Scotland Yard detective now asserts, far more credibly, that Mr.
Ouko was killed because he knew too much about high-level corruption.
The report is a timely warning to Western governments too tolerant of Kenya's one-party autocracy.
Before his death, the Foreign Minister was compiling testimony alleging that close associates of President Daniel arap Moi routinely sought 10 percent kickbacks on public projects.
The figure seems conservative given a report by the International Monetary Fund asserting that overseas accounts held by Kenyans have soared to $2.6 billion, a suspicious capital flight exceeded in Africa only by Liberia, Nigeria and South Africa.
Small wonder that Mr.
Moi's Government has for six months suppressed the findings on Mr.
Ouko's death.


About Real Estate; Chicago Expanding McCormick Place
Officials are expanding McCormick Place, the nation's largest convention and trade-show center, by adding a structure that will cover about four city blocks.
The latest step was taken two months ago by the Metropolitan Pier and Exposition Authority, which owns and operates McCormick Place, by awarding a $675 million contract to a Chicago firm, Stein &amp; Company, to design and construct the new hall.


Books of The Times; The Civil War's Neglected Stepchild
The Civil War in the American West Alvin M. Josephy Jr.
Illustrated. 448 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $27.50.
Even the most avid followers of the fortunes of the Blue and Gray have big gaps in their knowledge about what was going on west of the Mississippi during the Civil War.
There were no major set pieces, like the siege of Vicksburg or the battle of Gettysburg; there was no gallant confrontation between the Union and Confederate commanders, as at Appomattox Court House.
The little-known actions on the western frontier left no comparable heritage of famous names and places, of landmarks and spent Minie balls.


Islanders' Healy Is Injured
Fresh from an 0-3 tour of the West and skidding at a 2-9-1 clip, the Islanders got more bad news yesterday when they learned that their first-string goalie, Glenn Healy, would be out for 10 days to two weeks with a fractured right index finger.
Healy injured the finger Sunday night in Vanvouver during a 6-0 defeat.
In 14 games, he has a record of 4-8-2 and a goals-against average of 4.46.
His backup, Steve Weeks, has played in three games and has an 0-1-0 record and a goals-against average of 3.31.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  FARE COULD RISE TO $1.40 NEXT YEAR
The battle over how much the New York City subway fare will increase next year moved into high gear as the Transit Authority recommended a rise of 25 cents, to $1.40, unless the state provides additional subsidies.
Page A1.
DOCTORS WALK THE PICKET LINE
More than 300 senior doctors began walking picket lines at the Woodhull hospital in Brooklyn in what is believed to be the first strike by staff doctors anywhere in the country.
At the heart of the walkout are two issues at the center of health care debates throughout the country: money and quality of care.
Page A1.
FAR FROM HOME, 'FINALLY HOME'
To the buoyant greeting of a chorus of cleaning women and airport mechanics, Mayor David N. Dinkins landed on South African soil, embraced his hero, Nelson Mandela, and proclaimed himself "finally home." Page B3.
ILLEGAL SECURITY PATROLS IN THE BRONX
The Nighthawks Protection Agency, known for recruiting the city's toughest former gang members and some former convicts, was illegally patroling part of a South Bronx shopping plaza where a 17-year-old was fatally shot, officials say.
Detectives say they are investigating whether the shooting was committed by a security guard -- possibly a Nighthawk.
Page B3.
ASSEMBLY SPEAKER'S TRIAL BEGINS
Assembly Speaker Mel Miller and his longtime law partner "lined their own pockets at the expense of their own clients," a Federal prosecutor charged in his opening statement.
Page B3.
JUDGE EXAMINES KAHANE JURY SELECTION
The judge in the Kahane murder trial said there was strong evidence that defense lawyers had deliberately excluded whites from the jury, and he ordered both the defense and the prosecution to demonstrate that race had not been a factor in choosing jurors.
Page B2.
Home health aide arraigned in killing. Page B2.
Dismissed prosecutor says St.
John's sexual-assault case was botched.
Page B3.
REGION O'ROURKE HEADS FOR THE BENCH
President Bush nominated the Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, for a Federal judgeship, touching off a fierce battle for Westchester's top elected post and for political control of the county.
Page B5.
THE LESSONS OF MOUNT TRASHMORE
A giant pile of garbage, the largest illegal dump in Connecticut, towers over one of Bridgeport's poorest neighborhoods.
Known locally as Mount Trashmore, it has come to symbolize the powerlessness of America's poorest cities.
Page B5.
BRIDGEPORT U. PRESIDENT QUITS
Amid a deepening fiscal crisis, the president of the University of Bridgeport has quit.
Page B5.
IN ANTI-TAX TIMES, TALK OF TAXES
A week after Election Day setbacks attributed to a growing anti-tax sentiment, the incumbent Republican administration in Nassau County nevertheless proposed sharply higher county taxes to balance a recession-driven county budget.
Page B5.
Rescuers end search for missing flier. Page B5.
About New York B2


4 Composers Honored At Kennedy Center
Four American composers are the recipients of the 1991 Kennedy Center Friedheim Awards for new chamber music.
The $5,000 first prize went to Richard Wernick of Media, Pa., for his 1990 String Quartet No. 4.
Mr.
Wernick won a 1986 Friedheim Award for his Violin Concerto.
The second prize, $2,500, went to Donald Crockett of La Canada, Calif., for "Celestial Mechanics," a work for oboe and string quartet.
The third prize, $1,000, went to Sebastian Currier of New York City for "Clockwork," a duo for violin and piano.
Stephen Jaffe of Durham, N.C., received the fourth prize, $500, for his First Quartet.


Zimbabwe Official Takes Lead in Poll For Leader of U.N.
Zimbabwe's Finance Minister, Bernard Chidzero, moved into a one-vote lead today in the race to be next Secretary General of the United Nations, winning the support of 11 of the 15 Security Council members.
One Council member voted against Mr.
Chidzero and three abstained.
None of the five permanent members, each of which can veto nomination of a candidate, voted against Mr.
Chidzero.


Cuomo Joins Attack On Dinkins Aid Plan
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that the Dinkins administration should show that it could balance New York City's long-term budget without help from the Municipal Assistance Corporation, as Mayor David N. Dinkins has proposed.
But the Governor held out the possibility that assistance corporation money could be available later if the work force was reduced and city government was reorganized.


Baker in Seoul to Discuss Trade With Asia
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d arrived here from Japan today on the second leg of an East Asian trip.
On Wednesday, he is expected to confront some of the United States' toughest trading partners in an atmosphere testing the Bush Administration's concept of a fairer economic relationship with its Asian allies.


MOSCOW AID PLAN DYING IN CONGRESS
A plan to divert up to $1 billion from the Pentagon budget to aid the Soviet Union appeared all but dead today, the victim of political miscalculations by two of the most powerful lawmakers in Congress and a growing public perception that Washington is putting foreign aid ahead of domestic problems.
Efforts to salvage the Soviet proposal, which seemed headed for approval two weeks ago, were virtually exhausted today as the Bush Administration failed to offer a public endorsement of the plan.
Democratic leaders in Congress had said that without that public support from the White House, they would drop the proposal rather than bear the political heat alone.


Look Who's Back


Gates Sworn In as Intelligence Chief
Robert M. Gates, who was criticized by supporters and detractors alike during his confirmation hearings for his tough management style, started his tenure as Director of Central Intelligence today with a joke.
"Twenty-six weeks ago today, the President announced his intention to nominate me for Director of Central Intelligence," Mr.
Gates said, smiling broadly.
"In the interval, the entire Soviet empire has collapsed."


Plan to Modernize Set by Ameritech
The Ameritech Corporation, the regional Bell operating company for the Midwest, said it plans to spend $1 billion over the next five years to modernize telephone switching equipment in the Great Lakes region.


Anderson Almost Puts One Over on the Knicks
Fans who came to watch Kenny Anderson perform at Madison Square Garden last night got what they came for.
And the Knicks nearly got more than they bargained for.
After nearly losing an 11-point lead in the final six minutes, the Knicks survived to defeat the Nets, 98-96, before a crowd of 14,556 spectators.
It was not a classic effort, but it was exciting.
And Anderson, the Nets' rookie point guard from Queens, generated most of the electricity while sparking a fourth-quarter rally that fell just short.


Disaster Relief Proposal Worries Third World
A Western proposal that the United Nations appoint a senior official, with $50 million in ready cash at his disposal, to coordinate the world's response in floods, famines and other natural disasters is provoking debate at this year's General Assembly, where developing countries fear it could give foreigners a pretext for meddling in their internal political affairs.
The plan for a disaster relief coordinator was first proposed by the European Community this year and endorsed by the United States and Canada in July at the summit meeting of the Group of Seven industrialized democracies.


Scott Paper Redraws Organizational Chart
Struggling to cut costs and raise sagging profits, the Scott Paper Company announced a management reorganization yesterday that reshuffles executives worldwide.
The moves are intended to focus the company on its two main businesses, coated paper for publishing and personal-care and cleaning products, said Michael Kilpatric, a spokesman for the Philadelphia-based company, which makes Scott tissues, Cottonelle toilet paper and Viva paper towels and other brands.


Papp Proved That Landmarks Law Works
To the Editor:
Among the many accomplishments of Joseph Papp (obituary article, Nov. 1) was his role in demonstrating that the New York City landmarks preservation ordinance would work.


President of University of Bridgeport Quits as Fiscal Woes Deepen
The president of the University of Bridgeport resigned on Monday as the struggling private university's financial crisis deepened.
The resignation of the president, Dr.
Janet D. Greenwood, came a month after trustees rejected an offer from a group financed by the Unification Church to invest $50 million in the nonsectarian university and enroll 1,000 students a year.
Control would have passed to the group, the Professors World Peace Academy.
Dr.
Greenwood said at the time that trustees had to consider the offer because of the university's financial condition. 'Very Difficult Period'
Three days before Dr.
Greenwood resigned Standard &amp; Poor's lowered the rating on $3 million in bonds for the university from BB to CCC, a very speculative rating that carries significant risk, saying the university was nearly out of cash and "there is a possibility that U.B. may consider closing in the near future."


Democrats Court Labor By Hammering at Bush
The six major Democratic Presidential contenders vied for support before the A.F.L.-C.I.O. convention here today, pledging their commitment to the unemployed and the economically squeezed, hammering President Bush and promising drastic new measures to spur economic growth.
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa seemed to be the emotional favorite of the crowd, judging from the frequency and decibel level of applause when he railed against "scab-hiring employers" and promised to be a friend of labor in the White House.
But many officials here said the race for organized labor was still wide open, particularly since it is unclear whether Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York will seek the Democratic nomination.


Theater in Review
Absolutely Rude  Comedy Cellar 117 Macdougal Street Manhattan Music and lyrics by Rick Crom; direction and vocal arrangements by John McMahon.
Lighting, Sean Haines; board operators, David Hopkins and Tom Fudel.
Presented by the Comedy Cellar Theater and Rick Crom.
WITH: Mr.
Crom, Frankie Maio, Mark-Alan, Virginia McMath and Amy Ryder.
In the funniest sketch in "Absolutely Rude," an 80-minute musical comedy revue, Amy Ryder cheerfully introduces herself as Sally Struthers, "TV's most annoying spokesperson." After declaring, "I grovel for the causes I believe in; I've whined and whined and whined," the character goes on to plead for yet another cause, "the acting lessons I so desperately need," and encourages viewers to contribute just 50 cents a day toward that training.


Harold Hazelton, Genealogist, 87
Harold Hazelton, an advertising writer and genealogist, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 87 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Deni Lamont, Former Dancer, 59; Longtime Soloist With City Ballet
Deni Lamont, a member of the New York City Ballet's artistic staff who formerly danced with that company and the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 59 years old.
He died of lung cancer, a spokesman for the New York City Ballet said.


Senate Bill On Cable TV Is Delayed
A Senate bill that would let local goverments regulate prices for basic cable television service, a measure that had been expected to reach a vote as early as Wednesday, has been delayed and may not come up before Congress adjourns later this month.
Although Senate aides insisted today that the legislation was not dead, the delay was an unexpected setback and raised new doubts about the bill's ultimate prospects.
As recently as last Thursday, one of the bill's principal sponsors, Senator Daniel K. Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii, announced that a raft of interest groups and labor unions supported the legislation, and he predicted that the measure would come up on Wednesday.
Continued Resistance
But the measure continues to face significant opposition, including resistance from the movie industry's powerful lobby, headed by Jack Valenti, which is fighting an obscure provision added to the bill.


Bridge
The gods of the game had a nasty surprise in store for the South players on the diagramed deal from the Ogust-Schenken event, which was played in Manhattan on Saturday.
As dealers, they found themselves with an attractive collection, including two aces and two kings, that qualified at some tables for a strong club opening.
And at the end of the day they found that their opponents were cold for a grand slam.
Several North-South pairs felt foolish in the post-mortem because their opponents had stopped at the five level, in hearts or clubs, and had been pushed to slam.
In the diagramed auction West made a very restrained pass when his partner competed to five hearts, but he came to life when North unwisely bid five spades.
That player should have reasoned that his defenseless hand made it dangerous to push further.
A good guideline favored by many experts is: "The five-level belongs to the opponents."


Interns See Washington as Key to Post-College Job
For an increasing number of college students, internships in Washington provide the crowbar to pry open access to shrinking job opportunities after graduation.
As a result, college-sponsored internship programs that give academic credit for jobs in Washington during the semester, at costs comparable to that of living and going to classes on campus, are growing in size and popularity.
The programs help students avoid the problem of the cost of living in Washington while working for an intern's meager salary that in the past barred many students from being able to make acquaintances and get practical job experience during summer vacations, let alone during an academic term.


CHRONICLE
The Massachusetts Society of Washington gave a lifetime achievement award yesterday to one of its all-time favorite members, THOMAS P. O'NEILL JR., the former Speaker of the House of Representatives, who took advantage of the occasion to tell his friends that he is living proof that cancer can be conquered.
Looking chipper, Mr.
O'Neill said he is happily approaching his 79th birthday and is well, thanks to four operations for cancer, including a colostomy.
He urged everyone to have examinations to detect cancers early.


Wine Talk
The weekend magazine of the newspaper Le Figaro last week asked three prominent French sommeliers to put together three basic wine cellars: one at 5,000 francs, one at 10,000 and one at 15,000, or roughly $890, $1,780 and $2,680.
The three experts picked for the job were Jean-Claude Jambon, sommelier at Restaurant Faugeron in Paris; Jean-Luc Pouteau, a consultant who previously worked at several prestigious Paris restaurants, and Didier Bordas, who works at Caves Taillevent, the retail shop of Jean-Claude Vrinat of Restaurant Taillevent.


File Used to Deport Jews Is Found by French
A prominent hunter of Nazis announced today that after more than 40 years of looking, researchers had found a comprehensive file of the names of 150,000 Parisian Jews that the French police compiled during World War II and used to round up tens of thousands of Jews.
The Nazi-hunter, Serge Klarsfeld, said the files, which were missing since 1944, were discovered in the archives of the Ministry of Veterans Affairs.


Editorial Notebook; Not a Yawn: Real Help
Technical assistance: that's what President Bush and Western allies typically offer when Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union plead for help.
To most Americans, technical assistance is a yawner, about as enthralling as double-entry bookkeeping.
But as applied by Dan Arbess, who advises the Czechoslovak Government, and Peter Derby, who advises the Russian government, and dozens of other Western lawyers, accountants and investment bankers, technical assistance is economic sustenance, not pabulum.


Anderson Getting an Education
"Doesn't look like such a bad pick now, does it?" a beaming Joe Taub, one of the seven owners of the Nets, said in the corridor between the two lockerrooms last night at Madison Square Garden.
It wasn't as if a poll had been taken with the results running against the Nets' first-round selection of Kenny Anderson, as much as people wondered when they were going pay him enough money to do what did last night in the fourth quarter.
Which demonstrates why Taub made the right call when he stepped in last spring and cast an owner's vote for Anderson over Billy Owens in the National Basketball Association college draft.


Occidental to Buy Notes
The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said yesterday that it would redeem on Dec. 16 its outstanding $490 million of 8.95 percent subordinated notes due April 15, 1994, at a price of par plus accrued interest from Oct. 15, 1991.


Political Wing of I.R.A. Is Barred From Dublin Municipal Building
In a move that appeared to reflect growing public hostility to the outlawed Irish Rebublican Army, the Dublin City Council voted Monday night to prohibit the I.R.A.'s political counterpart, the Sinn Fein party, from holding its annual convention in a municipally owned building.
The overwhelming vote to ban Sinn Fein from the public rooms of the Mansion House, which is also the residence of the Lord Mayor, also reflected the ambivalence of the country toward the I.R.A. and Sinn Fein.
The party is legal in both the Irish Republic and the British province of Northern Ireland.
But its representatives are prohibited from making statements on radio and television in both countries, provoking debate on whether this is unnecessary and undemocratic censorship.


Board Opposing a Drug Center in TriBeCa
Community Board 1 voted last night to oppose a drug rehabilitation center in TriBeCa unless the sponsoring agency agrees to several concessions, but officials expressed optimism about settling their differences.
The agency, Project Return, wants to open the center at 107-113 Franklin Street, but residents have expressed fear about a rise in crime.


Business and Labor Call for Health Tax
A coalition of big businesses and labor unions proposed today to guarantee access to health care for all Americans by requiring employers either to provide health insurance or to pay a new Federal tax that would finance coverage for the uninsured.
The proposal adds to the growing debate on alternative forms of national health coverage and increases political pressure on the Bush Administration to come up with its own proposal to assist the 34 million Americans who have no health insurance.


Market Place; Pawnshops Shed Their Dingy Image
With unemployment up and bank credit tight, more Americans are having difficulty getting loans.
Consider then what Wall Street analysts are calling a superb bet on hard times: investing in stockholder-owned pawnshops.
Although pawnshop customers have traditionally been hourly workers whose low wages disqualified them from bank loans, more middle-income consumers, facing layoffs or salary cuts, are turning to them.


We Need a National Health Plan for Everyone; Physician Proposal
To the Editor:
Contrary to "A Plausible Revolution in Health" (editorial, Oct. 29), managed-care plans are hardly cost-effective.
According to a survey by A. Foster Higgins &amp; Company, a leading employee benefits consulting firm, the costs of health maintenance organizations, or H.M.O.'s, increased by 15.7 percent in 1990 -- hardly insignificant, though less than the 21.6 percent increase in indemnity plan costs for the same year.
Is the H.M.O. concept, confounded by your calling it "managed competition," the cure-all for a complicated issue?
I think not.


Skepticism on Cuomo Plan
Republican leaders and a Wall Street credit analyst criticized Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's multiyear budget plan while he defended it.
Page B1.


Citicorp Agrees To Sale of Unit
Citicorp has agreed to sell its Capital Markets Assurance Corporation unit to some of its managers and Elmrock Inc., an investment firm, for an undisclosed price, Elmrock said.
The unit provides insurance for issuers of asset-backed securities.


Computerland's Survival Strategy
Standing in front of a huge white board containing a scrawled list of his problems, William Tauscher, chairman of the Computerland Corporation, the nation's largest franchiser of personal computer stores, summed up the turmoil in his industry.
"In the retail business, someday soon somebody is going to sit down to eat, and somebody else is going to be lunch," he said.


In Japan, Bias Is an Obstacle Even for the Ethnic Japanese
When Japan opened its shores last year to a flood of immigrants from Brazil and Peru, few adjustment problems were expected.
After all, the newcomers were Japanese, or at least descendants of Japanese who had sought opportunities in South America earlier this century.
Now Japanese have discovered that while the immigrants may look familiar, they act like foreigners.
They talk more noisily than native-born Japanese do, and greet each other with laughter and embraces.
They have trouble with the language.
And they complain about their problems.
The Samba in Tokyo
"The people of Japan do not respect us," said Roberto Ishizuka, a 26-year-old former automobile worker in Sao Paulo who works six long days a week making car seats at a factory here in the region west of Tokyo.
"The Japanese treat us like some kind of an inferior race."
In Japan these days, Portuguese-language radio programs and newspapers have multiplied, offering news and music from Brazil and advice on problems in Japan.
There was even a recent Brazilian street festival flavored with samba and salsa in Tokyo.
At the Tia Maria restaurant here, a couple of dozen Brazilians of Japanese descent were enjoying steaming bowls of feijoada, drinking Brazilian beer and reading newspapers in Portuguese.
A sign on the wall warned people to disperse in the late evenings, as requested by the police.
Despite sometimes back-breaking work in foundries, factories and construction sites, life on the whole has been good for the newcomers, who can make $2,000 a month and send half of it home.
Often they live in company-owned dormitories and are bused to their 14-hour-a-day jobs.
But the immigrants say they suffer discrimination in stores and restaurants, citing a story of one department store near here that once had a loudspeaker announcement that a group of them had entered and the clerks should be on guard.
Another major problem, workers and Government officials say, is that employers usually pay no health or welfare benefits, leaving workers helpless when injured by molten metal or a sharp blade on the job.
Unscrupulous recruiting agents siphon off their wages, they say, and make sweeping promises about jobs that prove false.
"The people over here think Brazilians are living in Brazil like wild Indians," said Miyako Clemente, who works at an auto-parts company.
"Sometimes I can feel my roots here, and I want to learn and write Japanese. But sometimes it makes me desperate, and I feel like I want to get out."  Immigrants Total 150,000
In a turbulent world where millions flee oppression and starvation and migrate to other countries, the 150,000 people of Japanese descent looking for work in their ancestral land may seem like a trickle.
But it marks a break with decades of Japanese refusal to let in unskilled foreigners.
Not that the need has not been great.
Employers universally complain that younger Japanese in a newly affluent society no longer want to do dirty, difficult or dangerous work, and factories, restaurants and shops often seem desperate to fill jobs.
In recent years, many of those jobs have gone to Pakistanis, Bangladeshis, Thais and other Asians who come to Japan on tourist visas and remain illegally while the immigration authorities look the other way.
Estimates are that more than 100,000 illegal Asian immigrants work in Japan.
But Parliament, worried that the country might become like France or Germany, flooded by foreigners with customs looked on as strange by the native-born majority, enacted tough new curbs on immigration of unskilled people two years ago, and the police began expelling the Asians.
Law Changed for Descendants
Then Japan seemed to discover another pool of workers, descendants of its own people.
Last year laws were changed to allow in any foreigner with parents or grandparents in Japan, and the number of workers fleeing the troubled economies of Brazil and Peru rose sharply.
Critics say those policies reflect the latent racism of Japan, which they accuse of turning its back on millions of people desperate for work on their own continent.
"Japan feels it has to do something about its labor shortage," said Kyoko Yotsuya, a volunteer with the Seirei Social Welfare Community, a Christian group here.
"But they're afraid that if they open the doors to anyone, there'll be chaos. So they only want certain kinds of people."
The reactions of native-born Japanese to the Brazilians seem to involve class considerations as much as racial ones.
Americans of Japanese descent, for instance, say they are not looked down on, perhaps because most of them are not here to do factory work.
Dress and Act Differently
The Brazilians, when they arrive and often long afterward, usually speak no Japanese.
And they say the native Japanese can often tell they are Brazilians just from the way they dress or act, even before they open their mouths.
Indeed, anyone living in Japan is so aware of the polite and aloof way that Japanese deal with each other in public that it was often startling to see people in Hamamatsu embracing each other noisily in public, until one realized that they were Brazilian and not Japanese.
The first Japanese emigrated to Latin America in the first decade of this century, finding work at coffee and cotton plantations.
Later waves worked in factories and raised children who achieved success and prominence, like President Alberto Fujimori of Peru.
But the last couple of years have been troubled ones for the economies of Latin America, and now a large percentage of Japanese descendants, the overwhelming majority from Brazil, have come here for work.
When they get into trouble, it is the Brazilian Embassy, not the Japanese authorities, that they turn to.  'Expected to Be Japanese'
"Somehow, Japan expected them to be Japanese," a Brazilian Embassy official in Tokyo said.
"It's been a kind of shock, not only for Japan but for our people. It's harder on them than it is on the rest of us foreigners because there are different expectations for them."
Japanese officials maintain that the immigrants were not brought in to fill jobs, per se, but only to visit their families.
"There is a demand for foreign workers, but we did not change the law for that," said Kei Ogiso, an official at the immigration bureau of the Justice Ministry.
The Government, meanwhile, has tried to accommodate the new immigrants, establishing a dozen centers in central Japan to assist foreign laborers and tell them of their rights.
Brazil plans to open two consulates in areas populated by the immigrants.
"We are developing necessary protections for them," said Kouhei Nagashima, assistant director of the consular and migration policy division at the Foreign Ministry.
"Of course, it is not yet sufficient. But the problem has grown so quickly, we cannot be expected to solve it right away."


With Acquisition of Agency, Girgenti Enters a New Area
UNDERSCORING the growing strength of agencies that specialize in health-care advertising, one of the largest such independent shops is acquiring an agency that specializes in consumer accounts.
Girgenti, Hughes, Butler &amp; McDowell Inc., which creates campaigns for health-care clients like 3M Pharmaceuticals and Sanofi-Winthrop, is buying Rubin Reid Noto &amp; Ehrenthal Inc., an agency at which food, fashion and cosmetics companies are the main clients.


Rangers Exchange Shaw For Oilers' Beukeboom
Ranger General Manager Neil Smith continued yesterday to reassemble the Edmonton Oilers in New York City, hoping that the Stanley Cup will follow its magnetic winners all the way to Madison Square Garden.
The Rangers acquired big, grinding defenseman Jeff Beukeboom for a steady veteran, David Shaw.
Beukeboom will join his former teammates Mark Messier, who recommended him, and Adam Graves.
Although Smith would not confirm it, the Beukeboom deal also reportedly released an undisclosed amount of cash to Edmonton that had been set aside since the Messier deal last month.


Corrections
An article in some copies yesterday about the resignation of the president of the University of Bridgeport in Connecticut misidentified her.
She is Janet D. Greenwood.
An article discussing her departure appears today on page B5.


Integrated Resources Agrees to Be Acquired
Integrated Resources Inc., a financial services company that collapsed under junk-bond debt, said yesterday that it had tentatively agreed to be sold to the Bankers Trust New York Corporation for $565 million.
The bankruptcy court deal is in negotiations, and other parties could make a better offer.
But if concluded, it would end nearly two years of efforts to rescue Integrated.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Food Notes
Food for a Week, to Send
The Extended Family company in Hudson, N.Y., will ship a week's worth of complete meals anywhere in the continental United States.
The company was started by Gretchen Cryer, the actress, after she began shipping homemade food to her parents in Indiana when they were too ill to cook for themselves.


Overseas Buying Sends Prices Up
A wave of overseas buying helped to push up prices of Treasury securities yesterday.
But for the most part, domestic investors remained on the sidelines.
Traders emphasized that virtually all of the price gain, amounting to nearly a point for some longer-dated issues, was achieved during overnight trading in Asian and, later, European money markets.


The 70's (Stayin' Alive) Won't Die (Stayin' Alive)
SICK of 60's nostalgia? Find peace signs and ponytails passe? Wish the Grateful Dead
were
dead?
Perhaps then you will appreciate the next, and the most improbable, pop culture comeback: The 70's, the disco decade!
Perhaps not.
"It is 'Saturday Night Fever' all over again," said Andy Griggs, who works at the Roxy nightclub in the Chelsea section of Manhattan, which on Friday nights renames itself Disco Inferno.


Minority-Scholarship Ruling Is Due
After spending much of this year promoting the Bush Administration's education agenda at elementary schools across the nation, Education Secretary Lamar Alexander will make two rulings on higher education later this month that are expected to affect minority students and faculty for decades to come.
He will make a decision on the issue of whether race-specific scholarships are legal.
And, after getting an advisory panel's recommendation on whether a regional accrediting association should use "cultural diversity" as a standard for accrediting colleges and universities, he will make a ruling based on that recommendation.


Software Case Denials
To the Editor:
Elliot L. Richardson, author of "A High-Tech Watergate" (Op-Ed, Oct. 21), has apparently pursued without success in the courts claims against the Federal Government on behalf of his client Inslaw Inc., a computer software company.


Raymond L. Falls Jr., Senior Counsel, 62
Raymond L. Falls Jr., a senior counsel at the Manhattan law firm of Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel, died on Sunday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of his death was not known, said a partner in the firm, Thomas F. Curnin.
He said Mr.
Falls had been in the hospital only briefly after returning from a trip to Asia.


For Anyone but Johnson, a Daunting Pile of Requests for Help
Bombarded by pleas from AIDS organizations around the nation, Magic Johnson has formed an influential advisory committee to help him figure out how best to be America's ambassasador in the fight against the deadly disease.
While Mr.
Johnson vacations in Hawaii, the committee is educating itself about AIDS, devising a game plan for the former basketball star, digging out from under the nearly 1,000 requests for help that have been received in less than a week and bracing for thousands more to come.


William C. Kroeger, Compensation Expert, 56
William C. Kroeger, a private research analyst and vice chairman of the state Workers' Compensation Board, died on Friday.
He was 56 years old and lived in Manhattan.
His family said he had suffered a heart attack on a street near his home.


Mets' Harazin Hopes to Set Up Meeting With Bonilla
The Mets opened their Rolodex, turned through the first letter of the alphabet and left it open at the following entry: Bonilla, Bobby.
The Mets have the free agent's number.
What remains now is the question of whether they are prepared to meet his number.
General Manager Al Harazin, asserting that the Mets were "looking for offense," officially got in touch with Bonilla's representatives yesterday and expressed a desire to meet with the former star for the Pittsburgh Pirates.


Cuomo Comes To Defense Of Fiscal Plan
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, saying he was still weighing whether the state's budget troubles should pre-empt a Presidential campaign, today strongly defended a plan to solve New York State's recurring budget problems through an unusual multiyear financial plan.
Mr.
Cuomo, a Democrat, called the plan "an intelligent" and "extremely responsible approach."
But the State Comptroller and the State Senate majority leader -- both Republicans -- joined a leading Wall Street credit analyst in raising warning flags about the plan.
They were particularly concerned that the plan might require the state to continue its three-year history of borrowing to eliminate an end-of-the-year deficit.


BUSH STRIKES BACK AT 'TIRED LIBERALS'
The liberals are back, at least as far as George Bush is concerned.
Still battling troublesome public opinion polls and groping for ways to strike back at the Democrats, the President took up a weapon yesterday that had proved extremely potent in his 1988 campaign: painting himself as the guardian of the political center and the Democrats as far-out liberals.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-13 SOVIET AID PLAN FALTERS
A plan to move $1 billion from the Pentagon budget to aid the Soviet Union seemed all but dead, the victim of Congressional miscalculation and a public perception that foreign aid is being put ahead of domestic problems.
Page A1 Gorbachev says Bush called him to warn of a coup.
A12 GIVE US YOUR MEEK . . .
Ethnic Japanese from South America immigrating back into their homeland are getting a mixed reception.
They look like Japanese, but make noise in public.
And they complain of discrimination.
A1 NEW LATIN ECONOMICS
After a decade of no growth, crippling inflation and rising debt, Latin American governments are pushing for a new economic discipline.
A1 HOPE: AN UNFAMILIAR SENSATION
With the return to Cambodia tomorrow of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Phnom Penh, a once-gentle city that in recent years has known only oppression and war, is considering the possibility that peace has arrived and that it might last.
A3 A PRESCRIPTION FOR ZAIRE
There is broad agreement in Congress and the Administration that Zaire needs a transitional government if it is to be saved from further violence and economic ruin.
A6 THE IMPRISONED CITY
The 42-day siege of Dubrovnik intensified as Yugoslav Army artillery barrages reportedly killed people taking refuge in hotel basements and trapped European Community observers and journalists.
A12 Indonesian troops reportedly kill or hurt 100 in East Timor.
A11 As Hong Kong prepares for 1997, a sense democracy is fading.
A10 A file used to deport Jews is found in France.
A5 An anti-corruption newspaper in Zambia survives five months.
A7 U.S. prepared to announce a Mideast round on regional issues.
A13 NATIONAL A14-22 PROGRESS ON JOBLESS BILL
The Administration and lawmakers of both parties moved toward accord on legislation that would provide up to 20 weeks of extended unemployment benefits for people out of work at least half a year.
A1 BUSH ATTACKS AGAIN
The President took up a weapon that proved extremely potent in his 1988 campaign: painting himself as the guardian of the political center and the Democrats as liberals.
A20 The Democratic Presidential candidates assailed the President.
A20 HEARINGS ON BARR BEGIN
At the outset of his confirmation hearings, the Attorney General-designate said that the Justice Department's investigation of B.C.C.I. had been "fairly good" but that he had ordered an internal review to determine whether prosecutors had made any mistakes.
A14 WHAT BUSINESS THINKS OF DUKE
Among Louisiana business people, there is something approaching panic about what a victory by David Duke in the governor's race could do to the state's economy.
A20 An aide quit Duke's campaign, calling him an insincere Christian.
A20 CREDIT-CARD RATES SLIPPING
Banks are reducing the interest rates on credit cards for some customrs.
But the reduction isn't advertised, and so is occurring quietly.
A1 JOHNSON'S SCREENING COMMITTEE
Besieged by pleas from numerous organizations, Magic Johnson has formed a committee of prominent advisers to help him figure out how best to be an AIDS spokesman.
A14 TABLEWARE AS A HEALTH RISK
California took legal action that could force a drastic reduction in the amount of lead in plates, bowls, cups, mugs and other everyday tableware.
A18 HEART TREATMENT AND THE SEXES
A study found that men were twice as likely as women to get new life-saving treatments for heart attacks.
A18 Doctors and patients testified on breast implants.
A18 Robert M. Gates was sworn in as the nation's intelligence chief.
A16 William Smith's lawyers reported a break-in at the Kennedy estate.
A14 Education Page A23 U.S. rulings on minority students and faculty members expected.
Few parents are aware of national education goals, a survey found.
METROPOLITAN Digest, B1 DEATH, TAXES AND . . .
The Transit Authority set the stage for an inevitable increase in bus and subway fares in New York City in January, but how big of an increase is being haggled over.
A new fare of $1.40 was recommended.
A1 DOCTORS STRIKE AT HOSPITAL
More than 300 senior doctors walked picket lines at the Woodhull hospital in Brooklyn yesterday in what doctors and administrators say is the first strike by staff doctors anywhere in the country.
A1 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 The Living Section C1-14 A new image for pork.
C1  Labels (or foods) will change.
C1  Comeback for the disco decade.
C1  Metropolitan Diary C2  60-Minute Gourmet C2  Eating Well C3  De Gustibus C10  Wine Talk C12  A good vintage in New York.
C14 Health Pages C1, C15  Between doctor and patient, a conversation gap.
C1  Personal Health: A day to quit smoking.
C15 Arts/Entertainment C16-25  At Christie's, a test for the contemporary-art market.
C17  Film: "Cape Fear." C17  "Beauty and the Beast." C17  Word and Image: Book Notes C22  "The Civil War in the American West." C23  "48 Hours" on surrogate parenthood.
C24 Obituaries A21  Howard Haycraft, publishing executive and scholar of mysteries Deni Lamont, ex-City Ballet soloist Sports B6-12  Baseball: Mets seek Bonilla.
B7  Yankees interested in Buechele.
B8  Basketball: Knicks edge Nets.B7  Lakers start to adjust.
B9  Column: Araton on Magic Johnson.
B71  Football: Leahy tells chilling tale.
B10  Giants always on the go.
B10  Hockey: Rangers get Beukeboom for Shaw.
B11  Yachting: America's Cup enthusiasm becalms.
B12 Editorials/Op-Ed  Editorials A24  Son of Kemp-Roth.
Was this prisoner silenced?
Foul play in Kenya.
Michael M. Weinstein: Aid Letters A24  Anna Quindlen: (Same old) new Duke.
A25  Leslie H. Gelb: Breaking China apart.
A25  Gerald L. Posner: The Bormann file.
A25  Frank R. Lautenberg, Tim Wirth: Abortion rights and the military.
A25


Howard Haycraft Is Dead at 86; A Publisher and Mystery Scholar
Howard Haycraft, a publishing executive, editor and author of a classic history of the mystery novel, died yesterday in Hightstown, N.J.
He was 86 years old and lived in Hightstown.
Although he devoted his working life to the H. W. Wilson Company, publishers of library reference books, Mr.
Haycraft indulged a passion for detective fiction that resulted in "Murder for Pleasure," published in 1941 and still in print.
"At time of publication it was the most important single work of fiction-mystery scholarship ever produced," Otto Penzler, the owner of the Mysterious Bookshop in Manhattan, said yesterday.


Embattled Florio Says He'll Seek Guidance From the Voters
Conceding "maybe I've been wrong; maybe there's something I'm missing" and urging "a rethinking of fundamentals," Gov.
Jim Florio said today that he would barnstorm New Jersey listening to the voters in an effort to revive the state Democratic Party and restore his own popularity.
Among the issues he will discuss with the public, Mr.
Florio said, is taxation.
In last week's elections, the Democrats lost control of both houses of the Legislature for the first time in 20 years as the Republicans gained veto-proof majorities in the Senate and the General Assembly.
The Governor's unpopularity and the $2.8 billion tax package he pushed through the Legislature 16 months ago have been blamed for his party's defeat.


And This Little Piggy Is Now on the Menu
STYLISH foods are supposed to have weird and unpronounceable names, like cherimoya, a custardy fruit from South America, or offer a new and exciting eating experience, like pizza with goat cheese.
But
pork
?
Pork, a prosaic food if there ever was one, is finally getting some respect.
According to several surveys, pork in all its guises, from spareribs to roast loin with five-chili chutney, is one of the most rapidly growing items on restaurant menus.
Sales of pork have grown by 20 percent, from $25 billion to $30 billion, since the pork industry started a costly and intensive public relations campaign five years ago, emphasizing pork's leanness for consumers who are increasingly concerned about health.


Re-creating a Four-Alarm Chili That Still Lingers in Memory
ONE-DISH meals are often our favorite way of eating at home, and when cold weather comes, I long for chili.
Many years ago, a friend sent me a chili recipe that had been given her by the warden of San Quentin State Prison in California.
It was hot, very hot, but my family liked it as much as I did.
Even though I lost the recipe long ago, the taste of that chili remains in my memory, and I think this recipe is close to the one I remember.
My wife and I always serve our chili with boiled long-grain white rice and garnish it with shredded sharp Cheddar cheese and chopped red or white onion.
In addition, I serve it with hot corn tortillas or dry tacos.
Although "real" Texas chili doesn't accommodate beans, we make ours with red kidney beans or another variety of dried beans.
We like it better that way, and the beans extend the dish greatly, make it healthier, more of a complete meal, and more economical, because the quantity of meat can be greatly reduced.


Gorbachev Says Bush Called Him To Give Early Warning of a Coup
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that President Bush warned him personally of an impending coup sometime before the August putsch by hard-liners, and that he had told the American President not to worry.
Mr.
Gorbachev disclosed the warning at a news conference dedicated to the Soviet release of his short book about the coup, but he revealed neither when Mr.
Bush called him nor any other details of the exchange.


The Pop Life
An English Singer
The English soul singer Lisa Stansfield has just released her second album, "Real Love" (Arista), and, like most pop music, it seems obsessed with love.
One song, "Make Love to Ya," is about, well, just that.
Another, "A Little More Love," wonders what went wrong in a relationship.
So what's the story with all this love?


Was This Prisoner Silenced?
Just before the 1988 Presidential election a Federal prisoner named Brett Kimberlin sought out reporters with a charge that he had once sold marijuana to Dan Quayle.
That charge has never been substantiated, but what happened to Mr.
Kimberlin remains a serious matter.
On orders from Washington, he was slapped into solitary confinement at a Federal prison in Oklahoma and denied permission -- previously granted -- to meet with reporters.
Subsequently he sued for deprivation of rights.
In response, the Government argues that when he was first sent to "the hole" it was for his own safety, and that two other trips there were punishment for infractions of prison telephone rules.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 8
Nov. 1
Nov. 9
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
6.8
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.1
2.9
Gasoline stocks
200.2
204.3
218.6
Distillate stocks
133.5
135.6
135.8
Crude imports, daily
5.8
4.8
4.8
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.9
2.2
Crude stocks
346.5
342.9
345.4
Crude production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
81.5
82.2
82.0
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Review/Television; '48 Hours' in Examination Of Surrogate Motherhood
More tonight on the pleasures, pains and perplexities of surrogate motherhood.
As the "48 Hours" report at 10 o'clock on Channel 2 makes disturbingly clear, the law is still trying to catch up with the consequences of paying one woman to bear a child for another.


NEWSPAPER GAINS ZAMBIA'S RESPECT
In Zambia's anemic economy, books had been scarce for years and the state-run newspapers served up daily fare lauding inept leaders that many readers found preposterous.
The founders of a spirited newspaper sensed that there was an appetite for their forthright reporting, but in the atmosphere of a one-party African state there were baptismal jitters.
"We were waiting to see how long it would take for us to be locked up, but we've been here five months," said Jowie Mwiinga, a reporter, as he tapped on a computer, the first such modernity in a Zambian newspaper.


Lakers Slowly Adjust To Life Without Magic
By the end of practice today, the players began to allow themselves a small luxury.
They finally smiled.
It was a small step for the Los Angeles Lakers, who acknowledge that things will never really be the same without Magic Johnson.
But they are slowly adjusting.


Son of Kemp-Roth: Still Wrong
Alarmed by recession, Housing Secretary Jack Kemp has broken ranks with President Bush and proposed cutting taxes to prod the economy.
Coming from Mr.
Kemp, the idea is no surprise; he is, after all, a true believer.
He was a sponsor of the Kemp-Roth tax and budget reductions that slashed income tax rates 10 years ago.
What Washington did then was accumulate $2 trillion of debt, and mire itself in an endless budget quagmire.
Washington -- including Mr.
Kemp -- should have learned something indelible from the experience.
Tax cuts didn't solve economic problems then, and won't solve them now.


Metaphor Chief Hired By I.B.M.
David E. Liddle, the chief executive of Metaphor Computer Systems Inc., was considered a leading candidate to head the joint software venture between Apple Computer and I.B.M.
Yesterday, I.B.M. said he had instead been appointed I.B.M.'s vice president for new systems development, a new position.
The International Machines Corporation completed the acquisition of Metaphor last month.


Metropolitan Diary
IT was one of the final warm golden days of the season and our friend-about-town was lunching outside Good and Plenty on West 43d Street near Ninth Avenue.
Peering up from her pasta salad, she saw -- be still, my heart -- Al Pacino walking toward her.
The actor, looking very Armani, was accompanied by a friendly golden-haired dog whose leash was a nifty necktie.
The two joined a group of movie types at a nearby table.
A few minutes later, Mr.
Pacino excused himself and headed inside the restaurant.
After a few steps, he turned around and said, politely but firmly: "Sit! Wait! I'll be back." Dog or no dog, our friend insists that Mr.
Pacino was looking directly at her when he gave his command.


Prosecutor Faults Office On Sex Case At St. John's
The chief prosecutor of sex-crimes cases in Queens said yesterday that the District Attorney's office had botched the St.
John's University sexual-assault case.
Her remarks came after it was disclosed that she had been dismissed on Friday.
The prosecutor, Alice Vachss, attributed her dismissal to disagreements with her superiors over a variety of matters, including the prosecution of the St.
John's students who were charged with sodomizing a female student.
That case, in which all three defendants tried so far have been acquitted, was taken from the jurisdiction of Ms.
Vachss in its early stages.


EXECUTIVES
*
American Express Information Services Co., New York, named John M. Gaven executive vice president and chief operating officer of its health systems unit. *
Beneficial Corp., Wilmington, Del., a financial services holding company, named Thomas P. McGough to the new position of senior vice president-finance and treasurer.


Guard Agency at Mall Where Youth Was Shot Was Not Licensed by State
A security agency hired to patrol part of a South Bronx shopping plaza, where a 17-year-old man was fatally shot last week, is not registered with the state as required by law, a spokesman for the Secretary of State said yesterday.
The Nighthawks Protection Agency, which says it recruits former gang members and ex-convicts, is required, as are all private guard and detective agencies, to be licensed by the state.
Guards Investigated
"We have no record of them, so it would appear that they are operating outside the law," said William Brown, the spokesman.
Security agencies may not employ convicted felons, he said.


C.D.'s and Bank Funds Off
Yields on deposit accounts have plummeted to the lowest point in nearly a decade.
The declines follow the latest easing of interest rates by the Federal Reserve, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest-rate publication.
"There is no letup in the strong downward movement of rates," Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Bank Rate Monitor, said yesterday.
"Banks are catching up with last week's half-point cut in the prime rate, and today's lower rates at the Treasury auction are stimulating the sharp downturn."


In First Such Walkout, Doctors Strike in Brooklyn
More than 300 senior doctors began walking picket lines at the Woodhull hospital in Brooklyn yesterday morning in what doctors and administrators say is the first strike by staff doctors anywhere in the country.
At the heart of the walkout at the Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center, the second-busiest hospital in Brooklyn, are two issues that are at the center of health-care debates throughout the country: money and quality of care.


Dinkins, in South Africa, Proclaims Himself 'Finally Home'


Old-New-York Food, Drink and Memories (Don't Ask Why)
"I WAS born on East 114th. I never left. I never wanted to. I close the place, couple weeks in summer, but I don't leave. Ah, maybe up to Arthur Avenue. Walk around, do a little shopping. You got to get out of this place once in a while. This neighborhood is a disaster area."
Salvatore Medici, 74 years old and rather gruff, drank Scotch and soda from a wine glass.
He smoothed a splattered cook's apron over his yellow T-shirt.
His eyes wandered down the leg of his tattersall leisure pants to the dark, linoleum floor of Andy's Colonial Saloon, the bar-restaurant he owns on First Avenue near 116th Street in East Harlem.


Home Aide Arraigned in Killing Of a Stroke Victim in His Care
Victor Ponce, an 81-year-old stroke victim, lived alone in Washington Heights, relying on a home health aide to care for him.
Yesterday, the aide was arraigned on charges of killing Mr.
Ponce last month.
And in a twist out of an Agatha Christie mystery, the authorities said Mr.
Ponce was apparently frightened to death.


Dow Rises 11.85, Closing At 3,054.11
Stocks rose smartly in active trading yesterday, with a firm bond market underpinning gains in equities.
A number of indexes reached new record highs, and the Dow Jones industrial average rose 11.85 points, to 3,054.11.
The Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks, a measure of blue-chip activity, rose by 3.62, to a new high of 396.74, surpassing the old record of 396.64 set on Aug. 28.
Trading on the American Stock Exchange moved the index up by 1.13 points, to 392.37.


We Need a National Health Plan for Everyone; Rationing Treatment
To the Editor:
"Battle of Insurers vs. Therapists" (Business Day, Oct. 24) brings to light serious problems created by aggressive utilization reviewers in the care of psychiatric patients.


New York Vines Bear Good News
WAGNER VINEYARDS' 1991 Finger Lakes Niagara, a semidry white wine, was given all the aging it needed last week -- 10 minutes -- as it was moved from the bottling line to the winery's store.
This fruity confection will be a memory when the Benmarl Wine Company's '91 baco noir, a gutsy Hudson Valley red, fully evolves in, perhaps, a quarter of a century.


Book Notes
The Johnson Team
Just days after revealing that he had the AIDS virus and was retiring from professional basketball, Magic Johnson has decided to write his autobiography.
Mr.
Johnson will be collaborating with Roy S. Johnson Jr., with whom he wrote the book "Magic's Touch," an instructional guide to basketball published by Addison-Wesley, said Michael Carlisle, a literary agent.
The two have also collaborated on today's cover story in Sports Illustrated, where Roy Johnson is a senior editor.


Fading Democracy Vexes Hong Kong
As they prepare for hard-line Communist Chinese rule in six years, many people in this wealthy British colony are vexed that it is bucking the trend toward democracy sweeping much of the world.
Six polls over the last four years have shown that only 15 percent to 23 percent of Hong Kong residents want to be reunited with China, as is their fate in 1997.
And the elections and referendums held one after another in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union only remind people here of how they were not directly consulted when Britain and China decided early in the 1980's on the territory's future.


Businesses in Louisiana Fear Duke
Along with issues of race and religion, right and wrong, sin and redemption, the Louisiana gubernatorial race between Edwin W. Edwards and David Duke is increasingly focusing on something more mundane -- dollars and cents.
Among business people, particularly in New Orleans, which lives and dies on tourism, there is something approaching panic about what a victory by Mr.
Duke, a Republican State Representative who is also a former Ku Klux Klan leader, could mean for the state's sagging economy.


All Too Often, The Doctor Isn't Listening, Studies Show
WHAT would you think about someone who interrupted you within seconds whenever you started to talk or cut you off before you could say what was most on your mind, but nevertheless assumed she knew exactly what it was?
Would you want that person as a friend? How about as a doctor?


Dinkins, in South Africa, Says He's 'Finally Home'
To the buoyant greeting of a chorus of cleaning women and airport mechanics, Mayor David N. Dinkins landed on South African soil today, embraced his hero, Nelson Mandela, and proclaimed himself "finally home." He then set off to tour a black hospital and shantytown, where he passed out Mets caps and crayons to poor children.
Accompanied by his wife, Joyce, and more than three dozen business and civic leaders and city officials, the Mayor began his six-day trip with high emotion and pride.
While he received nothing like the blizzard of ticker-tape showered on Mr.
Mandela, the African National Congress leader, in New York last year, the white-minority Government allowed him a clapping, dancing greeting on the tarmac by A.N.C. officials and workers that American diplomats said was rare.


Mays Out for Season
Atlanta Hawks guard TRAVIS MAYS will miss the rest of the season after surgery yesterday to repair two ruptured tendons in his right ankle, the team announced. (AP)


Fox to Show Condom Ads
The Fox Broadcasting Company has become the first national broadcast television network to change its policies to accept commercials for condoms.
And one of the Big Three networks, CBS, said yesterday that it was reviewing its policies of refusing to accept such spots.
So far, commercial messages from condom makers have appeared only on local stations.


60-Minute Gourmet
HALIBUT, a delicious firm-fleshed white fish that lends itself to countless quick preparations, is one of the most bountiful species in the North Atlantic.
It is a cold-water fish that is rarely seen south of New York.
I have often found that cold-water fish have a cleaner, fresher flavor than warm-water varieties.
Halibut steaks are exceptionally well-suited to grilling because they can be cut thickly.
They also saute well, but because the flesh has relatively little oil, it is critical not to overcook.


Most Parents in Survey Say Education Goals Can't Be Met
Only one in four American parents is aware of the six national education goals set by President Bush and the nation's governors, according to a national survey released Monday.
In "Parental Involvement in Children's Education," the second annual survey done for the National Parent Teacher Association and the Chrysler Corporation, only 7 percent of the 792 parents surveyed could correctly recall even one of the national goals set in February 1990.
After being told what the goals are, most parents did not believe that the goals, with one exception, could be achieved by the target year 2000, the survey found.


CHRONICLE
It may just be a footnote to the changing climate between the republics of the Soviet Union and the United States, but this week two of them have signed contracts for legal representation by the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
According to THEODORE C. SORENSEN, a partner in the firm who was President Kennedy's special counsel, contracts were signed on Monday with the Republic of Byelorussia, "which has roughly the same size population, 10 million, as Ohio," and yesterday with Kirghizia, "which has four million people, the same as Minnesota."


A New Discipline in Economics Brings Change to Latin America
Suddenly, a look at the economic map of Latin America shows a startling change.
After a decade of no growth, crippling inflation, rising foreign debt, protectionism and bloated state payrolls, governments -- at least for now -- have found a new economic religion.
Balanced budgets are in, as is privatization, the buzzword for selling off government enterprises.
Negotiations to reduce foreign debt have been successful in some countries, especially Mexico, and are continuing in others.
Stabilization and discipline have become winning political slogans.
The free market, open economies and deregulation are now part of the vocabulary of taxi drivers and laborers.


G.M. Rating Under Review
Moody's Investors Service said yesterday that it might cut its quality ratings on $75 billion of long-term debt of the General Motors Corporation.
Moody's said it would review its ratings because the car maker's "relatively high operating cost structure will continue to weaken the company's competitive position, despite its aggressive schedule of new model introductions."


McDonnell Talks on a Sale
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation, which has been seeking an investment partner for its commercial aircraft business, said today that it was talking with an outsider about the potential sale of up to 40 percent of the business for as much as $2 billion.
Until the announcement was made, the terms of any potential deal had not been known.
But earlier in the day, an analyst at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company upgraded the company's stock to a "buy," predicting a deal with an Asian entity would occur.


USAir Sets Off a Round of Discount Fares
USAir yesterday announced discounts of 10 to 25 percent off most existing excursion fares for travel to almost all its destinations between Jan. 7 and March 31 -- usually the period of least air travel.
American, United and Continental Airlines said they would match USAir, while Delta Air Lines said it is likely to do so today.
While the nonrefundable fares will not necessarily result in the lowest fares offered on each route during the last 12 months, during which Eastern Airlines cut fares extensively in a futile attempt to avoid liquidation, USAir's announcement comes when most carriers have been trying to raise fares -- or at least hold the line -- to stanch the industry's continuing losses.


Transit Agency Asks $1.40 Fare Or a Rise in Subway and Bus Aid
The New York City Transit Authority set the stage yesterday for what officials say is an inevitable increase in the subway and bus fare in January, and then began haggling with legislative leaders over how much the fare would go up.
The authority formally recommended a rise of 25 cents, to $1.40, but at the same time said the increase could be smaller if the state agreed to provide additional subsidies.


BRIEFS
*
Alza Corp., Palo Alto, Calif., a pharmaceutical research concern, expects to take a $100 million charge against fourth-quarter earnings as a result of acquiring all outstanding shares of Bio-Electro Systems Inc. *
Brenna Resources Ltd., Hayward, Calif., a mining company, has set up a 50-50 joint venture with the republic of Uzbekistan in the Soviet Union for gold mining in Uzbekistan.


Travelers Is Selling Dillon Firm
The Travelers Corporation agreed yesterday to sell Dillon, Read &amp; Company to a joint venture between the management of the old-line Wall Street investment house and Barings P.L.C., the venerable British merchant bank.
With a value at $122 million, the deal unites two of the oldest financial firms in the world and marks the third time in 10 years that ownership of Dillon, Read has changed hands.


Personal Health
EVERY year 1.3 million Americans join the ranks of former smokers, who now number more than 36 million.
A significant share started their new lives as nonsmokers on a particularly meaningful date, like a birthday, New Year's Day or the day a friend died of a smoking-related disease.
Another such date will soon be here: Nov. 21, the day chosen by American Cancer Society for the Great American Smokeout.
Like Alcoholics Anonymous, which urges sobriety one day at a time, the society asks smokers to quit for just 24 hours.
If they get through the first day, they are urged to continue until "one day at a time" becomes forever.


Yankees Are Interested in Buechele
If Gene Michael, the Yankees' general manager, utters the magic numbers 4 and 13, he could make the team's well-documented third-base problems disappear.
Steve Buechele's agent, Alan Meersand, said yesterday that he was seeking a four-year, $13 million contract for the 30-year-old third baseman, the best player available at the position the Yankees desperately need to improve.
Michael spoke with Meersand on Monday to express interest in Buechele, but the general manager declined to say if he was prepared to whisper those numbers in Meersand's ear.


Quotation of the Day
"People say that I've come a long way from home, and it's true I have come a long way, but today I am finally home." MAYOR DAVID N. DINKINS, arriving in South Africa.  [ B3:1. ]


Bonn Plans Tax on Interest
The German Government outlined a proposal today to tax income from interest-bearing investments.
The plan is a modified reprise of a controversial withholding tax on interest income imposed and repealed in 1989.
That tax caused huge capital flight and severely weakened the mark against the dollar.


Charity Comes Too Close to Home
Every day, as he cruises Manhattan in his taxicab, Samuel Cohen sees the toll homelessness exacts on the indigent, addicted and infirm.
He solemnly nods and says the city should help those souls find their way into a home.
But standing in his driveway and glancing down the block at an empty lot where the city has proposed building a shelter for homeless men, he chafes at that notion of charity so close to home.
He worries that a shelter would bring noise, crime and outcasts to his middle-class neighborhood in the Flatlands section of Brooklyn, and drive away people who settled in these boxy brick homes after fleeing shakier areas elsewhere.


Conceding Delay at Justice, Nominee Defends Department on B.C.C.I. Case
William P. Barr, President Bush's nominee to be Attorney General, said at the outset of his confirmation hearings today that the Justice Department's record in pursuing the heavily criticized investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International was "fairly good." But he said he had ordered an internal review to determine whether prosecutors had made any mistakes.
Mr.
Barr acknowledged that the investigation into the bank had progressed slowly with "very little coordination" until this summer, when senior officials took over the inquiry.
But in an impassioned defense of the department, he denied that prosecutors had dragged their feet or were influenced by outsiders trying to slow down the investigation.


Congress Will Try Again To Revamp Banking Laws
Legislation that would overhaul the nation's banking system and eliminate decades-old barriers to interstate banking is expected to be introduced as early as Wednesday in both the Senate and the House of Representatives, members of both chambers said today.
House leaders said they would permit key amendments to broaden the measure that was approved by the House Banking Committee last week.
The committee legislation would provide billions of dollars in new taxpayer funds to the ailing bank deposit insurance fund, give regulators new authority to close banks earlier, and require auditors to report to officials when their bank clients are found to have committed wrongdoing.


CHRONICLE
The Tournament of Roses parade in Pasadena, Calif., promises to be no bed of roses this New Year's Day, if ethnic tensions provoked by the appointment of a descendant of Christopher Columbus as grand marshal persist.
When it was announced that CRISTOBAL COLON, a 20th-generation descendant, would lead the parade, American Indians said his selection was an insult because Columbus's arrival in the Americas had resulted in genocide.


Advertising Council Marks Its 50th Year
The Advertising Council will celebrate its golden anniversary tonight, 50 years after the advertising executive James Webb Young urged a conference of advertisers and agencies to make advertising "the servant of . . . all the forces of righteousness."
Mr.
Young's speech led to the formation of the War Advertising Council, which after World War II became the Advertising Council.
For the last five decades, it has coordinated public service campaigns on subjects as diverse as preventing forest fires to encouraging the use of seat belts to urging "Don't be a litter bug."


U.S. Calls Miller a Con Man; His Lawyer Says He's Political Prey
Mel Miller, the Speaker of the New York State Assembly, and his longtime law partner, Jay Adolf, "lined their own pockets at the expense of their own clients," a Federal prosecutor charged in an opening statement yesterday.
He said the two carried out a series of frauds involving investments in cooperative apartments.
In sharp contrast, the lawyers for Mr.
Miller and Mr.
Adolf told the jury that it was the prosecution's chief witness, Avi Cohen, who committed all the wrongdoing in the case and then lied about the two defendants to get immunity for himself.


Reviews/Television; Different Show, Same Roseanne
Roseanne Arnold, television's reigning female star on the weekly charts, is clearly determined to succeed in the movies.
Starring opposite Meryl Streep, she took an inglorious flop in "She-Devil." (She was still billed as Roseanne Barr at the time.) Now, at 9 tonight on ABC, she can be seen in "Backfield in Motion," her first made-for-television movie.
This is what used to be called a vehicle, carefully tailored to the star's already established public persona.
It's silly, obvious and just outrageous enough not to disappoint Roseanne Arnold's more fervent fans.
Mrs.
Arnold plays Nancy Seavers, recently widowed and moving to suburban Deerview from Los Angeles with her teen-age son, Tim (Johnny Galecki).
"Hey," says Tim, sulking about the new neighborhood, "I've seen 'Hee Haw.' " "And now," says Mom with a wicked smile, "you're gonna live it." Tim finds his new neighbors weird, especially the contingent of housewives greeting them with tuna casseroles.
Nancy has to agree: "They do have that certain game-show-contestant glow about them."


Foreign Affairs; Breaking China Apart
In an otherwise uneventful Foreign Affairs quarterly article by Secretary of State Baker, there is a tantalizing sentence about China.
Some will call it simply an observation.
But according to key Bush Administration officials, it is an observation that could develop into the ultimate sanction -- a threat to the territorial integrity of the Middle Kingdom -- if Beijing leaders continue to defy new standards of world behavior on arms sales and human rights.
Mr.
Baker will not play, or even hint at, this "card" in China later this week.
It would be too explosive.
But Beijing's rulers know the card is now in the deck, waiting for their next moves on a host of legitimate American grievances.


Missouri's Rejection of Education Plan Is Seen as Bad Omen
Missouri voters used last week's elections to make a decisive statement about education spending, rejecting a $385 million package that would have been financed by higher taxes.
But in the only other state with an education measure on the ballot, Texans approved a $300 million increase for a college loan program.
Education analysts saw the Missouri vote as a significant blow to the national movement to improve school programs by raising more money.
Voter backlash toward higher taxes finally materialized in the voting in Missouri, analysts said, after two recent efforts to cut spending failed.
Citizen groups in Nebraska last year and in Oklahoma last month got measures on the ballot to repeal expensive state education plans, but both measures lost.


Sentiment Grows in Washington for Shift in U.S. Zaire Policy
In Congress and the Bush Administration there is now broad agreement that the United States must press for the installation of a transitional government in Zaire if the country is to be saved from further violence and economic ruin.
There is also a consensus that the interim Government should be led by a newly unified political opposition.
Where Congress and the Administration differ is over the immediate fate of President Mobutu Sese Seko, Zaire's ruler for 26 years.
Both sides agree, however, that his Government has lost all legitimacy and is out of step with the growth of democracy throughout Africa.


Casey Gets a Raise
He plays for a team that hasn't had a winning season in five years, but he is as good a goaltender as they've got and the Minnesota North Stars decided they wanted to keep him around a while -- especially after he took them to the Stanley Cup finals last spring.
So they offered JON CASEY a four-year contract worth $3.8 million and Casey said that will do.


Pile of Debris, Spouting Flames, Annoys Bridgeport Residents
Here in this financially uncertain city's hardscrabble East End, an illegal pile of construction debris looms 45 feet or so above the streets -- higher than any of the nearby houses.
Sometimes the jumble of shattered siding, torn plastic sheets, fragmented two-by-fours and crumbled asphalt bursts spontaneously into flames, and firefighters rush to put them out, leaving a wet, mosquito-breeding mass in their wake.
That the pile, 50,000 cubic yards of waste that is one of Connecticut's most blatant environmental hazards, sits in one of Fairfield County's poorest neighborhoods is no accident, residents there say.
And they are not convinced that they are hearing the truth when the city and state say that lack of money and policy constraints prevent them from cleaning up the site, which is home to large rats and produces an odor so offensive that people keep their windows closed, even on the hottest summer days.


O'Rourke Is Nominated For a Federal Judgeship
President Bush has nominated the Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, for a Federal judgeship, setting off a fierce battle for political control of the county.
The nomination, expected for more than a year, was made formal when President Bush telephoned Mr.
O'Rourke on Monday.
It stirred a round of political scurrying and speculation here because it came against the backdrop of an intensifying push for power by Democrats in a county that has been dominated by Republicans for decades.
Democrats for the first time captured numerical control of the county legislature -- the Board of Legislators -- in last week's election and won many local offices.


Study Finds Heart Treatment Differs for Men and Women
Men are twice as likely as women to receive newer life-saving treatments for heart attacks, a study that was reported here today has found.
The study involved nearly 5,000 men and women treated for heart attacks in 19 hospitals in the Seattle area since 1988.
It was reported at a meeting of the American Heart Association.


Spurs Claim Buechler
The San Antonio Spurs have claimed second-year forward JUD BUECHLER off waivers.
Buechler, 6-foot-7-inch and 220 pounds, averaged 3.1 pounts, 1.9 rebounds and 11.6 minutes a game with the Nets last season, but was released last Friday in order to make room for KENNY ANDERSON.
Terms of his contract were not revealed. (AP)


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.87
4.50
7.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.63
4.63
7.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.70
4.69
7.02
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.01
7.03
8.25
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.82
7.86
8.52
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.90
9.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.79
6.81
7.54
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


With Compassion, a Zealot Hunts for Cancer
THE man sat in a dark room staring at a large back-lighted screen.
He spoke into a tape recorder, describing in intricate technical detail what he saw.
The epitome of intensity, this slight man in the white coat.
"I feel like a hunter," said Dr.
Abraham Pollack.
"Just like the guy in 'Jaws' who hunts sharks."


Nuclear Industry Plans Ads to Counter Critics
After months of planning, the nuclear power industry is ready to begin a three-year, $9 million public relations and advertising campaign in Nevada designed to "neutralize" political opposition to a desert site for permanently disposing of radioactive wastes.
Using metaphors more familiar to the military, the authors of a confidential blueprint describe the need to establish a "political beachhead" for supporters of the repository, giving them "air cover" to defend research on the site, and challenging news reports that they consider unfair with "attack/response teams."


Terreri Sparkles in Tough Going
Successfully killing a five-minute major penalty is usually a huge motivating factor for a hockey team.
It certainly was for the Devils in tonight's clash with the Flyers.
With Chris Terreri making 6 of his 36 saves during the five-minute major assessed to New Jersey's Kevin Todd, the Devils raised their intensity a notch or two and came away with a 5-2 triumph at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Becker Falls to Agassi  Andre Agassi of the United States tamed Boris Becker's serve with hard returns and began defense of his Association of Tennis Professionals Tour world championship title last night with a 6-3, 7-5 victory over the German in Frankfurt, Germany.
Earlier, top-seeded Jim Courier of the United States came from behind to beat Karel Novacek of Czechoslovakia, 6-7 (8-6), 7-5, 6-4.
Also, Ivan Lendl routed Guy Forget of France, 6-2, 6-4, in 73 minutes.
Agassi never dropped his serve and broke Becker's once in each set to post his fifth straight victory over the German.
The year-ending, $2.25 million tournament includes the top-ranked eight players in the world.
They are split into two round-robin groups, with the top two from each group advancing to the semifinals. (AP) Fernandez Upset by Schultz: Brenda Schultz used an overpowering serve yesterday to upset fifth-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez, 6-1, 2-6, 6-4, in the first round of the $350,000 Virginia Slims of Philadelphia tournament.
In 17 previous tournaments in 1991, Fernandez, the world's seventh-ranked player, had not lost in the first round and had advanced as far as the quarterfinals in 15 of the events. (AP) GOLF  Baker-Finch in Lead  Ian Baker-Finch, the British Open champion, played a steady if unspectacular round of four-under-par 68 yesterday and took a one-stroke lead over Masters champion Ian Woosnam in the $1 million P.G.A.
Grand Slam of Golf at Kaui Lagoons, Hawaii.
The 36-hole tournament brings together the winners of the year's four major tournaments.
Baker-Finch had four birdies and no bogeys during his tour of the 7,035-yard Kiele Couse at the Kauai Lagoons Golf Club.
Woosnam birdied No. 17 to pull within one shot of the lead after an erratic round of six birdies and three bogeys.
Payne Stewart, the United States Open champion, was two strokes back at 70.
The P.G.A. champion, John Daly, rebounded from a miserable start to shoot a three-under 33 on the back side for a one-over 73. (AP) N.H.L.
Whalers Top Nordiques  Marc Bergevin scored with 5 minutes 29 seconds left as the Whalers survived giving up a two-goal third-period lead to beat Quebec, 5-4, last night before the eighth-smallest Hartford crowd ever.
Doug Smail scored a short-handed goal 4:38 into the third period to tie the score. (AP)
North Stars 7, Maple Leafs 0: Jon Casey celebrated his new multimillion-dollar contract by making 23 saves for his second shutout of the season and feeding Stewart Gavin for a breakaway goal as Minnesota, playing at home in Bloomington, pounded Toronto.
Brian Propp and Mike Craig each scored two goals. (AP)


U.S. and Lebanon Discuss New Violence
The United States and Lebanon are discussing ways to halt an increase in violence in southern Lebanon before the next round of Middle East peace talks begins, Government officials said today.
Faris Bouez, the Lebanese Foreign Minister, said after a 90-minute meeting with the Ryan Crocker, the United States Ambassador, that ideas were exchanged "for finding a solution in stages" to the problem in southern Lebanon.


We Need a National Health Plan for Everyone
To the Editor:
The "solution" you suggest for the national health care crisis in "A Plausible Revolution in Health" (editorial, Oct. 29) would work about as well as a Band-Aid on a compound fracture.


Philharmonic to Make Live Recordings
The New York Philharmonic and its new music director, Kurt Masur, have signed a six-year recording contract with Teldec Records, a German label owned by Time Warner.
The contract calls for 32 live recordings, which are to be made at Avery Fisher Hall during the orchestra's concerts, Mr.
Masur said at a news conference yesterday.
The first recording under the newly announced contract, a Bruckner Seventh Symphony taped during the orchestra's opening concerts this season, is to be released next week.
Also completed is the Dvorak "New World" Symphony.
Works by Ives and Brahms are to be recorded during concerts this week.


Yale Offers Workers Plan to Retire Early
Yale University has offered an early retirement option to about 13 percent of its managerial and professional employees as it tries to comply with budget cuts ordered by the university's president.
The offer, made to employees who are at least 55 years old and have worked at Yale for 10 or more years, will provide credit for an additional five years of age and service when their pension benefits are calculated.
About 325 of Yale's 2,400 professional employees -- but not including professors -- are eligible for the plan.


Kahane Trial Lawyers Ordered to Prove No Bias in Juror Choices
The judge in the Kahane murder trial said yesterday that there was strong evidence that defense lawyers had deliberately excluded whites from the jury, and he ordered both the defense and the prosecution to demonstrate that race had not been a factor in choosing jurors.
"The exclusion of Americans on the basis of color is extremely ugly," Justice Alvin Schlesinger said after denying a prosecution motion for a mistrial.
Prosecutors had sought such a ruling on the ground that the defense was excluding jurors because they are white.


Dollar Is Narrowly Mixed Amid Uncertainty on Rates
The dollar was mixed against other currencies yesterday as traders continued to speculate about the direction of interest rates in the United States and overseas.
Analysts said the dollar drew some support from a Los Angeles Times article quoting senior officials at the Federal Reserve as saying the central bank has virtually decided against any more interest rate cuts this year.


Favored Credit Card Holders Quietly Given Lower Rates
Banks are reducing the interest rates they charge on credit cards for some customers, but many bankers would just as soon not advertise it.
The rates are going down as the banks try to keep their best customers, many of whom have wondered why the interest rates on their bank cards had not fallen along with the prime rate, mortgage rates or the interest they receive on deposits.
Frustrated by the stubbornly high rates, card holders have been doing comparison shopping for the best credit card deals and have been turning in their costliest cards.


Sports of The Times; Keep Magic In the Mainstream
NO one has ever used the clock better than Magic Johnson.
No one has ever been as resourceful in getting his point across, given the constraints of a 24-second possession.
Running the fast break or directing the half-court offense or just backing in with the ball for the hook shot he learned by mimicking Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Johnson was the most improvisational talent the National Basketball Association had ever seen.
The true beauty of Magic Johnson was not how fast he ran, how high he jumped, how spectacularly he passed, how accurately he shot, how much he smiled.
It was how well and quickly he thought, for himself and for his team, as he did when he made one of his most brilliant passes, a slow bouncer to no one that drained the final seconds of a playoff series against Portland last spring.
With all due respect, Pat Riley was the second-best coach the Los Angeles Lakers have had.


Corrections
Charts in the sports pages on Saturday showing causes of transmission of the AIDS virus gave an incorrect visual representation of the numbers for men.
The numbers, which were accurate, are shown correctly today in a chart on page B9.


Argentine Chief, in U.S. Visit, to Seek Investment Money
President Carlos Saul Menem of Argentina is scheduled to arrive in the United States on Wednesday for a seven-day visit in which he hopes to enhance the image of Argentina as a close friend of Washington and attract billions of dollars in loans and investment to rebuild his country's struggling economy.
While Mr.
Menem hopes the formalities and pomp of a state visit will enhance his image as a leader of Latin America, his aides concede the financial matters are paramount.


Don't Whitewash Brooklyn Gang
To the Editor:
I am the lawyer for Gary Aviles, one of the black victims of the gang you profiled in your misleading and offensive "Brooklyn Gang: A Mythology of Violence" (front page, Oct. 24).


That's College of Idaho, Spelled 'Albertson'
It was bad enough seeing distinguished alumni win awards and recognition and be cited as graduates of the University of Idaho, in Moscow, or Idaho State University, in Pocatello.
But to be asked over and over again, "How're things in Coeur d'Alene?" -- where North Idaho College is located -- or, "What's going on in Twin Falls?" -- the site of the College of Southern Idaho, a community college -- was getting to be too much.
So the College of Idaho, a tiny, private, liberal arts college in Caldwell, changed its name last week.
It is now the J. A. Albertson College of Idaho.
The college, with about 640 undergraduates, 460 of them full-time students, was founded in 1891 by the Presbyterian Church.
It has been nonsectarian since 1970.


Barkley Will Switch To Johnson's No. 32
CHARLES BARKLEY will drop his No. 34 and wear MAGIC JOHNSON's No. 32 on his Philadelphia 76ers jersey for the rest of the season to honor the retired Los Angeles Lakers player.
Barkley will make the switch as soon as a jersey is made, team officials said.
The switch will happen either Friday night when Philadelphia plays at Boston, or Saturday at Detroit, team officials said.


FOOTBALL: Notebook; Leahy Experiences the Big Chill
Pat Leahy said the cold weather Sunday at Giants Stadium might have had something to do with the fact that he missed field goals of 22 and 44 yards in the first half.
"The coldness was a factor," Leahy said. "It was hard to stay loose on the sidelines."


Long Ignored, Prostate Cancer Gets Spotlight as Major Threat
WHEN Frank Zappa's daughter, Moon Unit Zappa, told a concert audience in New York last week that her father was suffering from prostate cancer and could not attend the celebratory performance of his music, a disease that is often ignored or dismissed as an "old man's cancer" suddenly took center stage.
Mr.
Zappa, an icon of progressive rock music since his days with the Mothers of Invention in the 1960's, has refused to discuss the details of his illness.
His press agent said he was "fighting it well," was neither hospitalized nor bedridden, as had been rumored, and was working at home in Los Angeles on his next musical project.


Public &amp; Private; (Same Old) New Duke
Some people wonder why so much has been made of David Duke's plastic surgery.
The answer is simple.
David Duke's new face is a symbol of what he seeks to do: turn back the clock and pretend to be something he is not.
For every avowal in the Louisiana gubernatorial race that he is a changed man, there is a revelation about his recent past that gives it the lie.
Well into the 1980's he still had the standard racist/anti-Semite spiel: race mixing is ruining America, segregation is the ideal, the Holocaust didn't happen.
Even the views of the new improved Duke are more of the same, couched in politicospeak with a nudge and a wink at his right radical supporters.


Proposed Budget in Nassau Would Increase Taxes 24%
A week after Election Day setbacks attributed to a growing anti-tax sentiment, the incumbent Republican administration in Nassau County has nevertheless proposed sharply higher county taxes to balance a recession-driven county budget.
The County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, said today that with tax revenues plummeting, and the county forced to borrow to pays its bills this year, he had little choice but to raise county property taxes -- by 24 percent on average -- to balance a $1.9 billion budget.


U.S. Planning Mideast Talks On Trade and Regional Issues
Almost two weeks after Arabs and Israelis met at a peace conference in Madrid, the United States is preparing to announce a second major Middle East conference to discuss trade, water rights and other regional issues, Bush Administration officials said today.
The regional conference could be announced as early as next week, and would likely be held next month somewhere in Europe, said the officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Contemporary-Art Sales Far Short of Estimates
The major works offered in last night's auction of contemporary art at Christie's in New York sold for low prices that greatly disappointed the auction house.
Of the 67 works up for sale, 27 did not find buyers.
Among those that did, the most important works sold for far less than Christie's estimated, while the less significant ones fared better.
The evening's sales totaled $15,354,900, well below the low-end estimate of $26.86 million.


Accounts
*
Cable Television Administration and Marketing Society, New York, to Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss, New York, and its Modular Direct/Promo Group division, to promote pay-per-view systems.
Budget for the advertising and marketing campaign has yet to be determined.


Shelling of Besieged Yugoslav Port Is Intensified
The 42-day-old siege of Dubrovnik intensified today as the pro-Serb Yugoslav army fired artillery barrages that killed several people huddling in hotel basements and trapped European Community "cease-fire" monitors and foreign journalists, news reports from the Adriatic port said.
Meanwhile, the leaders of the European Community and United Nations efforts to find a peaceful solution to the Serb-Croat war are slated to travel to Yugoslavia on Wednesday in another effort to negotiate a lasting cease-fire.


Session on Breast Implants Hears Criticism and Praise
In the opening of what promises to be a three-day marathon of heated debate, women with breast implants and doctors who treat them came before an advisory committee of the Food and Drug Administration today to testify on whether silicone implants should be banned in the United States.
Some women spoke angrily about the health problems they said they had endured because of the implants.
Others said they were delighted with their implants; some said they would keep them even if they were a health threat.
And the doctors, plastic surgeons for whom implants are a substantial part of their practice, said the devices should stay on the market.


Sony Offering Seen in Japan
The Sony Corporation will offer 28 percent of its Japanese music company to the public in Japan by the end of the month, a person close to the negotiations says.
The company hopes to raise $1 billion from the offering, which would put the value of the entire Japanese company at about $3.5 billion.


Another Official Disciplined For Dissent on Property Sale
Another Government official is being disciplined after trying to sell a property seized from a failed savings and loan for what he believed was a higher price than the Government would otherwise have received, according to Government officials and documents.
D.
L.
Lancaster, who is is a credit specialist in Texas for the Resolution Trust Corporation, faces dismissal or disciplinary action after he told higher officials at the agency in the last few days that he was being punished for trying to sell a New Orleans hotel for about $3 million more than the Government might have received in a planned bulk sale of properties, the officials and documents said.


Imelda Marcos Faces New Charges in Manila


A New Chief For Ventura
Ventura Software Inc., a subsidiary of the Xerox Corporation, said today that it had elected David W. Hanna president and chief executive.
Ventura, based in San Diego, is a leading producer of desktop publishing software.
Mr.
Hanna, 52 years old, has served on Ventura's board since 1990, when the company was acquired by Xerox Desktop Software Inc., another subsidiary, and he has been an adviser to the company since its formation in 1985.


To Keep Track of the Giants, It Helps to Get a Late Start
When Wellington Mara's mother decreed that the Giants' bench would always be on the sunny side of the field so he wouldn't be cold, she didn't anticipate Monday night football.
Or Sunday nights.
Or 4 P.M. starts.
But because the Giants won the Super Bowl, and thus are in demand in prime time, they once again have messed up Sundays and evenings for their fans -- and not simply because of the way the team has played this season.


AGREEMENT IS NEAR ON MEASURE TO AID LONG-TERM JOBLESS
Lawmakers from both parties and the Bush Administration moved to the brink of an agreement today on legislation to provide up to 20 weeks of additional unemployment benefits for about three million Americans out of work at least half a year.
The $5.1 billion plan is intended to pay for itself.
And it seems likely to end more than three months of partisan arguments over how to aid the long-term jobless who have been unable to find employment in the continuing economic downturn.


INSIDE
Hearings on Barr Begin
At the outset of his confirmation hearings, the Attorney General-designate said that the B.C.C.I. inquiry had been "fairly good" but that he had ordered a review of it.
Page A14.
Yugoslav Fighting Worsens
The 42-day siege of Dubrovnik intensified as the army fired artillery barrages said to have killed people taking refuge in basements.
Page A12.
What Business Says of Duke
Louisiana business people are fearful of what a victory by David Duke in the governor's race could do to the state's sagging economy.
Page A20.
Judgeship for O'Rourke
The Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, was nominated for a Federal judgeship, touching off a fight to succeed him.
Page B5.


Review/Film; De Niro as Revenge Seeker In Scorsese's 'Cape Fear'
Film cultists, here are your hats.
Martin Scorsese's "Cape Fear," a remake of J. Lee Thompson's very popular 1962 suspense melodrama about an ex-con and the family he terrorizes, is new and improved and, from time to time, so fiendishly funny that it qualifies as a horror film.
At one point this "Cape Fear" slips in its own blood, but instead of falling on its face, it achieves a new high in audience-friendly sadism.
Among the film's other double-edged virtues is the way in which it pays homage to the original while, in passing, it points out everything that's wrong with it.


Firefighters Killed in Line of Duty Are Honored


Technologies To Post Loss
The United Technologies Corporation said yesterday that it would take a charge against fourth-quarter earnings that would result in a loss for the quarter and the full year.
While the Hartford-based military contractor did not say how large the charge would be, analysts and investors told Bloomberg Business News that the amount would be at least $400 million and perhaps as much as $1 billion.


'Nutcracker' Is a Romp, But Challenges Dancers
"The Nutcracker," which heralds the Christmas season each year in theaters across the nation, is a pretty, undemanding holiday classic, full of dancing toys and candies, battling mice and a snowstorm.
But dancing the ballet, an example of pure 19th-century ballet classicism, can be intimidating if you're immersed in the repertory of the 20th century.
That is the challenge faced by dancers in the Joffrey Ballet production, which opens tomorrow night at City Center (131 West 55th Street) for a three-week run.
The New York City Ballet's version follows, at the New York State Theater early next month, and several small companies will take it on during the holidays.


South African Strike Sends Platinum Prices Up Sharply
A two-day strike by South African miners against the world's second-largest platinum producer helped push prices of platinum and other precious metals sharply higher yesterday.
The strike affected platinum mines owned by Impala Platinum Holdings Ltd., the second-largest producer, after Rustenburgh Platinum Holdings, also of South Africa.


Kissinger Firm Denies Reports of B.C.C.I. Link
A senior associate of Kissinger Associates Inc. has denied a report in The Boston Globe that Henry A. Kissinger recommended that the Bank of Credit and Commerce International hire a Washington firm to initiate a "public relations offensive" a day after the bank was indicted on charges of money laundering.
The Globe said it based its account on B.C.C.I. documents it had obtained.
Alan Stoga, senior associate of the New York-based economic consulting firm, said Monday in a telephone interview that "Henry never met or talked with them," and that nobody in his firm gave B.C.C.I. that advice.


U.S. Condones Turkish Attacks on Kurds
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 20 front-page report that Iraq is arming rebel Kurds in Turkey calls this a case of Iraq's "meddling beyond its borders." Meddling beyond borders is also the proclivity of Turkey.
Until this year, Turkey never even permitted the use of the Kurdish language in public, and it wages all-out war against its own Kurdish opposition.
For months, Turkey has courted Iraqi Kurds while destroying their counterparts in Turkey.


Mail-Order Mates With a Biotech Twist
Through artificial insemination, a prize bull can father thousands of cows, passing along his superior genes to herds around the world.
But the technique will not work for pork farmers, because pig sperm does not stand freezing, and artificial insemination is of limited use with horses, because horse sperm can be refrigerated only briefly.
But now a Gulph Mills, Pa., company that specializes in commercializing biotechnology patents is working on a method of preserving sperm that requires no refrigeration.
The company, British Technology Group USA, uses a polymer gel to encapsulate the sperm.
At room temperature, the polymer solidifies, immobilizing the sperm and lowering their metabolic activity.
The polymer is permeable, letting oxygen in and waste products out.
Because it is encapsulated in the polymer, the sperm can be sent through the mail.
In the case of cows and mice -- the only species for which the technology has been demonstrated so far -- the sperm can survive up to 21 days.


Theater in Review
As a Dream That Vanishes (A Meditation on the Harvest of a Lifetime)  575 Broadway (entrance, 142 Mercer Street, at Prince Street), Manhattan Through Nov. 24 Created by Merry Conway and Noni Pratt.
Constructor of museum, Gregor Paslawsky; lighting, Mike Taylor; performance coordinator and sound engineer, Ron Botting.
Presented by Creative Time, in association with the Guggenheim Museum and Conway and Pratt.
WITH: Ms.
Conway, Ms.
Pratt and Albert Ratcliffe.
"As a Dream That Vanishes: A Meditation on the Harvest of a Lifetime" is part walk-through museum installation and part performance piece, the combined creation of Merry Conway and Noni Pratt, who are actresses as well as visual artists.
Paradoxically, it is the environmental exhibition that is the more animated half of the show.


Review/Film; Disney's 'Beauty and the Beast' Updated in Form and Content
Two years ago Walt Disney Pictures reinvented the animated feature, not only with an eye toward pleasing children but also with an older, savvier audience in mind.
Disney truly bridged a generation gap with "The Little Mermaid," bringing the genre new sophistication without sacrificing any of the delight.
It's not surprising that an attempt has been made to replicate that success with "Beauty and the Beast," a film that takes a similar view of its audience and transfers some of the earlier film's most inspired staging ideas from an underwater setting to 18th-century France.
But it
is
a surprise, in a time of sequels and retreads, that the new film is so fresh and altogether triumphant in its own right.
Lightning has definitely struck twice.


Two Companies Announce Johnson Advertising Spots
Two companies that have endorsement contracts with Magic Johnson yesterday announced ambitious plans to continue to run, or to develop, advertising campaigns with him.
Their decisions reflect a startling process of rewriting the rules regarding AIDS and corporate America's response to the disease.


Corrections
A report in the Business People column yesterday about the new president of Equitable Capital Group Retirement Services rendered her name incorrectly in some copies.
She is Mary Rudie Barneby.


One State Rating Affirmed, Another Is Cut by Moody's
Moody's Investors Service has taken a look at two states' general obligation bonds, affirming one and downgrading the other.
The ratings service affirmed the A rating given to New York State's general obligations, which total $22.1 billion of tax-supported debt.
Despite what it calls "a diverse and substantial economic base" in New York, Moody's notes that "real reforms have not yet been devised" to solve the state's financial problems, including the unrestrained growth of Medicaid payments.


Aide in Duke Campaign Resigns, Questioning the Candidate's Piety
As he tried to mobilize supporters in southern Louisiana today, State Representative David Duke found himself on the defensive.
One of his top aides announced that he was quitting because he no longer believed Mr.
Duke's assertions that a Christian conversion had caused him to reject views he held as a Ku Klux Klan and neo-Nazi leader.
Mr.
Duke's opponent, former Gov.
Edwin W. Edwards, had only one public appearance on his schedule today, a speech before a women's group, as he continued to wage a campaign that relies heavily on television advertising.


Harry H. Bassett, 74, Ex-Banking Executive
Harry Hood Bassett, a prominent Miami banker and supporter of civic causes, died Sunday in Jeffersonville, Vt., at one of his family's homes.
He was 74 years old.
The family said the cause of death was cancer.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Banks are cutting interest rates on credit cards for some customers, but they would just as soon not advertise it.
First National Bank of Chicago, Banc One and a growing number of others are beginning to offer cards with rates around 14 percent, far below the 19.8 percent that has been the standard.  [ Page A1. ]
A bill that would let local governments regulate cable television prices has been delayed in the Senate and may not come up before Congress adjourns later this month.  [ D1. ]
Earnings fell at J. C. Penney, the Limited and Nordstrom while May Department Stores posted a gain.
Caldor had a loss.  [ D1. ]
An R.T.C. official is being disciplined for trying to sell a property seized from a failed savings and loan for what he believed was a higher price than the Government would have otherwise received, according to Government officials and documents.  [ D10. ]
Legislation to overhaul the banking system is expected to be introduced as early as today in the Senate and the House.  [ D20. ] ,  Companies
Travelers agreed to sell Dillon, Read to a joint venture between the management of the old-line Wall Street investment house and Baring P.L.C., the venerable British merchant bank.  [ D1. ]  Baring's chairman, Peter Baring, has watched as one non-American investment bank after another has tried to break into the U.S. and reaped only losses and frustration.  [ D7. ]
USAir cut fares 10 to 25 percent for travel to almost all its destinations between Jan. 7 and March 31.
American, United and Continental Airlines will match the lower fares.  [ D1. ]
A senior official of Kissinger Associates has denied a news report that Henry Kissinger recommended that B.C.C.I. hire a Washington firm to initiate a "public relations offensive" a day after the bank was indicted on charges of money laundering.  [ D2. ]
Integrated Resources has tentatively agreed to be sold to Bankers Trust New York for $565 million.  [ D4. ] International
A look at Latin America's economic map shows big changes and the new economic religion includes terms like balanced budgets and privatization.  [ A1. ]
Argentine President Carlos Saul Menem arrives in the U.S. today in hopes of enhancing his country's image.  [ D2. ] Markets
Stocks rose smartly and the Dow rose 11.85 points, to close at 3,054.11.  [ D10. ]
A wave of overseas purchases helped lift Treasury prices.
But most investors remained on the sidelines.  [ D16. ]  Yields on deposit accounts plummeted.  [ D8 ]
Platinum and other precious metals futures prices rose sharply in reaction to a two-day strike by South African miners.  [ D17. ]  The dollar was mixed.  [ D17. ] Technology
New systems will help to speed up data transmissions by computers, which may account for 80 percent of the traffic over the public telephone network within five years.  [ D9. ]
A way of preserving sperm without refrigeration is being developed by a company that specializes in biotechnology patents.  [ D9. ] Today's Columns
Monetary Union offers Europe a cheap way to banish inflation and lower capital costs, a group of European economists said, Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Investing in pawnshops is considered by some Wall Street analysts as a superb bet on hard times.
Market Place.  [ D1. ]
Girgenti, Hughes, Butler &amp; McDowell is buying Rubin Reid Noto &amp; Ehrenthal.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D20. ]


Abortion Rights? Not in the Military
When a pregnant 21-year-old woman in the Philippines discovered that her child would be born with fatal birth defects, she and her husband reluctantly decided to end the pregnancy.
Since abortion is illegal in the Philippines except to save the woman's life, she could have flown to Japan where its legal.
On her husband's salary, the couple simply could not afford it.
She was forced to carry the fetus to term with the agonizing knowledge it would die at birth.
The woman was not an impoverished Filipino but the wife of an American serviceman.
Her husband was stationed at a naval base where the abortion could have been done safely and affordably, if not for a 1988 Defense Department directive barring abortions at U.S. military hospitals except to save a woman's life.


Review/Film; The Failure To Free The Victims In Auschwitz
During World War II when British pilots used aerial photography to pinpoint German bombing targets in Silesia, the Auschwitz concentration camp, which was nearby, was clearly depicted in the pictures, but nothing was done to destroy it and free its prisoners.
More than 30 years after the photographs were taken, they became the objects of intense study by Central Intelligence Agency officials who used them to corroborate descriptions of the camp by its survivors.
The history of those pictures forms a central motif in "Images of the World and the Inscription of War," the elliptical cinematic essay on photographic reality by Harun Faroki, the German film maker.
On the agency's blowups of those photos, the dormitories, gas chamber, crematory, paths and even the truck (disguised as a Red Cross vehicle) that delivered the poison pellets to the gas chamber have all been identified and carefully labeled.


Cambodians See the Return of Prince Sihanouk as the Best Hope for Peace
The young dancers knelt at the feet of Chea Samy and presented her with small bundles of incense, their tribute to a woman who is considered a master of the art of ancient Khmer dance -- and one of the few master teachers who managed somehow to survive the terrors of the Khmer Rouge.
Miss Chea Samy, now 73 years old, says she is overwhelmed by the scheduled return to Phnom Penh this week by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the long-exiled former King of Cambodia, who is seen by many here as Cambodia's best hope for peace after what has been nearly a full generation of war.


Lance Hayward Dies; Jazz Pianist Was 75
Lance Hayward, a jazz pianist, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 75 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of pneumonia, said Claudia Marx, a friend.


Earnings Decline in Quarter At Several Large Retailers
The J. C. Penney Company, the Limited Inc. and Nordstrom Inc. said yesterday that their earnings for the third quarter fell from depressed levels of a year earlier, while the May Department Stores Company said its profits edged up 1 percent.
Another retailer, the Caldor Corporation, said its third-quarter loss narrowed from the corresponding period last year.
The improvement reflected the company's stock sale, the proceeds of which were used to retire debt.


Traffic Not So Bad for a Presidential Visit
President Bush's nine-hour visit to New York City yesterday caused traffic tieups in midtown Manhattan at noontime, but city officials said that the problems were not as bad as they had been during past Presidential trips.
"Things went pretty smoothly, except for people stuck in the residual backups," said Joseph DePlasco, a spokesman for the city Transportation Department, noting that the city did not declare a gridlock alert for the time the President was in town.


New Rules On Labeling May Change Foods, Too
IS lean cuisine still lean? Is "low fat" low enough? How fresh is fresh?
The basic cart-pushing, label-reading grocery shopper is in a semantic netherworld.
Last week, the Federal Food and Drug Administration proposed new food-labeling regulations that would narrowly define buzzwords like "light," "low-fat," "reduced" and "fresh." The agency will issue a final version of the regulations within a year; the regulations are to be enforced within two years.
They are expected to change the look of thousands of food packages, and maybe the contents.
But some food labels already reflect the changes as many companies voluntarily comply.


Theater in Review
The Trojan Women  Pearl Theater 125 West 22d Street Manhattan Through Dec. 7 By Euripides; translated by Richmond Lattimore; directed by Shepard Sobel; set, Robert Joel Schwartz; stage manager, Mary-Susan Gregson; costumes, Barbara A. Bell; lighting, Paul Armstrong; sound, Donna Riley.
Presented by the Pearl Theater Company.
WITH: Carlo Alban, Robin Leslie Brown, Arnie Burton, Joanne Camp, Belynda Hardin, Bella Jarrett, Alex Leydenfrost, Stuart Lerch, Diane Paulus, Laura Rathgeb, Hank Wagner and Donnah Welby.
"The Trojan Women" remains the most gut-wrenching antiwar play of all, able after 2,400 years to arouse pity and terror, and plenty of both.
For his version at the Pearl Theater, Shepherd Sobel makes some deep cuts -- principally in the chants of the chorus -- and emphasizes the relentless grinding-down of the widowed and enslaved Trojan women.
His production lasts 90 minutes and leaves one feeling hammered.
People who know the original will miss some of the sweeping choral odes; their meaning is often murky, but they give the play a slow, majestic rhythm that heightens the terror.


Economic Scene; Banking on Currency Union
IS one currency, controlled by one central bank, the next logical step to a truly integrated European economy?
Or is it an act of hubris, a marriage that will ruin a beautiful friendship?
Eight distinguished European economists assembled by the Center for Economic Policy Research, an independent think tank in London, dismiss fears that the prospective partners are fundamentally incompatible.
They maintain that the European Monetary Union, anchored on Germany's determination to maintain stable prices, offers Europe a cheap way to banish inflation and lower capital costs -- provided national economies retain some fiscal flexibility to cope with shocks.


Lintas Executive Plans Screen-Writing Career
Roger Mosconi, executive vice president and group creative director at Lintas New York, is hoping to add an Oscar to his 22 Clios.
Mr.
Mosconi, who is 46 years old, has confirmed an Adweek report that he had resigned to pursue a career in screen writing and television programming.
He added that a studio, which he declined to identify, had already acquired a screenplay he wrote with his partner, Neal Dearling, 46, a senior vice president and creative director who remains at Lintas.


Patriots Stay in Court
Hopes of keeping the New England Patriots ownership dispute out of court failed yesterday when a bank sued co-owners VICTOR KIAM and FRAN MURRAY.
The suit wasn't viewed as a major impediment to an agreement between majority owner Kiam and Murray, reached the previous night, that they would delay resolution of the matter until after the season.
Their conflict centered on a provision in the ownership contract which allowed Murray to get out of it by demanding $38 million from Kiam three years after it was entered into in October 1988.
If Kiam didn't pay, Murray, who owns 49 percent of the team but is seeking an expansion franchise in St.
Louis, would get the franchise and sell it.


Speeding the Calls of Fast-Talking Computers
As far as a telephone line is concerned, even the chattiest, mile-a-minute talker produces a predictable, manageable stream of information -- no more than 2,400 bits a second, to borrow computer terminology.
But computers are themselves altogether different.
They talk in unpredictable dam bursts of information -- quiet one moment, then suddenly subjecting telephone lines to torrents.
And these days, when some computers hold forth, it is like the Hoover Dam giving way, gushing out 134 million bits of data, or more, each second -- the equivalent of more than 80 copies of "Moby Dick." It takes six to eight bits, or binary digits, to create a byte; a byte is equivalent to a single typewritten character.


After 2 Weeks, Search for Flier Is Called Off
The determined and laborious search for a young flier whose helicopter ditched in a violent storm at sea two weeks ago formally ended yesterday when the Air National Guard concluded that he had not survived.
The Air National Guard had continued to hunt for the flier, Tech.
Sgt.
Arden R. Smith, a member of the 106th Air Rescue Group stationed in Westhampton, L.I., even after the Coast Guard and the Navy called off their searches last Thursday.


California Moves to Limit Lead Used in Tableware
Amid growing public-health concern about lead in food, California began legal action today that could force a drastic reduction in the amount of lead in plates, bowls, cups, mugs and other everyday tableware.
The step is the latest attempt by California to repeat what it has done on automobile emissions and impose environmental and health standards far stricter than those adopted by the Federal Government.


Behind the Numbers: Voices of the Unemployed


Review/Cabaret; Julie Wilson on 2 Master Songwriters
Since returning to cabaret seven years ago after an extended sabbatical from show business, Julie Wilson has established herself as the archetype of a kind of supper-club elegance that has all but vanished from New York night life.
Poured into a skintight gown augmented by elbow-length gloves, wearing a gardenia tucked behind one ear and trailing a feather boa, the rail-thin 67-year-old singer brings the stylized theatrical precision of a Kabuki performer to the interpretation of popular standards.
Miss Wilson's appearance and her highly physical way of emoting have always lent her cabaret performances a special dramatic intensity.
At the Kaufman Theater, 534 West 42d Street, where she is performing songs of Cole Porter and Noel Coward through Jan. 1 with her longtime sidekick William Roy at the piano, the theater's extra space enhances a magnetism that the cramped stage of a nightclub tends to impede.


Samuel J. Cohen, Lawyer, 83; Represented Many Labor Unions
Samuel J. Cohen, who played an important role in several strikes as a lawyer representing major unions in the New York region, died on Wednesday at Eastern Long Island Hospital in Greenport, L.I.
He was 83 years old and had residences in Tucson, Ariz., and Shelter Island, L.I.
His death was caused by heart failure, his family said.


For Philadelphia, a New Management
Edward G. Rendell, who was elected Mayor of Philadelphia last week by the largest margin in 60 years, is looking for volunteers to help paint City Hall's dingy corridors after he takes office in January.
It's his way of telling people that the city government, which has been in sharp decline for the better part of two decades, is under new management.


Hussein's Half-Brother Is Named to Iraqi Post
President Saddam Hussein has appointed his half-brother to the vacant post of Interior Minister, strengthening his family's grip on the upper ranks of power.
The official Iraqi News Agency announced the appointment of the relative, Watban Ibrahim al-Hassan, a week after the departing minister, Saddam Hussein's cousin Ali Hassan al-Majid, was named Defense Minister.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day last Thursday about revenues from beverages for the Coca-Cola Company and Pepsico Inc. described the figures incompletely.
The domestic figures for Pepsico included revenues from bottling and distribution; the domestic figures for Coca-Cola did not.


Review/Dance; Judson Troupe Extends Series Of Free Shows
Things got off to a happy start on Monday night at the latest program of Movement Research at the Judson Church with an announcement that the acclaimed free dance series had been extended through April and would be underwritten in part by the proceeds from a benefit on Dec. 7.
The cheers that met this announcement were unsurprising, for the series, which offers programs by new and familiar choreographers, is a major addition to dance in New York City.
There have been ups and downs in the programming, as there were on Monday night, but spirit, invention and skill have been hallmarks of the series.


Dinkins in South Africa: It's Not Quite Clockwork
Mayor David N. Dinkins may not be jinxed, but even half a world away from the problems that dog him daily in New York, he could be forgiven for wondering.
First he had to postpone this trip to South Africa for lack of money.
Then he failed to win an audience with the Pope in Rome on the way over.
Today, he could not manage to get an appointment -- already listed on his public schedule -- with the white-minority Government's acting President, Gerrit N. Viljoen, who is running the country while President F. W. de Klerk is traveling in Taiwan this week.


As Recession Tightens Its Grip, Hopes of Jobless Dwindle and Fears Mount: Chappaqua, N.Y.; Trader Still Waits After 400 Letters
Karen L. Johansen, a commodities trader, found herself jobless four times during the 1980's.
Each time she found a new job within weeks or, at most, a couple of months.
This time is different.


Quotation of the Day
"I've heard the word 'overqualified' so many times, I don't ever want to hear it again. There are so many people like me who just want to work again, who just want to be productive." -- BARBARA KERIN.  [ B8:1. ]


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a Food and Drug Administration hearing on breast implants misstated the opinion of the author Karen Berger.
She supports, not opposes, the use of implants.


As Recession Tightens Its Grip, Hopes of Jobless Dwindle and Fears Mount: Elwood, L.I.; Urgent Times For a Plumber
Thirty-three-old Gary Eppich began working when he was 14, and through all his years of independence he never imagined this: that he could be out of a job and nearly broke in the prime of his life.
"Who the hell wants to be on unemployment?" he asked bitterly.
"I'm not looking to be on public assistance."


Corrections
An article yesterday about a security-guard agency that is not registered with New York State rendered its name incorrectly.
It is the Knight Hawks Protection Agency, not Nighthawks. (The corrected version was among several that The Times checked with the Secretary of State's office, which keeps records of guard agency licenses.)


Too Many Agencies Govern Public Lands
To the Editor:
Your two articles on the Forest Service's management of natural resources in the Nov. 3 Week in Review illustrate the difficulties of a cohesive forest policy.
Congress has divided the management of national lands among the Agriculture Department (Forest Service), the Department of the Interior (Bureau of Land Management, Fish and Wildlife Service and National Park Service) and the Department of Defense.
Each agency and its operating units has its own mandate, which is often in conflict with those of the others.


13.4% Drop In Sales Of Vehicles
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks fell 13.4 percent in early November, auto makers reported today.
Some analysts said the figures confirmed their belief that the industry was in its second recession of 1991 after what had seemed a promising summer.
"It looks like it's a double-dip recession," said Ronald A. Glantz, an automotive analyst with Dean Witter in San Francisco.
Many analysts had attributed sluggish sales through October to rebates and other big incentives in September, which helped raise the sales of leftover 1991 models.


A Legislature With a Less Urban Tone
When the 205th session of the New Jersey Legislature convenes in January, its members will be slightly younger than their predecessors, a bit more educated, much less experienced and overwhelmingly Republican.
In a freshman class that will make up a third of the entire Legislature, voters added four blacks, another female legislator, a Hispanic Assemblyman and a 24-year-old college student.
But the Legislature will still be dominated by white men and lawyers.


Yves Montand Is Buried in Paris


British Say SmithKline Was Target of Plot
British retailers today withdrew three million bottles of a soft drink made by SmithKline Beecham P.L.C., the drug and consumer products company, after the police said they had uncovered a plot by animal-rights advocates to contaminate bottles of the drink in stores.
The police said they believed that they had foiled the plot before any bottles of Lucozade, which is not sold in the United States, had been damaged.
At the end of the working day, SmithKline Beecham said it had not found any tampering.


Caps Expose Rangers In 60 Minutes on Ice
The Rangers played half a hockey game at Madison Square Garden last night and looked very good doing it.
Their opponents, the Washington Capitals, played for 60 minutes and showed why they deserve, at least for now, to hold first place in the Patrick Division and first place, over all, in the National Hockey League.
The Capitals, some of their faces wearing bloody badges of courage as red as their uniform shirts, trailed twice by two goals but scored the last four goals of the game to win, 5-3.


Market Place; A Wave of Calls On Bonds Is Seen
WITH interest rates on the skids, credit- market experts see a wave of bond calls not experienced for years.
Just as many homeowners refinance mortgages when rates turn down, bond issuers call, or redeem, securities, so they can refinance at lower rates.
Even the Treasury recently called one issue for the first time in three decades.
Although Treasury securities have been noncallable since November 1984, some $78 billion of older Treasury issues are outstanding.
The call trend is most pronounced in the municipal market, where bonds are commonly issued with 10-year call protection, which is now expiring on many tax-exempts issued in the early 1980's at high interest rates.
Corporate issues may also be called.


Bridge
If a partnership locates a 4-4 fit in a major suit, it is hardly ever right to abandon it later in the bidding.
There is sometimes a temptation in a match-point event to reject an obvious major-suit slam in favor of six no-trump, gambling for a top score but risking a bottom.
The gamble paid off on the diagramed deal, played in a regional stratified pairs in Lancaster, Pa., two weeks ago, but the declarer had a nervous time.
North and South were Ron Kraft and Beverly Bluth, both of East Windsor, N.J.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
4.87
11.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.65
4.63
7.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.69
4.70
7.02
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.06
7.01
8.23
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.90
7.82
8.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.87
8.80
9.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.81
6.79
7.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Congress Takes Up Banking Bills
The House of Representatives and the Senate took up banking measures today that would provide billions of dollars in taxpayer loans for the deposit insurance program, remove some barriers to interstate banking, and give regulators greater authority to shut down ailing banks.
The Bush Administration worked hard in the corridors of the House tonight for amendments it favored.
Lawmakers were told that President Bush would accept a bill that included broader powers for strong banks to operated across state lines.


Bush Assails Democrats And Defends His Travels
President Bush today moved to counterattack Democrats who had made his extensive foreign travel a political issue, painting them as isolationist demagogues who were taking "cheap shots" at his global leadership.
In speeches to a group of young farmers in Kansas City and Republican contributors here, the President charged that his critics wanted to "turn their backs on the historic opportunities before us" in global trade and diplomacy that he said his travels sought to exploit.


Agreement on Jobless Benefits
Congress and the White House agreed on a bill to extend jobless benefits, with some expected to get checks by Thanksgiving.
Page A20.


Edith Zornow, 72, Animation Producer For 'Sesame Street'
Edith Zornow, a prominent figure in the New York independent film and video community who produced the animation for "Sesame Street" and "The Electric Company" on public television, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 72 years old.
She died of cancer, said Ellen Morgenstern, a spokeswoman for the Children's Television Workshop, the producer of "Sesame Street."


As Recession Tightens Its Grip, Hopes of Jobless Dwindle and Fears Mount
Grandparents have stepped in to buy the children winter coats.
Car payments and other loans have been stretched out, if they can be.
For many of the unemployed in the New York metropolitan region, an evening's entertainment is now the television.
For Gary Eppich of Long Island, and for thousands of others in the region, the savings are dwindling and the fear is mounting but still there are no jobs in sight.
Some pore over the classified ads in the newspapers.
Others take courses to improve their skills.


British Airways Wants Partner
British Airways P.L.C. will need to form a partnership with a North American airline to remain globally competitive, the company's chief executive, Colin Marshall, said yesterday.
British Air has been approached by many airlines throughout the world about forming an alliance, Mr.
Marshall said at a meeting of securities analysts in New York, but he did not identify the parties.


Men's Test Scores Linked to Hormone
Men have better spatial ability when tested in spring than in autumn and the variation appears to be linked to seasonal fluctuations in male sex hormones, a scientist said today.
The findings conform with earlier, little-publicized research showing that men with low levels of testosterone perform better on tasks like mentally rotating a three dimensional object, which involve spatial reasoning skills that are critical in much of mathematics.
Earlier research has also shown that men's testosterone levels tend to be lower in the spring.


Electronic Publisher Names Head Scientist
Franklin Electronic Publishers Inc., which makes hand-held electronic spelling checkers, dictionaries and translators, has named Edgar T. Irons, a computer language expert, as its chief scientist.
Mr.
Irons, 55 years old, is the co-founder and former chairman of the computer science department at Yale University, where he was a professor from 1969 to 1979.
His recent work is in the area of teaching computers to parse sentences, or break them down into components, as in the exercise of diagramming a sentence once done in junior high schools.


The Nib's The Thing At Pen Fair
QUESTION: Enliven a gray, rainy weekend with a bright yellow banner strung across 46th Street between Fifth and Sixth Avenues, add 2,000 or so enthusiastic men, women and children -- most of them uttering words like beautiful, fantastic, excellent, smooth, fine, flow, gold-plated, wow and, most frequently, nib -- and what do you have?
The answer, at least last Saturday and Sunday, was: the Seventh Annual International Writing Instruments Fair.
The fair ground was the two levels of Arthur Brown &amp; Brother, store that bills itself as "the International Pen Shop." On view (and for sale) were the latest collections of 27 manufacturers from around the world, as well as antique pens, vintage pen appraisers and repairers and, of course, pen fanciers of every description.
Just the place for aficionados to swap stories and rhapsodize about writing instruments.
There are worse ways to spend a wet weekend.


F.D.A. Announces Plan to Speed Process for Approving New Drugs
The Food and Drug Administration announced plans today to speed its drug approval process, including using outside experts to review new drugs and cooperating with other nations to standardize testing and regulation.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, said the changes at the agency, which is part of his department, would revitalize the agency and "accelerate the availability of drugs for serious and life-threatening illnesses."


City University Wanted to Continue Reviewing Jeffries Case
To the Editor:
"Why the Delay on Dr. Jeffries?" (editorial, Oct. 30) questions the action of the City University of New York board of trustees in supporting the recommendation of Bernard Harleston, City College president, that Prof.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. be reappointed chairman of the black studies department for a one-year term ending in June, instead of the customary three-year term.
Your observation that this suggests a tolerance for bigoted behavior could not be further from the truth.


Topics of The Times; November Norm
Most of the time the sky is pewter-colored.
When it isn't the sunsets are every shade of red.
The rain is the kind that chills the bone, and snow has been reported here and there.
At night the radiator's thunks are as welcome as an air-conditioner's purr was a few months back.
The hat of the season, for women at least, appears to be a beret pulled well down over the ears.
Men remain undecided.
Both sexes have unearthed their six-foot scarves.
Temperatures have dipped, and the northeast wind's been busy.


Home Video
An Opportunity, But
With theater attendance falling and the weak economy forcing many studios to scale back their film making, video distributors are looking for alternative programming, from old television series to cable movies, to fill any future shortage of big films flowing into video stores.


White-Supremacist Group Fills a Corner in Duke Campaign
In a suburban white frame cottage, the headquarters of David Duke's campaign for Louisiana governor is side by side with the main office of the white supremacist organization that promotes his candidacy.
Yet the supremacist group insists it is not directly involved "with the mechanics" of the campaign.
The campaign headquarters in Metairie has virtually taken over the space once used by the National Association for the Advancement of White People, which Mr.
Duke founded, and a book store that sold neo-Nazi books, pamphlets and tapes.


Bill on Credit Card Rates Advances
The Senate approved a measure tonight to limit the interest rates that banks can charge credit card holders to 14 percent.
The measure passed 74 to 19.
Some said it would help ease what they saw as a shortage of credit and others argued that it was pro-consumer.


Midway Air Shuts Down After Buyout Is Abandoned
Midway Airlines said it had ceased operations early this morning.
The announcement came just hours after Northwest Airlines said it was abandoning its effort to acquire the small Chicago-based carrier.
Midway, which employs 4,000 people, had been trying to reorganize under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code and will now probably have to liquidate.


Ali Fasts for Health
MUHAMMAD ALI is the latest public figure to embrace a liquid diet.
Under the supervision of Syrian doctors, Ali said yesterday from Damascus that the doctors had limited him to water and herbal tea for three weeks and that the fasting regimen has eased his Parkinson's disease.


Lack of On-the-Spot Revival May Doom Cardiac Victims
When people suffer cardiac arrest and are not revived by rescue workers, they are virtually doomed to die and it is a waste of time and money to take them to a hospital, a study has found.
Even if they are revived in the emergency room, the odds that they will live to leave the hospital are virtually nil, the researchers said.
As a result, they said, it would be better to declare these patients dead at the scene rather than subject them to dehumanizing, costly and ultimately futile treatment at a hospital.


Tiffany's Net Declines 9.9%
Tiffany &amp; Company said yesterday that the costs of new store openings, renovations and other investments to develop its business caused a 9.9 percent decline in fiscal third-quarter earnings.
The New York jeweler's profits dropped to $8.2 million, or 52 cents a share, from $9.1 million, or 58 cents a share, in the period that ended Oct. 31, compared with the quarter last year.


BRIEFS
*
AIM Telephones Inc., Parsippany, N.J., reached an agreement with its primary lenders for a financial restructuring that will include a new equity infusion of $1.5 million.
The company will also sell its western Pennsylvania operations to JWP Telecom Inc., a unit of JWP Inc., Purchase, N.Y.
Terms were not disclosed. *
American General Corp., Houston, an insurance and financial services company, raised its investment in Travelers Corp., Hartford, an insurance company, to 5.3 million common shares, or 5.1 percent, from 4.9 million shares.


Justices Weigh Bias Legacy at Colleges
Thirty-seven years after it declared an end to official segregation in public elementary and secondary schools, the Supreme Court met today to consider an issue that, remarkably, it has never addressed: what a state must do to overcome the legacy of segregation in its public university system.
The case, from Mississippi, could shape the future of historically black public colleges throughout the South.
In Mississippi, as in other Southern states, public university systems that were once segregated by law continue to serve distinct student bodies that are readily identifiable by race, with the institutions that remain predominantly black receiving a disproportionately small share of resources.


Bowe's Manager Makes Name for Himself, but One He May Not Want
Rock Newman has been acting recently as though he were taking his cues as a boxing manager from the World Wrestling Federation.
Newman, the manager of the undefeated heavyweight contender Riddick Bowe, has yet to call opponents of Bowe "pencil-necked geeks," as is the custom in wrestling.
But the 39-year-old manager has been involved in the sort of chaotic "incidents" that wind up on the 11 o'clock news.


BRIEFS
DEBT .
Cablevision Industries Corp., of Liberty, N.Y., has filed for $150 million of senior notes, due 2002, to be offered through Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Review by L. A. Gear Has One Less Agency
Dailey &amp; Associates, Los Angeles, yesterday withdrew from the review for the estimated $35 million L. A. Gear advertising account.
Dailey's departure, advertising executives said, leaves at least five agencies in the review: the company's in-house advertising department, which has been handling the account; Hill Holliday Connors Cosmopulos, Boston; Lintas New York; Ogilvy &amp; Mather, New York and Los Angeles, and Stein, Robaire, Helm, Los Angeles.


Securities Planned By BankAmerica
The BankAmerica Corporation of San Francisco, parent of one of the nation's largest banks, said yesterday that it had filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to offer up to $3 billion in securities, including debt, preferred shares, warrants and currency warrants.


Cardinal Leger, Canadian Prelate Who Aided Lepers, Is Dead at 87
Paul Emile Cardinal Leger, a former Archbishop of Montreal who gave up the trappings afforded a prince of the Roman Catholic Church to work among lepers and handicapped children in Africa, died in Montreal today.
He was 87 years old.
He died of respiratory failure, hospital officials in Montreal said.


Do-It-Yourself Ceramic Art on 14th Street
TWO years ago, Emily Goodman was working for a publishing company in Manhattan and hating it.
"I realized I didn't want to spend my life behind a computer," she said.
So Ms.
Goodman, who had never taken an art class, enrolled in a three-week course on tile making at the Parsons School of Design.
As she worked, she became convinced that there were other fledgling ceramics artists like herself in Manhattan.
She was right.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ALTHOUGH she is only 17 years old, she has been dating the boy for four years.
She's tired of his hitting her and wants to end the relationship.
He has told her that if she tries to break up with him, he'll kill her.
She believes him, but hasn't told her parents, who recently encouraged the girl to see a psychologist because her grades were slipping.
While death threats are extreme, a surprisingly large number of teen-age girls become involved in abusive relationships.
"As many as 30 or 40 percent of teen-age girls in this country have been hit in the course of dating," said Dr.
Eva Feindler, the director of the psychological service center at C. W. Post/Long Island University in Brookville, L.I.


City University Wanted to Continue Reviewing Jeffries Case; Fairness Responsibility
To the Editor:
It is unfortunate that decisions about Prof.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. are being made on the wrong basis.
Academic freedom, like freedom of speech, is intended to protect opinions that some may find offensive.
Odious as his opinions are, to impose sanctions on him because he expresses such opinions is to undermine the freedom of all professors and students to say what they think.


A Victim of Deadly Crash in the Bronx Is Buried


National Party Says It May 'Turn Up the Heat' on Cuomo to Decide
Even as the Democratic National Committee applied new pressure on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to disclose his Presidential plans, the state Democratic chairman said today that the Governor could possibly wait until Thanksgiving.
Ginny Terzano, the press secretary for Ronald H. Brown, the national committee chairman, said today that Mr.
Brown "will have to turn up the heat" if Mr.
Cuomo does not reveal his decision soon.
She did not suggest a deadline, but said that "if it extends much longer, another two or three weeks, it could be hurtful to the party." She said the strategies of other candidates depend on whether Mr.
Cuomo is in the race.


Blaylock Goes on Tear But Nets Fall to Jazz
Kenny Anderson had the ballyhoo; Mookie Blaylock had the ball game. Neither was enough.
The Nets' second-half rally against the Utah Jazz fell short tonight, ending in another loss, 98-92, at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Triple for Clemens in Cy Young Awards
Roger Clemens, once again the most dominating pitcher in the American League this past season, continues to dominate the annual Cy Young award competition as well.
By doing so, the Boston Red Sox right-hander has placed himself among a quartet of pitchers already entrenched in the Baseball Hall of Fame or all but guaranteed to be enshrined.
Clemens yesterday was voted the American League's Cy Young award winner in overwhelming fashion by the Baseball Writers Association of America, winning for the third time in six years.
He now trails only Steve Carlton in terms of number of Cy Young awards won.
Carlton was voted four of the awards between 1972 and 1982 while pitching for the Philadelphia Phillies.


Calendar: Quilts, Crafts and Fabrics
25 Contemporary Quilts
The City Gallery at the Department of Cultural Affairs, 2 Columbus Circle (59th Street); (212) 841-4144.
A show by the Manhattan Quilters' Guild runs through Dec. 28.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
Free.
Connecticut Crafts
Wilton High School, 395 Danbury Road (Route 7), Wilton, Conn.; (203) 762-7257.


In Former East Berlin, It's Off With Lenin's Head


Rebuilding a House From Memory
WHEN they built their house here in 1980, Evelyn and Arthur Krosnick turned to people prone to reverence.
Their architect, John Randal McDonald, trained with Frank Lloyd Wright and still speaks of the master in hushed tones.
Their furniture designer was George Nakashima, the famous artisan committed to what he called the "particular destiny" of trees.
The Krosnicks are design zealots, too, but they are dedicated only to a single structure: their own.
This quirky series of hexagonal rooms of red cedar burned to the ground two years ago, taking with it both its blueprints and the world's second-largest collection of furniture by Mr.
Nakashima -- everything from sleek dining chairs that cantilever over long runners to burl lamp bases. (Only the Japanese-style home Nelson and Happy Rockefeller built in Tarrytown, N.Y., in the 1970's contains more Nakashima work.) This fall, the Krosnicks moved into a reasonable facsimile of their old dwelling, its late 1970's style looking eerily new.


Rails Move People Better Than Highways; Federal Program
To the Editor:
I am at a loss to understand why, in "Right Road for Transportation" (editoral, Oct. 26), you continue to misconstrue the Administration's five-year surface transportation pro gram as a "road construction" proposal.
Nothing could be further from the truth.


British Leisure Concern To Have Change at Top
Lord Delfont, chairman of First Leisure P.L.C., one of Britain's largest providers of leisure-time services, will retire at the end of the company's fiscal year on Oct. 31, 1992.
First Leisure has interests ranging from discos to bowling alleys.
Lord Delfont, an 82-year-old show-business entrepreneur who staged 200 shows in London's West End and on Broadway, led a management buyout of First Leisure from Forte P.L.C. in 1983.


HOUSE BACKS BILL FOR FAMILY LEAVE OF UP TO 90 DAYS
After two weeks of lobbying by the Democratic leadership, the House voted overwhelmingly today to guarantee unpaid leaves up to 90 days to about half the work force for family emergencies, a measure that President Bush had threatened to veto as an undue burden on businesses.
The 253-to-177 vote fell short of the two-thirds majority needed to override a veto.
Congressional Democrats hope to use the family leave issue to underscore their assertions that Mr.
Bush pays too little attention to domestic and social issues.  [ Roll-call, page B16. ]


As Recession Tightens Its Grip, Hopes of Jobless Dwindle and Fears Mount: Newark; A Familiar Pattern For a Brick Mason
The lines at the New Jersey Department of Labor's branch in Newark tend to snake out the doors and around the squat building on Broad Street.
Roger Holmes, a 25-year-old construction worker, has learned to get there early.
In two years as a brick mason Mr.
Holmes has been laid off "lots of times," perhaps half a dozen or more, he said.
Three months ago it happened again.
In each instance Mr.
Holmes has waited six weeks or more before applying for unemployment insurance, partly because he has expected work to come along, mostly because he dreads the process.


Case Dropped in Chaining
Charges against a Bronx couple who said they had chained their daughter to the radiator in their apartment to keep her away from drugs were dropped yesterday "in the interests of justice," the Bronx District Attorney's office said.
The couple, Eliezer and Maria Marrero, were arrested in September and charged with unlawful imprisonment and endangering the welfare of a minor for chaining their 15-year-old daughter, Linda.
Friends said the parents were afraid of losing their daughter to drugs, and the girl said she loved her parents and wanted to be with them.


Corrections
A table in Business Day yesterday showing the volume of shares traded on stock exchanges misstated Tuesday's figure for the Pacific Stock Exchange.
It was 7,997,798 shares.


Brown Defends Sending Officers to Dinkins's L.I. Friend
Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown yesterday defended his decision to send two police arson specialists to Long Island to advise a friend of Mayor David N. Dinkins about a fire in the man's mansion, asserting that he would do the same for anyone.
He said he saw nothing ethically wrong in dispatching the officers to Amagansett in Suffolk County to confer with Reginald Lewis, the chairman of Beatrice Foods, because it was to help Mr.
Lewis as a businessman from New York City.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in the Company News column in some copies of Business Day yesterday misstated the reason for a fourth-quarter charge taken by the Phillips Petroleum Company against pretax earnings of $15 million.
It results from previous staff cuts, announced in September.


Books of The Times; About the Lifelong Love Of a Lubber for Boats
Small Craft Advisory  A Book About the Building of a Boat  By Louis D. Rubin Jr. 394 pages.
Atlantic Monthly Press. $21.95
Despite what its title implies, Louis D. Rubin Jr.'s "Small Craft Advisory: A Book About the Building of a Boat" is not an instruction manual.
Rather, it is the author's entertaining, if slightly quixotic, attempt to understand a lifelong obsession with boats that has hummed like a pedal note beneath his many other interests.


Judge Suggests Lawyers Explore a Plea Deal in Gay-Bashing Trial
Testimony in the trial of two men charged with killing a gay man in Queens ended yesterday, and the judge later suggested that the prosecution and defense lawyers explore the possibility of reaching a plea deal before the case goes to the jury.
The judge, Justice Ralph Sherman of State Supreme Court in Queens, made the suggestion in private, but when it became known to reporters, he confirmed it.
He said that this was a "normal procedure" that he followed after testimony ended "in almost every case" before him, because at that point the two sides were "in a better position to assess" the strength of the opposition's case.


Levine, Huntley Closes After Billings Dive
Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver Inc. was closed yesterday by its corporate parent, Grey Advertising Inc., after the loss of key accounts sent billings plunging at the once-hot New York agency.
The decision, though not unexpected, brings an abrupt end to a rags-to-riches story of a group of executives who joined with Chet Huntley, the former NBC newscaster, in 1971 to acquire a small agency and produce advertising meant to sell with a smile.


Mets Keep Free-Agent Options Open
For the Mets, blockbuster free-agent negotiations appear off on the horizon if not on complete hold.
A meeting with Bobby Bonilla almost surely won't take place until next week.
Wally Joyner, while not ruling the Mets out, hasn't penciled them in as his first choice for next employer.
Danny Tartabull, too attractive as a run producer to be ignored, likely won't be categorized as a top priority until the Mets deem Bonilla beyond their established financial boundaries.


Trenton Shift Brings Battle To Control Redistricting
With lame-duck Democrats still in control of the Legislature but a huge Republican majority set to take command in January, a battle is building over who will draw the final Congressional district lines that will eliminate one of New Jersey's 14 members of the House of Representives.
Because of a population loss since the 1980 census, the New Jersey Congressional delegation is scheduled to drop in the 1992 election to 13 seats from 14.


MANDELA HOPEFUL ON NEGOTIATIONS
The long awaited conference of political parties that would lay the groundwork for formal negotiations on South Africa's post-apartheid future looks increasingly likely to get under way by the end of this month.
"The all-party conference is set down for the 29th and 30th of November," Nelson Mandela, the African National Congress president, said today.
Mr.
Mandela spoke with reporters after a meeting with the Italian Deputy Foreign Minister, Andrea Borruso, who is visiting South Africa.


Stocks Mixed, With Dow Ahead by 11.19
After trading lower most of the day on a worrisome inflation report, stock prices made a strong comeback yesterday to finish mixed.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 11.19 points to finish at 3,065.30.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was moderately heavy at 184.5 million shares, down from 199.5 million on Tuesday.
The Big Board composite was up 0.37, to 219.37, with losing issues narrowly outpacing gainers by 833 to 778.


Larger Ford Issue
The Ford Motor Company, which recently announced that it planned to sell $750 million in preferred shares, said yesterday that it had filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to increase the size of the offering to $2.3 billion.
An increase had been expected, but only to $1.5 billion.


Catholic Bishops to Keep 6 Days of Obligation
After a morning of debate about the clash between distinctly Roman Catholic practices and modern working schedules, the nation's Catholic bishops came down today on the side of sticking with their distinctive tradition.
They rejected a proposal to drop three of the six holy days of obligation -- days outside of Sundays when Catholics are required to attend Mass -- and to move another one from Thursday to Sunday.


Chauffeur for the Grand Rabbi Finally Renews Driver's License
For the last three years, the chauffeur for the spiritual leader of the Lubavitch Hasidic movement has been driving without a license, at times with a police escort.
But yesterday the chauffeur renewed his license and paid $112 in fines.
Although the chauffeur, Rabbi Yehuda Krinsky, was driving on the night of the fatal accident that touched off several days of racial clashes in Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, he was not driving the car that struck and killed a 7-year-old black child, Gavin Cato.


Sports of The Times; Sorry, But Magic Isn't a Hero
WITH a magician, the hand is always quicker than the eye.
But with Magic Johnson, the smile is quicker than the I.
The dazzle of that smile seems to have blinded some people to the egotistical essence of Earvin (Magic) Johnson's having tested positive for the HIV virus that causes AIDS.
He has been hailed by many as a "hero," when hedonist might be the better word.


Events: Benefits, a Panel And a Demonstration
Benefit and Show
Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue and 66th Street; (212) 777-5218.
A preview of the antiques show, "Modernism: A Century of Style and Design -- 1860 to 1960," will be held from 6 to 9 P.M. on Wednesday to benefit the Brooklyn Museum.
Tickets are $125; for reservations, call (718) 638-5000, extension 326.


Bank of Japan Lowers Its Discount Rate Again
In a sign of increasing worry over the health of the Japanese economy, the Bank of Japan this morning announced the second reduction in its discount rate this year.
The central bank announced the reduction, from 5.5 percent to 5 percent, early this morning, effective immediately.
The key rate, which influences deposit and lending rates at banks, was reduced on July 1 by a half a percentage point.


In the Nation; Question at the C.I.A.
In his inaugural remarks as the new Director of Central Intelligence, Robert M. Gates said that at the C.I.A.
"we have always aspired to be more than a team, to be a family."
The problem he faces, however, is that while the agency may be a team or a family, it's also and more prominently a giant bureaucracy -- one that got that way, moreover, with the help of a career manager named Robert M. Gates.


Macmillan Computer
Paramount Communications Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Macmillan Computer Publishing, a publisher of personal computer and related technical books, from Macmillan Inc., a subsidiary of the Maxwell Communciation Corporation.
The operations of Macmillan will become part of Simon &amp; Schuster, Paramount's publishing operation.
Although the company did not disclose the price, one executive with knowledge of the negotiation said it was about $157 million.
The company had sales of $58.7 million in Maxwell Communication's fiscal year ending March 1991 and operating profits of $17.5 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
Producer prices jumped a startling 0.7 percent in October, the biggest increase in a year, Government figures showed.
But close examination found the report much less worrisome.  [ Page A1. ]
Sales of U.S.-built cars and light trucks fell 13.4 percent in early November, auto makers reported.
Some analysts saw confirmation that the industry was in its second recession of 1991.  [ D1. ]


Yankees Hire Hassey
RON HASSEY, a catcher who filed for free agency last month, was hired by the Yankees as an advance scout yesterday, marking the third time he has been a Yankee.


A New State Poet Is Named for New York


Chemical Renames Price To Continue as Its Auditor
Edging out a leading rival, Price Waterhouse will continue auditing the Chemical Banking Corporation after it merges with the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation next year, accounting officials said yesterday.
"Price Waterhouse is delighted to be named the auditors of the new Chemical Banking Corporation," said Ken Koprowski, a Price spokesman.


Gorbachev Is Said to Protect Wanted German
Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Russian republic, says in an interview to be published here this week that German efforts to extradite Erich Honecker, the former East German leader, are being blocked by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Mr.
Yeltsin said Mr.
Gorbachev felt "moral obligations" to Mr.
Honecker and would not approve his extradition.
But Mr.
Yeltsin said he and Foreign Minister Boris D. Pankin were trying to persuade Mr.
Gorbachev to change his mind.


Rails Move People Better Than Highways
To the Editor:
Peter Passell's Economic Scene column for Oct. 30, "Transit Green, Gridlock Blues," leaves the impression that investment in rail projects is a waste of taxpayer money.


Devices Are Said to Curb Abnormal Heart Rhythm
Small battery-powered devices implanted in people with life-threatening abnormal heart rhythms have succeeded in preventing recipients from dying, new findings reported here today show.
Such abnormal rhythms can cause sudden death and often develop among the millions of people who suffer heart attacks.


Review/Pop; A Hyperactive Evening With the Chili Peppers
When the Red Hot Chili Peppers didn't get the screaming ovation they expected on Monday night at Roseland, the group's bassist, Flea, called the audience "hoity-toity" before the band started its grudging encore.
But the problem wasn't the crowd, which gleefully slam-danced at every hint of a beat; it was the band, which played a fitful, poorly paced set.
Back in 1983, when the band emerged from Los Angeles, the Red Hot Chili Peppers were one of the first bands to put funk, hard rock and rap side by side.
They became a major draw on the collegiate circuit as a post-punk version of a frat-party band; they play dance music, talk dirty and have gained a wild-man reputation by sometimes taking off their clothes.
At Roseland they were bare-chested, but their pants or bicycle shorts stayed on.


Rio Journal; Add to Economic Disaster, a Bankrupt Love Affair
The most powerful woman in modern Brazilian history, Zelia Cardoso de Mello, broke all the rules by freezing $115 billion in bank accounts last year.
Out of power today, the 38-year-old former Economy Minister has again broken the rules, this time by agreeing to be the prime source of a book chronicling her seduction and abandonment by a fellow Cabinet member.


Lawyers Now Learning Basics of Business
Corporate lawyers are known to call upon many talents to get their client companies out of jams, but odd as it seems, basic business acumen is not usually among them.
In the last year, however, several law firms across the country have started to change that.


A Greenhouse Where Bugs Are Served
IF a hell for insects exists, surely its most infernal pit is California Carnivores.
The year-old greenhouse in Guerneville, Calif., sells only insect-eating flora, and its inhabitants wreak death in ways that would shock even Bret Easton Ellis.
Under a blazing Sonoma County sun, an hour north of San Francisco, 340 varieties spend their days paralyzing, strangling, drowning and dissolving hapless bugs.
The founder, Peter D'Amato, has not escaped from these hearty eaters since 1965.
He was 10 when he found several specimens growing in a bog near his home in southern New Jersey.
"There's something hypnotic about them," he said.
"They're always involved in some kind of drama. I have to keep reminding myself that they can't think."


Energy Prices Mostly Fall; Grains and Soybeans Rise
Energy futures prices rose sharply on the New York Mercantile Exchange early yesterday on reports of a huge decline in gasoline stocks, then fell on continued weakness in home heating oil contracts.
Crude oil for delivery in December settled 15 cents lower at $22.35 a barrel; December home heating oil fell 0.66 cent, to 65.90 cents a gallon; December unleaded gasoline rose 0.61 cent, to 62.13 cents a gallon; December natural gas fell 1.5 cents, to $2.040 for 1,000 cubic feet.


Every Day, a Magic Show at the Dry Cleaners
DRY cleaning is not dry.
That was the bombshell dropped on an unprepared audience of adults and children at the New York School of Dry Cleaning this week by the sultan of stain removal, William Seitz, who followed up with another shocker.
After carefully classifying stains by type, he asked the group: "Do you know what the largest category of stain is?" A blank pause followed.
Mr.
Seitz beamed and said: "Unknown!"
Mr.
Seitz proceeded to dissolve ignorance as he would a gravy stain, explaining such mysteries as solvent action, wetside and dryside lubrication and why you should never blame your dry cleaner for anything because it is not his fault.


Bush Is Said to Hold Off on Israeli Loan Backing
President Bush told leaders of American Jewish organizations Tuesday that he would not yet commit himself to the $10 billion in loan guarantees that Israel is seeking to help it absorb tens of thousands of Soviet Jewish immigrants.
But as one of the leaders, Edgar Bronfman, president of the World Jewish Congress, said, "On every other subject, the President was very positive in addressing our concerns."


EXECUTIVES
*
Ann Taylor Stores Corp., New York, said its chairman and chief executive, Joseph E. Brooks, would retire next year after a successor has been found. *
Federal-Mogul Corp., Southfield, Mich., a precision-parts manufacturer, named Martin E. Welch 3d senior vice president and chief financial officer.


Panel on High-Speed Trains Sees Need for Subsidies
A panel of experts reported today that proposed high-speed passenger trains could probably not cover their expenses through fares and would have to be subsidized by the Government to operate in the United States.
The report, produced for the Transportation Department by a branch of the National Academy of Sciences, was more cautious than some other analyses issued in recent years by the Government and by industry groups.


Breast Implants Are Imperiled As U.S. Rejects Safety Data
In a strong indication that the Government will act to end or sharply limit the sale of silicone gel breast implants, a Food and Drug Administration panel voted overwhelmingly today to reject the safety data of the leading manufacturer, the Dow Corning Wright Company, and a second producer.
The panel said the data were not enough to prove that the implants were safe.


A.T.&amp; T. Credit Card Rate Is Cut
A.T.&amp; T., a new but rapidly growing force in the credit card business, said yesterday that it had pushed up plans to cut the interest rates on its Universal Card to 16.4 percent from 17.4 percent.
"We think the lower rates can make a lot of difference and help consumers feel good before Christmas," said Paul Kahn, the president of A.T.&amp; T. Universal Card Services.
A.T.&amp; T., whose 11 million cards make it the fourth-largest issuer in the industry, has now reduced rates on its cards by two and a half percentage points this year.


Siemens Profit Rises 7%
Siemens A.G. said today that earnings in the year ended Sept. 30 totaled 1.79 billion German marks ($1.1 billion), up 7 percent from 1.668 billion marks in the 1990 fiscal year.
The Munich-based computer, telecommunications, electronics and power engineering company said sales rose 16 percent, to 73.1 billion marks from 63.2 billion marks.


Money Fund Yields Move Sharply Lower
Yields on both tax-exempt and taxable money market funds fell sharply in the week that ended yesterday, mostly in response to the Federal Reserve's recent easing of credit, according to IBC/Donoghue's, which monitors the funds and issues The Money Fund Report.
"We expect it will take a few weeks before we see any further action by the Federal Reserve," said Walter S. Frank, chief economist for IBC/ Donoghue's.
"The all-important Christmas season will determine the Fed's next move."


Armani and Saks Plan New Stores
The Giorgio Armani Corporation said it would open a 3,500-square-foot boutique in Manhasset, L.I., in February.
The shop, the company's sixth in the United States, will carry the full range of the designer Giorgio Armani's men's and women's products under the Borgonuovo and Le Collezioni labels.
Armani currently has a much smaller boutique in Manhasset that only sells women's apparel.


Giants Must Avoid Block Party
Two Sundays ago, against the Phoenix Cardinals, Robert Williams of the Dallas Cowboys blocked a punt.
That led to a field goal that helped the Cowboys win, 27-7.
Last Sunday, against the Houston Oilers, Issiac Holt of the Cowboys blocked a punt, Williams caught the ball in the air and ran 18 yards for a touchdown and the Cowboys led, 7-0.
The next time the Oilers had the ball, Darrick Brownlow blocked a punt that led to a Cowboys' field goal and a 10-0 lead.


Doctors Reach Tentative Pact In Brooklyn
A tentative agreement has been reached between striking doctors at Woodhull hospital and the corporation that pays their salaries, apparently after pressure was applied by the Mayor's office.
The doctors, whose walkout on Tuesday halted all but the most urgent business at Brooklyn's second-busiest hospital, could return to work as early as this morning, their union said.


S.&amp; P.'s Concern on Mexico
The price of Mexican debt fell yesterday when the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation expressed worry about the country's ability to pay its bills.
S.&amp; P. said Mexico's ability to repay long-term foreign debt was "only adequate, with minimal protection likely during unfavorable circumstances."


House-to-House Fighting in Croatian City Nears End
Pro-Serb Yugoslav Army troops fought house-to-house gun battles today with Croatian militiamen trapped in the ruins of this Danube River town in what were obviously the last hours of a siege that began almost three months ago.
"We have no reason to push forward quickly," said Maj.
Borivoje Tesic, as army artillery pounded the two remaining Croatian strongholds in Vukovar.
"That would only result in more casualties." Croatia's government has for months held up Vukovar as a symbol of resistance to Serbia's and the army's campaign to strip away Serb-populated Croatian lands.


At Saturn Plant, a Vote on Innovation
The Saturn Corporation, General Motors' lofty experiment to reinvent labor relations while building a competitive small car, is getting a dose of reality from its union.
Nearly 4,700 Saturn workers are expected to approve a new labor contract today -- a "memorandum of agreement" in Saturn's parlance -- that would scale back some of the innovative features of the original accord that linked a portion of pay to profits.
The changes would also allow any worker who does not like Saturn's try at a self-directed workplace to opt out with a severance agreement of up to $50,000.
It would further permit workers to return to a more conventional pension plan, if they want.


Yeltsin Gets an S O S
Political infighting among Russian yachtsmen for recognition as the republic's 1992 America's Cup challenger has forced San Diego race officials to request BORIS YELTSIN to intervene.


Rivals in Louisiana Intensifying Pace and Vitriol
With three days to go in the Louisiana governor's race, State Representative David Duke accused former Gov.
Edwin W. Edwards today of heightening racial tensions to mobilize the black vote, while Mr.
Edwards stepped up attacks on Mr.
Duke's competence and questioned the sincerity of his religious beliefs.
Three and a half weeks after the rivals took the top two spots in the Oct. 19 primary, two polls released today showed solid support of core constituencies for each candidate, which analysts said should insure each of them at least 40 percent of the vote in Saturday's election.


Essay; Call Me Gospodin
My contact said to meet the group across the street from the October movie theater.
Long familiar with clandestine meetings in this capital, I murmured assent, arrived early and waited in the cold rain.
In the group was a writer with a black beard that made him look like Karl Marx; a dissenter who had once hijacked a plane to try an escape, and an eager young physicist in a black jacket with a strange-looking medal on it.
Before going to the angry meeting of the Democratic Russia movement in the theater, we slipped into black-jacket's office in a nearby building to compare notes.


Why Kashmir Chose To Unite With India
To the Editor:
"Behind Its Mountain Walls, Kashmir Wages Vicious War" (front page, Oct. 28), though otherwise thoughtful, perpetuates a longstanding historical error.
Kashmir, on India's far north in the borderland with Pakistan, was not "forcefully brought" into the Indian Union in 1947.


At Last, Aid for the Jobless
Congressional Democrats were slow to spot the need for additional aid to the long-term jobless this year, but President Bush was even slower.
For four months, since July, he resisted extra unemployment insurance as unnecessary and too costly.
The economy's weak recovery and his own weakness in recent polls have finally driven him to accept what he rejected only a few weeks ago.
It's high time.
The unemployment insurance bill that he now seems likely to accept will provide essentially the same benefits the Democrats proposed and the President opposed from the start.
The big difference is that this bill nominally includes revenue to pay for the extra benefits, which the others did not.
The estimates of anticipated revenue include some typical Washington bookkeeping artistry.


ISRAEL EMPHASIZES HARD-LINE STANCE
With the Middle East peace process waiting to enter a new phase, Israeli leaders have chosen to emphasize their resolve against making territorial compromises with their Arab neighbors.
On Monday, Parliament passed a resolution with broad support from the governing Likud Party and the opposition Labor Party, declaring that Israel's control of the Golan Heights was nonnegotiable and that, if anything, more Jewish settlements should be put there.


U.S. Nearer Farm Accord With Europe
American and European Community officials said today that they were approaching a compromise on reducing subsidies to farmers -- a major stumbling block in global trade talks -- but that some obstacles remained.
Negotiations picked up steam after President Bush met with European Community leaders last weekend, the officials said, and both sides have adopted more conciliatory positions.
A breakthrough might allow for a conclusion later this year of the 108-nation round of trade talks covering a broad range of issues.


Stop the Political Campaign Spending Frenzy
To the Editor:
Your "Pulse/Campaign Spending" graphic (Nov. 4), showing campaign spending leaders in contests for the New Jersey Assembly and State Senate, and the New York City Council, is another shocking reminder of the fund-raising fever that afflicts American politics.
You show the biggest spenders exceeding the average candidate's spending by 5 times to almost 40 times.


Dollar Off in U.S. Trading And Gold Is Up Moderately
The dollar was mostly lower in domestic trading yesterday in a muted reaction to a surge in inflation last month.
It rose overseas.
Gold prices rose modestly, gaining 70 cents on the Commodity Exchange in New York, to $356.60 an ounce.
The Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $356.10, up 45 cents.


Willard Swire, Official Of Equity, Dies at 81
Willard Swire, for many years an official of the Actors' Equity Association, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old.
His death was apparently caused by a heart attack, said Dick Moore, the union's press representative.


Tale of Nazi Horror Unfurls in Stuttgart Trial
As the Nazi terror recedes into history, a trial under way here offers a stark look at perhaps its most vicious living practicioner.
The defendant, Josef Schwammberger, who is now 79 years old, commanded three forced-labor camps in Poland during his years as an SS lieutenant.
Testimony being given in Stuttgart suggests that during those years, he descended to an extraordinary level of savagery.


And on the Ninth Day of Gridlock . . .
There are the twelve days of Christmas, with partridges in pear trees, turtledoves and gold rings.
There are the eight days of Hanukkah, with menorahs and dreidels and chocolate coins wrapped in gold foil.
And then there are the nine days of gridlock, with Peter A. Pennica and about a million cursing, teeth-gnashing New York drivers.
Like that jolly old guy who ho-ho-ho's his way across the sky -- no traffic tieups there -- the 44-year-old Mr.
Pennica has a beard.
But his is mostly black, he is a good deal thinner than Santa and he is no bearer of glad tidings.
As chief of the traffic analysis bureau in the city Department of Transportation, he is the person who decides when to declare gridlock alerts.


CONGRESS'S BANK WON'T BE REVIVED
As accountants for the House ethics committee work to complete the first phase of an investigation into members who overdrew their accounts at the House bank, House leaders have emphatically rejected a suggestion from a committee chairman that the decision to close the institution be reconsidered.
The reaction underscored the continued discomfort of lawmakers about the appearance that they abused their privileges.


Drug Stock Drops After F.D.A. Delay
Stock in Immune Response Inc. lost more than 25 percent of its value after a Food and Drug Administration panel dimmed hopes for quick approval for the company's AIDS vaccine, traders said.
Immune Response lost $15.75 in over-the-counter trading yesterday, closing at $46.
The stock was among the most active issues.
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, Immune Response's partner on the AIDS vaccine, was off $2.75, to $55.75, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Bruce Hubbard Dies; Operatic Baritone, 39
Bruce Hubbard, a baritone who sang both opera and musical theater, died on Tuesday at New York University Hospital.
He was 39 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of pneumonia, said his mother, Hannah Poindexter of Indianapolis.


The Daily News Will Seek a Deputy Chief
Kevin Maxwell, publisher of The Daily News and son of the late Robert Maxwell, yesterday assigned one of his father's close associates to find a deputy publisher who will be responsible for the newspaper's day-to-day operations.
Mr.
Maxwell announced that Charles Wilson, editorial director of the Maxwell family's Mirror Group Newspapers in London, had been named executive vice president of The Daily News.
Mr.
Wilson said in a statement that his first task was to appoint someone to function as the paper's chief executive.


Brightness of a Star In Nonstellar Roles
Kate Nelligan is intelligent, direct, well-mannered and on time.
No wonder she's not a star.
This three-time Tony nominee for Best Actress has reshaped her career, abandoning the big, bravura leading roles that made her famous in favor of secondary character parts that will keep her famous.
Her recent comic turn in the film "Frankie and Johnny" as a gum-snapping, wise-cracking waitress was so unexpected that people swore it was someone else.
And that is in sharp contrast to the serious role she plays in the forthcoming "Prince of Tides" as Nick Nolte's emotionally withholding, nightmarish mother, at the ages of 30 and 70.


Auburn's Accuser Sets Sights on Dye
They have been in hiding for nearly five weeks.
Viewed by some as outcasts in their own state, they have been called heroes and mercenaries, martyrs and traitors.
They have received threats of violence, they say, and inspired spiteful decals and bumper stickers.
During the last three months, Eric and Twillitta Ramsey have taken on one of the flagship football programs in college sports and one of the nation's most powerful coaches.
In the process of possibly exposing wrongdoing within Auburn University's football program, they have stirred up sensitive issues of greed, race and exploitation.
And there will be more.


1-2 Punch: Ewing Is Ejected, Knicks Lose
On a night when Patrick Ewing was ejected early in the second period, the Knicks refused to fold, responded with fury, pushed the Pacers to the limit, but left the arena dejected anyway.
Playing without their All-Star center for the final 34 minutes, the Knicks fought gallantly before losing to Indiana, 110-107, at Market Square Arena.


Banned Miami Player Split by Instincts, Law and Big Game
A few doors away at the University of Miami athletic complex, Martin Patton's football teammates were preparing for practice.
The focal point of their season, the long-anticipated game against fellow unbeaten Florida State, was three days away.
And Patton, the sophomore fullback who was suspended indefinitely from the team after being arrested early Sunday, has not yet decided how he will spend what would have been the most important Saturday of his college career.


CHRONICLE
W.
Averell Harriman was born 100 years ago tomorrow, and so, starting today, friends, family, colleagues and scholars are assembling to study, analyze and celebrate the life of the man who was an ambassador, a Cabinet member, a Governor of New York and an international negotiator.
As Senator DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN, who is to be one of the speakers at a daylong observance today at the Library of Congress, put it: "He was there at the creation, the creation of the postwar era, and he helped shape the institutions prevailing in 45 years of encounters with the Soviet Union that are now just ending: the Defense Department, the C.I.A., the foreign aid program."


Gretzky's Father Starts Treatment
Wayne Gretzky's father, who underwent brain surgery last month, was moved to a rehabilitation center today to begin treatment.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Joel Helleny Sextet  Condon' 117 East 15th Street Manhattan Through November
Joel Helleny and Dan Barrett, two of the most adept masters of the growls and wah-wahs pioneered on trombone in the 1920's by Tricky Sam Nanton with Duke Ellington's band, are playing together in Mr.
Helleny's group.
But there are no trombone duets.
Mr.
Barrett is playing cornet, on which he is heard with relative infrequency.


Pop and Jazz in Review
McCoy Tyner  Fat Tuesday's
The pianist McCoy Tyner hasn't been well served by his bands over the last decade or so, and his performances tend to become leaden and thick.
But on Friday, Mr.
Tyner was using an extraordinary rhythm section, including the bassist Ron Carter and the drummer Al Foster, and suddenly the music took up Mr.
Tyner's potential.


As Recession Tightens Its Grip, Hopes of Jobless Dwindle and Fears Mount: Manhattan; A Fashion Designer Is 'Overqualified'
Barbara Kerin owns an elegant one-bedroom apartment in the Murray Hill section of Manhattan.
Her savings account alone could support her for at least a year.
And her resume details her more than 20 years' experience as a fashion designer, working with companies like Macy's.
But those assets are of little comfort these days.
Like many other high-level professionals -- from corporate vice presidents to academic deans -- she is out of work.


Bronx School Chief Says He's Facing 'Witch Hunt'
A school superintendent appointed to clean up a long-troubled Bronx district has revealed that he is himself the subject of what he calls a "witch hunt" by the school system's chief investigator.
In a flood of letters to Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and other officials, the superintendent, Alfredo Mathew Jr., complained that the investigator, Edward Stancik, was conducting a "flagrant fishing expedition" and personal vendetta.


Review/Television; Sherlock Holmes Solves A Two-Ended Mystery
Returning to "Mystery" in five new hourlong cases, Jeremy Brett has become television's quintessential Sherlock Holmes.
These latest episodes bring to a total of 34 hours since 1984 the Granada Television productions that star Mr.
Brett as Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's fictional detective.
One curious development: the more the actor painstakingly refines and enriches his portrayal, the more he tends to suggest in his increasingly chilly cerebrations the interpretation of another actor closely associated with the role, Basil Rathbone.
Even if unintentional, the effect is perfectly on target.
In these new additions to "The Casebook of Sherlock Holmes," England has turned the century, shifting from a Victorian to an Edwardian mode.
Holmes, however, remains remarkably resistant to change.
He still lives at 221-B Baker Street, tended to by Mrs.
Hudson (Rosalie Williams), the unflappable housekeeper, and assisted in his amateur sleuthing by the steady Dr.
Watson (Edward Hardwicke).
For important errands, he employs the local young men known as the Baker Street Irregulars because, he explains, "they are more discreet than any telegraph."


Kenneth M. Nelson, Publishing Executive, 47
Kenneth M. Nelson, who headed the United States operations of a Dutch publishing company, Elsevier N.V., died on Sunday at his home in Mendham, N.J.
He was 47 years old.
He died of liver cancer, said his secretary, Candy Thompson.


Corrections
A map on Nov. 6 showing pharmaceutical companies in northern New Jersey misidentified one in East Hanover.
It is the Sandoz Pharmaceuticals Corporation.


Three European Nations Propose U.N. Peace Force for Yugoslavia
In an attempt to buttress European efforts to end the Yugoslav civil war, Britain, France and Belgium urged the United Nations Security Council today to dispatch a peacekeeping force to Yugoslavia if the warring Serbian and Croatian factions will agree to a lasting cease-fire.
These three countries -- the three European Community members of the Security Council -- are now drafting a new resolution asking Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar to see whether the battling forces would agree to suspend the fighting and allow United Nations units to take up positions between their forces.


State Troopers Vote On a Hartford Offer
Connecticut's state troopers voted in Hartford yesterday on a proposed concessionary contract under which they would give up this year's meal allowance and most of next year's scheduled raises.
In return, 111 laid-off troopers would be given their jobs back on Friday and the troopers would get six months of job security.
David McCluskey, a spokesman for the Connecticut State Police Union, predicted that the giveback proposal would be adopted by the required majority of the union's 934 members but said the outcome would not be known until midday tomorrow.


Review/Cabaret; Recalling A Lyricist's Golden Age
Sally Mayes has the curly blond hair, cherry lips and wholesome spunk of a Ginger Rogers character from the 1040's and a belting pop-jazz delivery that matches that look.
It is a voice well suited to interpreting the lyrics of Dorothy Fields, whose work Ms.
Mayes is performing at Eighty-Eight's, 228 West 10th Street, Manhattan, Friday evenings at 11 P.M. through Dec. 27.
She also recently completed an album of Fields's songs, which DRG Records is to release in two weeks.
The most important female lyricist from the golden age of the Broadway musical, Fields expressed a playful feminine assertiveness in her songs while shying away from outright defiance of the masculine romantic standards laid down by Ira Gershwin, Irving Berlin, Lorenz Hart and other eminent songwriters in the theater.
Ms.
Mayes does not dwell on the nuances of Fields's lyrics, but her bright, mostly vibratoless singing has a self-assured swagger, and she is not afraid of taking interpretive risks.


An Ethnic Push In Credit Cards
A Connecticut bank and a Spanish-language television network are embarking on a nationwide effort to market credit cards to Hispanic customers.
People's Bank, based in Bridgeport, began offering the cards today through a special toll-free number, and will make applications and monthly statements available in Spanish and English.


In Mel Miller Trial, Witness Tells of Secret Co-op Deals
Testifying as the prosecution's main witness, the operator of a real-estate business said yesterday that he took part in three real-estate schemes with Mel Miller, the Speaker of the New York State Assembly, and his longtime law partner, Jay Adolf.
The witness, Avi Cohen, said that in one deal to buy eight cooperative apartments in a Brooklyn building, Mr.
Miller told him to find someone else whose name could be used as the buyer of the apartments.


METRO DIGEST
THE FACE OF UNEMPLOYMENT
In New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, the recession has been tenacious and indiscriminate, an equal opportunity un-employer that has struck the work force in virtually every job category, tightening its grip over the last two-and-a-half years.
Layoffs continue to thin out factories, stores and office suites around the region, even reaching to the usually untouchable, civil servants.
Five profiles in unemployment, page B8.
NEW YORK CITY CLOAK AND DAGGER IN THE BRONX?
A superintendent hired to clean up a troubled Bronx school district has complained that he is the subject of a cloak-and-dagger "witch hunt" and "fishing expedition" by the city's chief school investigator.
Page B3.
DEFENDING A DECISION
Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown defended his decision to send two police arson specialists to advise a friend of the Mayor's about a fire in the man's Long Island mansion.
He added that he would do the same for anyone.
Page B3.
THE TRIALS OF A TRAVELING MAYOR
Mayor David N. Dinkins may not be jinxed, but even in Johannesburg, half a world away from the problems that dog daily him in New York, he could be forgiven for wondering.
Page B4.
THE MAN BEHIND THOSE GRIDLOCK ALERTS
As chief of the traffic analysis bureau in the city's Department of Transportation, Peter A. Pennica is the person who decides to declare those gridlock-alert days when you
really
shouldn't drive your car into Manhattan.
He relies on computerized traffic-flow data, equations and 13 years of experience at counting the 800,000 vehicles that chug in every day.
Page B3.
Testimony ends in trial over gay man's slaying.
Page B2.
Family seeks inquiry in man's death after encounter with the police.
Page B2.
Lubavitcher Rebbe's driver drove without a license.
Page B6.
Key government witness testifies in Miller trial.
Page B5.
A Queens temple for India's Untouchables.
Richmond Hill Journal, page B4.
REGION NEW PRESSURE ON CUOMO
Even as the Democratic National Committee applied new pressure on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to disclose his Presidential plans, the state Democratic chairman said the Governor could wait until Thanksgiving.
Page B7.
PROFILE OF A LEGISLATURE
When the 205th session of the New Jersey Legislature convenes in January, its members will be slightly younger, much less experienced and overwhelmingly Republican.
But the most profound impact of the voter revolt that turned nearly a third of the 120 legislators out of office last week may well be the shift from the cities to the suburbs.
Page B7.
REDISTRICTING BATTLE BEGINS
With Republicans now in the majority in both houses of the New Jersey Legislature, the battle lines are drawn over who will lose a seat in the upcoming Congressional redistricting.
Page B7.
TAX-CUTTING BATTLE CONTINUES
Democrats and Republicans in Trenton escalated their political warfare over who will be the first to cut taxes -- and who will be responsible for replacing the lost revenue.
Page B7.


Bush Should Have Visited Japan
Of all of President Bush's countless foreign journeys, few were more important to America than the one he recently canceled, with damaging effects: his trip to Japan, the world's No. 2 economic power.
The visit would have provided a rare opportunity to make headway in closing the huge U.S.-Japan trade imbalance, which makes our limping economy even weaker.
Japan's new Prime Minister is even more hard line on trade than his predecessor.
Mr.
Bush should have understood his ascent as a signal that we must pursue trade issues more vigorously with Japan.
Instead, it inspired a retreat.


U.S. Calls North Korea Atom Plan a Global Concern
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d told South Korea today that Washington considered North Korea's suspected development of nuclear weapons a matter of urgent global concern and that it was now actively exploring with Japan, China and the Soviet Union ways to curtail the move.
South Korea's Foreign Minister, Lee Sang Ock, endorsed the American initiative to try to further isolate North Korea economically and diplomatically until it opened its nuclear installation to international inspection and halted work on what is suspected to be a reprocessing plant capable of producing hundreds of pounds of weapons-grade plutonimum, a senior Korean official said.


Indictments Are Expected in Pan Am Jetliner Bombing
Federal prosecutors are expected to announce on Thursday the indictment of Libyan terrorists suspected of carrying out the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988, Government officials said today.
At least one of those covered in the indictment by a Federal grand jury has also been implicated in the bombing of a French airliner over Africa in September 1989.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Transvision Vamp  Limelight
"Are you bored?" Wendy James of Transvision Vamp asked halfway through the band's set on Sunday night.
The audience had yet to offer more than a smattering of applause.
Perhaps the problem was Ms.
James's outfit.
Since this British band's 1988 debut, Ms.
James, the lead singer, has staked Transvision Vamp's reputation on her own image as a sexpot.
Wearing lingerie in photos, flaunting a nasty attitude in post-punk tunes like "Tell That Girl to Shut Up," Ms.
James has attempted to posit herself as a kind of bush-league Madonna, an alternative-rock material girl who wants to beat the industry's game by subscribing to its worst female stereotypes.


Converse's AIDS Effort Features Magic Johnson
Converse Inc. said yesterday that it would introduce its first national public-service advertising campaign, centering on AIDS and featuring its longtime spokesman, Magic Johnson.
The announcement of the campaign, which had been expected, came six days after Mr.
Johnson, a Converse spokesman since 1979, disclosed he had the HIV virus and had said would be a "spokesman for the virus."


The Shunned Find Comfort in a Caste
Kumar Chowdhary converted to Buddhism as a teen-ager in his native India, in part to escape his caste identity.
But here in New York, the 54-year-old engineer regularly visits a small temple in Queens that worships an Indian saint who embodies the struggles and victories of the downtrodden of India -- the Untouchables.
To walk into the Sri Guru Ravi Dass Sabha, a temple in a storefront beneath the elevated tracks of the J train, is to step from the relative simplicities of American life into the maze of Indian religion and caste.


Donald T. Birdzell, White House Guard, 82
Donald T. Birdzell, a retired White House guard who was wounded defending President Harry S. Truman in a 1950 assassination attempt, died last Saturday.
He was 82 years old.
Mr.
Birdzell was wounded in both knees in a gunfight with two Puerto Rican nationalists who tried to shoot their way into Blair House in Washington, where Truman was staying.


A Dog Show On National TV
The American Kennel Club yesterday announced it will hold a national invitational championship at the Baltimore Arena on April 7.
The top 50 dogs in each of the seven groups -- sporting, hound, working, terrier, toy, non-sporting and herding -- and the national specialty winners in each breed will be invited.
There will be $50,400 in prize money, with $10,000 for the champion.


Review/Dance; Some Heavy Artillery From Toronto
Some dance companies not only get curiouser and curiouser; they also get better and better.
The Toronto Dance Theater, which put on a first-class show when it opened on Tuesday night, is a prime example.
The Canadian modern-dance troupe has been sighted in highly scattered fashion in New York over the years, and to all intents and purposes this weeklong engagement at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street) is a major Manhattan debut.
The company's last local appearance was at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College in 1985 and this time around the troupe has arrived with heavy choreographic artillery.


Mercedes-Benz to Review Account With McCaffrey
IN a decision that left agency, and industry, executives stunned, Mercedes-Benz of North America Inc. said yesterday that it was putting up for review its estimated $90 million account that has been at McCaffrey &amp; McCall since 1979.
The unexpected announcement came in a statement by Mike Jackson, the senior vice president for marketing and sales at the German automobile maker's American subsidiary in Montvale, N.J.


A Great Fake Lives On In Kitchens and History
THE fake has a special niche in American culture.
From toupees to vinyl siding, from Las Vegas to synthetic fingernails, we are a nation that exalts in the "faux" as much as the "beaux."
This penchant for fake things that look real, and fake things that look fabulously fake, is manifested in a once-miraculous material that has become so ubiquitous as to be almost invisible.
Even its name, Formica, proclaims its status as a great pretender (it made its debut in 1913 as a substitute for mica).


Poland's Ex-Communists Met Soviet Hard-Liners
Poland's former Communists, under pressure from disclosures in the Moscow press, have acknowledged contacts with Soviet hard-liners, including talks about possible joint business ventures.
The ties, which began shortly after the fall of Communism in Poland in 1989, included a supposedly chance meeting in the Crimea this summer between leaders of the failed Soviet coup and some Polish former Communists.


Hanson Baldwin, Military Writer, Dies
Hanson W. Baldwin, retired military-affairs editor of The New York Times and the author of more than a dozen books on military and naval history and policy, died yesterday at his home in Roxbury, Conn.
He was 88 years old.
Mr. Baldwin died of heart failure, his family said.


Swiss Concern, Alcoa in Deal
Alcoa said today that it would form a joint venture with Alusuisse-Lonza Holding Ltd. of Switzerland to make flat- rolled products for the European automotive, industrial and aerospace markets.
Alcoa will have a 60 percent stake in the venture, which will invest about $210 million in modernizing the aluminum rolling equipment, smelter and ingot casting operations of Alusuisse Swiss Aluminum, a subsidiary of Alusuisse-Lonza.
A final agreement is expected in several months, the companies said.
They added that they would discuss other opportunities.


Fire Cost Report By Public Service
The Public Service Enterprises Group, the parent of the Public Service Electric and Gas Company of Newark, said the financial impact of a fire at its Salem 2 nuclear generating station in Salem, N.J., on Saturday would be minimal.
It said the plant was covered by $2.3 billion in property insurance and $3.5 million a week in replacement power insurance.
The insurance covers Public Service, which owns 42.6 percent of the plant; the Philadelphia Electric Company, which owns an equal share, and the Atlantic City Electric Company and the Delmarva Power and Light Company, which own 7.4 percent each.


Report Says U.S. Industry In a Decline
A new five-year Congressional study warns that American manufacturing has lost its competitive edge and recommends that the Government consider various strategies to halt the decline.
White House Opposition
The Bush Administration has opposed such efforts as "industrial policy" that would reward industries with the most political influence, rather than those that would help America compete globally.
Like the Reagan Administration, the Bush Administration has championed free markets and free trade, and has insisted that the market was better suited than Government to choose industries and technologies that would make aid the nation's welfare.


Calcium Reduces Hypertension in Pregnancy
A simple nutritional change, increasing calcium consumption, helps prevent the development of high blood pressure in pregnancy, a new study has shown.
Hypertension that develops in late pregnancy poses serious health hazards for the mother and is a major cause of prematurity and low birth-weight babies.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  ONLY SO EUROPEAN
Prime Minister John Major has made it clear that Britain would be prepared to accept a plan for a single European currency by the end of the century, but only if it is not part of a political union.
Page A1  RADICAL SURGERY FOR YUGOSLAVIA
Britain, France and Belgium urged the United Nations Security Council to dispatch a peacekeeping force to Yugoslavia if warring Serbian and Croatian troops agree to a lasting cease-fire.
A1  Yugoslavs fought Croatian defend ers house to house in Vukovar.A8  PROGRESS ON PAN AM 103 SEEN
Indictments are expected to be announced today in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103.
A3  NUCLEAR FEAR
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, in South Korea, said the United States was concerned about North Korea's suspected development of nuclear weapons and was exploring ways to curtail it.
A14  HOPE FOR SOUTH AFRICAN TALKS
A conference of South African political parties to lay the groundwork for formal talks on a post-apartheid future may begin this month.
A15  ISRAELIS' HARD LINE
With the Mideast peace process in limbo for the present and perhaps soon to enter a new phase, Israeli leaders are emphasizing their resolve against making territorial compromises with the Arabs.
A7  President Bush reportedly will not yet commit U.S. to loan guarantees.
A6  INDONESIA PLEDGES TIMOR INQUIRY
Indonesia, until recently isolated in foreign affairs, took the unusual step of ordering an investigation into an army shooting on a memorial procession in East Timor.
A12  U.S. envoy won't rule out a Khmer Rouge return to power in Cambodia.
A3  Rio Journal: A book that opens Brazilian politicians' boudoir door.
A4  Poland's ex-Communists acknowledged talks with Soviet hard-liners.
A16  At a trial in Stuttgart, a tale of Nazi forced labor and terror.
A17  National A18-27, B12-17  FAMILY LEAVE BILL GAINS
The House approved a bill, nearly identical to one already passed by the Senate, that would guarantee many workers unpaid leaves of up to three months for family emergencies.
But the vote fell short of the two-thirds that would be needed to override a veto, which the White House is planning.
A1  Agreement was reached on the unemployment bill.
A20  Bush carried his attack on Democrats to Missouri.
B16  Leaders rejected a suggestion that the House bank remain open.
A22  PRODUCER PRICES UP SHARPLY
In an inflation report that startled analysts, the Government said prices received by producers jumped 0.7 percent in October, the biggest monthly increase in a year.
A1  LOUISIANA RACE HEATS UP
With three days to go in the Louisiana governor's race, David Duke and Edwin Edwards stepped up their attacks on each other.
A1  Behind the white supremacist group that Duke founded.
B12  VOTE AGAINST BREAST IMPLANTS
An F.D.A. advisory panel concluded that a leading manufacturer of breast implants had failed to demonstrate their safety.
The vote was a strong signal that the panel would recommend halting or sharply limiting sale of the implants.
A1  The F.D.A moved to speed approval of drugs.
B14  REPORT ON CARDIAC ARREST
A study found that people suffering from cardiac arrest who are not revived by rescue workers are virtually certain to die before leaving the hospital and that it is therefore a waste of time to take them to a hospital.
A1  Gains were reported in treating abnormal heart rhythms.
A26  Calcium was shown to help prevent high blood pressure in pregnancy.
A24  MEN, SEASON BY SEASON
Men have better spatial ability when tested in spring than in autumn, and the variation appears to be linked to fluctuations in male sex hormones, a scientist found.
B14  JUSTICES LOOK AT SEGREGATION
The Supreme Court met to consider an issue it had never addressed: what a state must do to overcome a legacy of segregation in its public university system.
A18  DEADLINE IN PHILADELPHIA
By all accounts, Mayor-elect Edward G. Rendell has only six months to a year to show state legislators and Wall Street that he can make lemonade out of Philadelphia's sour finances.
Many people think he's up to the task.
A18  Acting Attorney General said the B.C.C.I. inquiry had expanded.
B13  Catholic bishops came down on the side of traditional holidays.
A18  Experts said high-speed trains would need U.S. subsidies.
A23  Pennsylvania was sued over Medicaid requirements.
A20  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest D1  The Home Section  A great fake lives on in kitchens -- and in history.
C1  The rebuilding of a house, from memory.
C1  Every day a magic show at the dry cleaner's.
C1  Christmas wreath styles turn away from tradition.
C6  Arts/Entertainment  Kate Nelligan's roles.
C17  Contemporary art sale at Sotheby's.
C17  Music: Julie Wilson sings Cole Porter and Noel Coward.
C16  Sally Mayes in cabaret.
C19  Dance: Movement Research extends its free shows.
C15  Premieres from Toronto.
C17  Word and Image: New Sherlock Holmes tale.
C28  Home Video.
C28  Obituaries D23-24  Cardinal Leger, Canadian prelate who aided Lepers.
D23  Samuel J. Cohen, a labor lawyer.
D23  Hanson Baldwin, military writer.
D24  Sports B18-24  Baseball: Third Cy Young award for Clemens.
B19  Basketball: Pacers defeat Knicks.
B21  Nets lose to Jazz.
B21  Boxing: Notebook B23  Column: Anderson on Magic Johnson.
B19  Football: Dye knew, Auburn accuser says B19  Miami player reflects on suspension.
B24  Hockey: Capitals beat Rangers, 5-3.
B22 Editorials/Op-Ed  Editorials A28  The many David Dukes.
At last, aid for the jobless.
The Speaker joins the fight.
Topics: Why more flags?
Letters A28  Tom Wicker: Question at the C.I.A.
A29  William Safire: Call me Gospodin.
A29  Mario Cuomo: Bush should have visited Japan.
A29  David A. Hidalgo: The case for breast implants.
A29


LARGE RISE POSTED IN PRODUCER PRICES
In an inflation report that startled analysts, prices received by American producers jumped seven-tenths of 1 percent in October, the biggest increase in a year, Government figures showed today.
But close examination found the report much less worrisome than it first appeared.
Given the weak economy -- and perhaps lulled by a string of favorable reports -- most specialists had expected little change in the Producer Price Index for Finished Goods, which measures inflation in the cost of goods just before they reach retail shelves and showrooms.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
FLOOR tiles made of vinyl, cork and other resilient materials offer a more manageable alternative to flooring sold in large sheets.
Tiles, which usually measure 12 inches a side, are easier to attach and trim than sheet flooring, and are usually more economical when you are covering only a small area, like a bathroom floor.
Many home centers carry resilient floor tiles, as well as squares of carpet and solid wood that can be installed the same way.
Depending on the requirements of the adhesive (these are printed on the container), new tile flooring can often be attached directly over existing flooring.
But unless the floor is perfectly flat and smooth, you should first cover the old floor with quarter-inch-thick plywood or hardboard underlayment fastened with nails or construction adhesive.


U.S. Diplomat Warns of Return by Khmer Rouge
The highest-ranking American diplomat to serve in Cambodia since the mid-1970's said today that while he believed "very strongly" that the Khmer Rouge would not return to power in Cambodia after a United Nations-sponsored peace plan, that could not be ruled out.
The diplomat, Charles H. Twining Jr., the United States special representative to the new transitional Government of Cambodia, said in an interview that the Khmer Rouge could return to power if the United States and other countries that have volunteered to help rebuild Cambodia pay too little attention to its impoverished countryside, where the Khmer Rouge retains support.


Economic Memo; Critics Want Fed Power Accountable
The Federal Reserve holds an anomalous position in the American system.
An enormously powerful Government agency, it is only loosely accountable to the public and to elected officials, and it allows private citizens, basically a banking elite, to help set the Government's economic policy.
When the economy is sour, as it is now, this odd structure tends to become a focus of attention, a sponge that soaks up frustrations over the way the economy is going.


Whalers Trade Dineen
The Hartford Whalers gave up part of their past for future considerations when they traded right wing KEVIN DINEEN to the Philadelphia Flyers for left wing MURRAY CRAVEN and a 1992 draft pick.
Dineen, an assistant captain, had been with the Whalers since 1982, longer than any other player on the team.
Dineen, 28, has 214 career goals and 232 assists, but last season he played on a checking line and had a career-low 17 goals and 30 assists in 61 games.
He has four goals and two assists in 16 games this season. (AP)


Alaska Agency Gets A-1 Rating
Alaska's Housing Finance Corporation received the first A-1 rating that Standard &amp; Poor's ever assigned to unsecured debt from a state-sponsored housing finance agency.
The rating is for a $150 million commercial paper offering in Europe.
The rating reflects "the strong capital base as well as the qualilty and liquidity of the corporation's assets," S.&amp; P. said.


Renewed Speculation That Plymouth May Be Retired
Remarks this week by Lee A. Iacocca have renewed speculation here that the Chrysler Corporation is considering retiring its 63-year-old Plymouth nameplate and its fledgling Eagle brand.
But Chrysler officials say they had no plans to shuffle or drop any brands.
Asked in an interview in the Nov. 11th issue of Automotive News, a trade magazine, about Chrysler's commitment to the Eagle and Plymouth brands if their sales continued to fall, Mr.
Iacocca, Chrysler's chairman, said: "You let a brand like Chrysler do the car work and a brand like Jeep do the specialty vehicle work. I think those are the winds of change that are blowing."


Bank Inquiry Widens, Justice Dept. Nominee Says
William P. Barr, President Bush's nominee to be Attorney General, said at his confirmation hearings today that the Justice Department's investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International had expanded to six American cities from four.
Until today, the Justice Department said its inquiry into B.C.C.I. was under way in Atlanta, Miami, Tampa and Washington.
In response to questions in the second day of hearings by the Senate Judiciary Committee, Mr.
Barr said the investigation had widened to include two other cities.


Japan Pressures Pyongyang To Dismantle Nuclear Center
Stepping up pressure against North Korea's efforts to develop atomic weapons, Japan's new Prime Minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, said today that Pyongyang must dismantle a key part of its secret nuclear center if it hoped to have normal relations with Tokyo and receive economic assistance.
Until now, Japan has insisted only that the North Korean Government of President Kim Il Sung allow international inspectors to examine the secret project at Yongbyon, a move Mr.
Kim's Government has so far refused.
A senior Japanese official said tonight that Mr.
Miyazawa was now "hardening our position considerably," insisting for the first time that part of the suspected bomb-making complex be taken apart.


British Bend on Single Currency But Resist Full European Unity
With the fate of European political and monetary union in the balance, Prime Minister John Major has made clear that Britain is prepared to accept a plan for a single European currency by the end of the century, but only if it is not part of a closer federal union.
Mr.
Major, who is playing a high-stakes poker game both for British interests and his own political future, is ready to offer conditional acceptance of the plan to his European Community colleagues when they meet in the Netherlands next month, his aides say.


Putting Windmills Where It's Windy
In the first significant expansion of electricity-generating windmills beyond California, an Iowa-based utility and a California windmill company have said they want to build a wind energy farm in the Upper Midwest.
As envisioned by the planners, the plant -- which at full production would be large enough to meet the electricity needs of 100,000 households -- would be cost competitive with new electric plants fired by coal or natural gas.
Although wind energy development in this nation has so far relied on heavy tax breaks or preferential power-purchase contracts with utilities, the Midwestern plant would have no such subsidies.


Pazienza in Hospital After a Car Accident
World Boxing Association junior middleweight champion VINNY PAZIENZA is in a Warwick, R.I., hospital after a traffic accident on Tuesday left him with neck and back injuries.


Rule Changes Focusing on Net Area Leave Some in N.H.L. Seeing Red
Part of professional hockey's enduring charm is its willingness to tamper with the rules, even the important rules, without thinking through all the consequences.
It gives the game a refreshing schoolyard dimension, with participants arguing about the rules and making them up as they go along.
With the current season about one-quarter complete, two major rules changes have caused dramatic reversals of games and have angered those whose oxen have been gored.
One rule calls for protection of the goalie in his crease and the other involves the use of videotape to judge if and how the puck entered the net.


CHRONICLE
JOSEPH J. JACOBS,the chairman of the trustees of the Polytechnic University of New York from 1976 to 1986, never anticipated returning to that post, but on Tuesday, he was elected to serve again, temporarily filling the vacancy left by the death of Robert Maxwell.
Mr.
Maxwell died four months after assuming the chairmanship and becoming a presence on the Brooklyn campus.
Though the fate of a $10 million pledge that Mr.
Maxwell had made to the school remains uncertain, Dr.
Jacobs reaffirmed a pledge of $6 million that he had made.
"I had long planned to make this annoucement tonight with my good friend Bob Maxwell by my side," he said at the annual President's Associates dinner Tuesday evening.
"It was to have been a joyous occasion. Instead we mourn a great loss for the whole Polytechnic community."


Dinkins Shifts On Fiscal Plan Under Pressure
The Dinkins administration said yesterday that it would revise its four-year financial plan in an effort to satisfy Felix G. Rohatyn, the chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation.
The administration agreed to let the Financial Control Board, the state agency that oversees city finances, serve as the arbiter of whether the city accomplishes the necessary streamlining to obtain $1 billion in additional assistance from the M.A.C.
Mr.
Rohatyn met yesterday with several top Dinkins administration officials, a few days after he stunned the administration by sharply criticizing the four-year plan the Mayor released last week.


Suit Charges Pennsylvania Failed To Meet Medicaid Plan for Youth
A group of pediatricians, teachers and children's advocates sued Pennsylvania today, saying the state has failed to carry out Federal mandates to provide free and unlimited health care to poor children.
The lawsuit charges that provisions of the 1989 Federal law expanding Medicaid to include many more children of working but low-income families are not being met by the state.
It says Pennsylvania has enrolled fewer than 25 percent of eligible children, has refused to publicize the program or failed to finance it adequately and has erected barriers to participation.


Review/Theater; The Painful Economics Of Life On the Farm
The crisis leading to rural unemployment and loss of farm property is given a diligent examination in "The Rivers and Ravines," by Heather McDonald.
Originally produced at the Arena Stage in Washington, this sprawling play is having its New York premiere at the Village Theater.
Both the play and the production are marked by earnestness and ambition.
It is to the credit of the Village Theater that it has attempted the work.
Ms.
McDonald, the author of "Faulkner's Bicycle," crosscuts stories of farmers and ranchers in Colorado in the late 1970's and early 1980's.
Seduced by the suggestion that "perpetual debt is the wave of the future," they borrow in order to expand and quickly find themselves facing foreclosure.
The suicide of one distraught wife sends the other characters spinning on a path of self-doubt.


Irish Tourist Board Is Back With Hal Riney
The Irish Tourist Board yesterday reassigned its account to Hal Riney &amp; Partners, New York, from Hill Holliday Connors Cosmopulos, also in New York, its agency for eight years.
The move reunites the board with Joe O'Neill, Riney's executive creative director.
When he worked at Hill Holliday, he was credited with creating the award-winning "ancient birthplace of good times" campaign.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Ian Woosnam birdied four of the final five holes yesterday to overtake Ian Baker-Finch and win the P.G.A.
Grand Slam of Golf tournament.
Woosman, who picked up $400,000 for the victory, had six birdies and two pars on the back nine to score a 6-under-par 66 on the Kiele course at Kauai Lagoons, Hawaii.
The tournament matched the winners of golf's four Grand Slam events in a 36-hole showdown.
Woosnam, who won the Masters, finished at 9-under-par 135.
Baker-Finch, who won the British Open, shot a 71-139 and won the $250,000 second-place prize.
Payne Stewart, the United States Open winner, shot a 71-141 and won $200,00.
John Daly, who won the P.G.A.
Championship, carded a 70- 143 and received $150,000. (AP) HOCKEY Penguins Win Kevin Stevens completed a hat trick with a goal at 3:25 of overtime as the Penguins lost three two-goal leads before beating the visiting Edmonton Oilers, 5-4, in overtime.
Stevens, who scored twice in the first nine minutes of the game, was seated on the ice when he tipped Paul Coffey's shot from the lower left circle behind Bill Ranford to give Pittsburgh only its third victory in nine home games this season. (AP)
TENNIS Sampras Defeats Stich Pete Sampras, mixing power with a fine touch, beat the Wimbledon champion, Michael Stich, 6-2, 7-6 (7-3), at the Association of Tennis Professionals Tour world championships in Frankfurt yesterday.
Ivan Lendl beat Jim Courier, 6-2, 6-3, to go 2-0 in the event and virtually assure a spot in the last four.
Courier, top-seeded and No. 2 in the world, dropped to 1-1.
Guy Forget beat Karel Novacek, 6-3, 7-6, (7-3), to keep alive his chances of reaching the semifinals in the round-robin tournament.
Forget is 1-1 in the event while Novacek dropped to 0-2.
Sampras looked impressive in his first career match against Stich, breaking his opponent in the fourth game and again in the eighth, at love, to win the first set in 29 minutes.
It was the first match in the tournament for both players.
The year-end event brings together the top eight players in the world.
They are split into two groups, with the top two from each group advancing to the semifinals. (AP)


Channel One Gets New Head
Whittle Communications yesterday named Douglas J. Greenlaw the new president of Channel One, its commercially sponsored news program sent to about six million schoolchildren in classrooms each day.
Mr.
Greenlaw had been an executive vice president at MTV Networks.
Ed Winter, the chairman of the Whittle Educational Network, which supervises Channel One, said Mr.
Greenlaw had been brought in to explore new opportunities for programming to younger viewers.


Family Asks Why Man Died In Police Hands
A 29-year-old Bronx man walked into the 47th Precinct station house in the Wakefield section early Saturday morning, the police say, and less than 20 minutes later was taken in a patrol car to a hospital where he was pronounced dead on arrival.
The family of the man, Shawn Montague, yesterday demanded "a complete and impartial investigation" into his death, disputing the police account.


Pact Reached on Benefits for Jobless
Congressional leaders and White House officials reached agreement tonight on a $5.1 billion bill to extend unemployment benefits, with some recipients expected to get their checks by Thanksgiving.
After another day of intense negotiations, the House Ways and Means Committee approved the measure tonight 29 to 7, with only Republicans voting against, and lawmakers said they hoped the full House and Senate would approve the legislation and send it to President Bush on Thursday.


City Center Names Its New Administrator
Judith E. Daykin has been named executive director of City Center.
She will succeed Antony P. Micocci, who had announced he would leave the post in February.
Ms.
Daykin will have responsibility for the theater staff, programming, booking and dealing with labor unions and companies performing at City Center.
She will assume her position on Jan. 7, working with Mr.
Micocci during a five-week transition period.


The Baffling Trash Pickup Plan
J.
J.
Stitt was on vacation and sticking close to home, which was just as well.
He could use all the time he could spare to try to decipher the new garbage schedule.
"Oh, man, it's unreal," he said.
"People are putting the cans out, and it's the wrong day. They're putting out regular garbage and they should be putting out twigs; twigs when they should be putting out garbage. It's all so screwed up."


Selling the Mayor's Shelters


INSIDE
City Hall to Try Again
The Dinkins administration agreed to revise its four-year financial plan and to let the state's Financial Control Board determine whether its changes justify additional aid.
Page B1.
Korean Arms Concern U.S.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d told South Korea that North Korea's suspected nuclear development was a matter of urgent concern.
Page A14.
A Step in Pan Am 103 Case
Prosecutors are expected to announce the indictments of Libyan suspects, none apparently in the U.S., in the Pan Am 103 bombing.
Page A3.
Pact in Doctors' Strike
One day after they walked out, doctors at Woodhull hospital in Brooklyn reached an agreement that will give them 1.5 percent raises.
Page B1.
Midway Stops Flying
Midway Airlines ceased operations several hours after Northwest Airlines said it was abandoning its effort to acquire the carrier.
Page D1.


Deaths in Timor to Be Investigated
Indonesia, which only recently began to seek a larger international role after decades of virtual isolation, today took the unusual step of ordering an investigation into an army shooting attack on a memorial procession in East Timor on Tuesday.
The army commander, Gen.
Try Sutrisno, also made a rare public statement of regret, The Associated Press reported.
"I am very unhappy and regret that the incident had taken place, and we will carry out a complete investigation of the case," he said.


As Recession Tightens Its Grip, Hopes of Jobless Dwindle and Fears Mount: Forest Hills; Back to School, To Learn Software
With 15 years of experience as an administrative assistant, Phyllis Goldberg has enough confidence to describe herself as a "good worker." She spent 12 of those years at the same electronics exporting company and earned a bachelor's degree from Baruch College in Manhattan at night while working full-time.
But those qualifications have been of little help to her since April, when her most recent employer, a catering company in Manhattan, laid her off after only two months on the job.
She has been unemployed ever since, though not for lack of trying.


In Queens, 300 Denounce Plan For 24 Shelters
About 300 irate Queens residents turned out last night to protest Mayor David N. Dinkins's plan to scatter 24 shelters for the homeless throughout the city.
In the first of a series of City Council hearings on the issue, nobody had a good word for the plan.
Instead, the speakers -- residents and politicians -- offered an unambiguous message to Mayor Dinkins: Place these shelters in our neighborhoods at your political peril.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Jethro Tull  Paramount Theater
Any rock band that has been performing for more than 20 years is bound to have its stage rituals, but Jethro Tull's are stranger than most.
On Monday night, Ian Anderson, the group's founder, lead singer and flutist, had a habit of hopping around the stage on one foot.
Between solos he would twirl his flute like a baton, point it like a gun, wield it like a phallus.
His dance movements -- ballerinalike swoops and turns, elfin jigs and reels -- were somewhat less than agile.
The guitarist Martin Barre played long, showy leads during the set's frequent extended instrumental sections, and the drummer, Doane Perry, sat ensconced in a drum kit the size and complexity of a space probe.
The overall effect was a sort of cross between Spinal Tap and "The Hobbit."


On the Ground, Jets Are Now Just Another Team in Green
For the first five games of the season, the Jets were leading the National Football League in rushing, and then they began to drop in productivity.
Going into this Sunday's game against the Patriots at Foxboro, Mass., the Jets' running game has fallen to sixth place.
At first, the decline attributed to injuries along the offensive line, especially to left guards Mike Haight and Dave Cadigan.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Laurie Beechman  The Ballroom 253 West 28th Street Manhattan Through Nov. 30
Laurie Beechman, a cabaret performer who is familiar to Broadway audiences from shows like "Cats" and "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat," has always tried to keep one foot in contemporary pop while building a career in the musical theater.
In her new cabaret act, the balance between the two worlds has shifted precariously toward pop.


Contemporary Art Fails to Incite High Bidding
Sotheby's sale of contemporary art last night resulted in another evening of prices that were much lower than expected.
But bidding was more spirited than at Tuesday night's sale at Christie's, and the results were better.
Sotheby's sale totaled $24.36 million as compared with Christie's total of $15.35 million.
At Sotheby's, 20 works out of 82 did not sell; at Christie's, 27 lots of 67 did not find buyers.
Although the ample number of bidders present was proof that interest in buying art was still strong, the final figures at both auction houses showed that buyers were unswayed by the estimates that auction houses are placing on works of art, and insistent on setting their own pricing levels.
For the most part, true collectors dominated the sales, holding firm to what they considered today's fair market values.
Buyers at both sales were reluctant to bid more than $1 million. 'Prices Will Stay at This Level'
"Prices are still too high," the Manhattan art dealer Leo Castelli said last night.
"Prices will stay at this level or lower for a while."
In light of the results on Tuesday night, Sotheby's president, Diana D. Brooks, said she was pleased and relieved.
"Tonight's sale demonstrated that you can still do business in this market," Mrs.
Brooks said.
Most of the buyers were private American collectors, she added.


WHERE TO FIND IT
John Sander
(212) 751-5974.
What happens to a crystal chandelier that isn't cleaned at least once a year?
That depends on where the chandelier is hanging, said John Sander, who has cleaned chandeliers in homes for 25 years.


Two Soviet Dancers Want to Stay in the U.S.
Federal immigration officials said today that two 20-year-old dancers with the Kirov ballet have asked for "immigration benefits," a phrase that usually means a foreigner has requested asylum in the United States.
But bizarre circumstances surrounding the request by the two women underscored how the changes in the Soviet Union and the end of the cold war had transformed the artistic and political landscape.


Democrat Sees a Way to Unload Revenue Burdens on the G.O.P.
A leader in the lame-duck Democratic Legislature suggested today that the Democrats might devise a way to make their $2.8 billion tax increase survive until the end of the budget year in June, then expire, leaving it to the Republicans to come up with a way to pay the bills without that revenue next year.
The Assembly's top Republican countered that if the Democrats want to cut taxes, they should roll back Gov.
Jim Florio's entire legislative package, particularly a $1.2 billion program to provide aid to poor and middle-income school districts, and reduce property taxes.


Styles in Christmas Wreaths Veer Away From the Traditional
IF you're decking the halls this holiday season, forget the holly.
Consider instead a wreath of chilies, garlic or herbs -- or even recycled wine corks.
For wreaths, unlike weddings, the nontraditional is now in style.
"In California, people have been doing nontraditional wreaths for quite some time and it looks like they've finally gone mainstream," said Mercedes Feller, the senior vice president for merchandising at Smith &amp; Hawken in Mill Valley, Calif., near San Francisco.
Smith &amp; Hawken has more than a dozen unusual wreaths this year.
One made of edible dried apple slices tends to sell out in the weeks before Thanksgiving.


15.8% Stake in Doskocil
An investment group including members of the Bass family of Texas holds a 15.8 percent stake in the Doskocil Companies' common stock, according to a filing today with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The group said it acquired 914,153 shares in connection with the plan of reorganization Doskocil filed on Oct. 31 to emerge from bankruptcy court protection.
Doskocil, based in South Hutchinson, Kan., produces processed meats.


House Approves Extended Benefits For Those Out of Work Six Months
A $5.3 billion measure to provide up to 20 weeks of extended unemployment benefits to about 3 million people out of work at least half a year stalled in the Senate tonight after overwhelming approval in the House earlier in the day.
Some senators contended that workers in their states were getting short-changed by the complex formulas determining the number of weeks people would get unemployment benefits.
Senator Kent Conrad, Democrat of North Dakota, spoke for many when he called it "the most cockamamie formula I've ever seen."


The War of the Christmas Catalogues
The next six weeks of Christmas shopping will be critical to the sales of many retailers, but none more so than mail-order catalogue merchants.
While department stores generate up to 50 percent of their profits in the final two months of the year, many cataloguers count on the same period for 60 percent to 75 percent of their earnings.


NETWORKS TO HOLD ELECTION DEBATES
Seven national broadcast outlets will sponsor several prime-time debates among the Democratic Presidential contenders, beginning Dec. 15 on NBC, organizers of the debates announced today.
Ronald H. Brown, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, described the effort as "an unprecedented opportunity for the candidates to speak to the entire nation about the issues facing our country."


Critic's Choice/Dance; The Decisive Moments In an Old Man's Life
Wim Vandekeybus, an award-winning experimentalist from Belgium, is not an easy choreographer to love.
His high-energy work can look brutal, but it has a strangely playful, almost off-handed quality, particularly in his use of odd props.
"Always the Same Lies," to be performed by Mr.
Vandekeybus's Ultima Vez company tonight and tomorrow as part of the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, portrays an 87-year-old German through his movement and perceptions of the world.
Mr.
Vandekeybus says that like his other works, "Always the Same Lies" deals with "the intensity of moments when you don't have a choice, when other things decide for you, like falling in love, or the second an accident happens."


Dispute on Law Professor's Retirement Is Settled
A civil rights lawyer and the New Jersey law school where he teaches have reached an agreement that would allow him to continue working despite his having reached the mandatory retirement age of 70.
The problem is that the agreement depends on a $150,000 appropriation from the fiscally troubled State Legislature.


Doctors Return to Work
A group of striking doctors at Woodhull hospital returned to work yesterday and approved a new one-year contract with the corporation that pays their salaries, a union official said.
The doctors, whose walkout on Tuesday and Wednesday partly paralyzed Brooklyn's second-busiest hospital, approved the contract by a vote of 77 to 16, said Dr.
Barry Liebowitz, president of the union representing the strikers, the Doctors Council.
The contract, which was retroactive to July 1, provides for a 1.5 percent pay raise, well below the 3.5 percent the doctors had demanded.


New Publisher Is Appointed For Reader's Digest in U.S.
The Reader's Digest Association said yesterday that it had named Gregory G. Coleman publisher of the United States edition of Reader's Digest.
As part of a management reorganization, Mr.
Coleman will also remain in charge of the Reader's Digest Special Interest Magazine Group.


Alice Newhouse Is Wed in South
Alice Gross Newhouse and Bob Cahlman were married yesterday at the bride's home in New Orleans.
Rabbi David Goldstein performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Cahlman, a graduate of New York University, is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
George M. Gross of Sands Point, L.I.
Her late husband, Norman N. Newhouse, who died three years ago, was the executive editor of The Long Island Press and later supervised Newhouse newspapers in New Orleans and other cities.


The Jobs Behind the Titles
A former general manager of the Chicago White Sox was put in charge of baseball operations for the Chicago Cubs yesterday, displacing but not replacing Cubs general manager JIM FREY, who was given an important title (senior vice president) but no meaningful responsibility under his new boss, LARRY HIMES.
Himes, who was dismissed by the White Sox last year, was given an even more impressive title (executive vice president of baseball operations) and all the authority he might need in restructuring the Cubs, who finished fourth in the National League East with a 77-83 record.


G.O.P. Chief Attacks Cuomo as Indecisive
In a day of sharply partisan politics on both the state and national levels, the Republican national chairman, Clayton K. Yeutter, asserted today that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's failure to disclose his Presidential intentions was "evidence of indecisiveness."
But Mr.
Cuomo attributed his inability to reach a decision to the "obstructionist course" taken in state budget negotiations by the Republicans who control the State Senate.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, the New Video Releases column yesterday omitted the title of the first release.
It was "Guilty by Suspicion."


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
3.50
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.63
4.65
7.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.69
4.69
7.05
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.99
7.06
8.24
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.81
7.90
8.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.81
8.87
9.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.80
6.81
7.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sports of The Times; Don't Worry. Be Happy.
CHARLES BARKLEY has been on a roll lately.
Last month, the Philadelphia 76ers' star forward accused the organization of bowing to fan pressure by keeping a white player on the roster to avoid fielding an all-black team.


Outbreak of Rabies Is Spreading North
The rabies outbreak among raccoons that reached New Jersey in late 1989 has now spread across much of the state, the 350-mile-wide Southern Tier of New York and western Connecticut.
Health departments in New Jersey and New York say that many hundreds of raccoons have tested positive for rabies this year, six to seven times the 1990 figures.
Connecticut recorded no animal rabies cases in 1990, but so far this year 120 cases have been confirmed, 106 of them in raccoons.


Restaurants
How does one rate an institution like Lutece?
The quality of food and service is foremost to be sure.
But there is also another consideration, one that requires an appreciation of history.
Lutece and its French-born owner and chef, Andre Soltner, have earned superlative comments for much of the restaurant's nearly 31 years in Manhattan, making it a paragon for young, aspiring chefs.
In the mid-1980's, a crop of ambitious and inventive whiz kids came of age, dazzling diners with their multi-cultural handiwork.
In the process, they garnered lofty kudos and became Mr.
Soltner's most fervent competition.


Arbour's Juggling Act Plays Well on the Road
Al Arbour, who has four Stanley Cups to his coaching credit, listened to his coaching instincts and formed a new Islander line for the first time this season.
Then he watched as it produced 7 points in a 4-3 victory over the Devils tonight at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
In a season of discontent, Arbour put Ray Ferraro at center with Benoit Hogue to his left and Patrick Flatley to his right.
Each player on the line produced a goal for the Islanders, but it took Derek King's goal with 2 minutes 32 seconds to go in the third period to provide the margin of victory for the Islanders, who posted their first triumph on the road since opening night in Boston.


Pop/Jazz; 3 Women Singing The Blues
Truly wild women are a scarce commodity in pop music.
One can only imagine the day when a diva like Whitney Houston struts onto a video screen, opens her mouth and belts out an ode to the pleasures of being sloppy drunk or when a songstress like Debbie Gibson sits down at a piano and, gripped by the sudden fever of inspiration, kicks over her stool and lays into a hellacious Jerry Lee Lewis-style boogie riff.
Unspoken laws of behavior abound.
Most women choose to stay respectable.
Outside the mainstream, though, women are more willing to bend the rules.
The members of Saffire, the Uppity Blues Women, a trio from Fredericksburg, Va., who are to perform tomorrow night at the Lone Star Roadhouse in Manhattan, have made it their career agenda to put across an alternative perspective.


Rivera Defendant Was Witness in Father's Case
One of two young men charged with killing a homosexual in what prosecutors say was a "gay bashing" attack in Queens was a key witness as a small boy in another homicide case -- the killing of his mother by his father.
Twelve years ago, the defendant, Esat Bici, now 19 years old, gave law-enforcement authorities in Brooklyn an account of the killing that prosecutors used to convict his father of murder, even though during the trial the boy disavowed the account.
An appeals court later threw out the conviction, partly on the ground that the boy's statement should not have been used.
The father later pleaded guilty to attempted manslaughter and was sentenced to 18 months in prison.


Review/Photography; The Magic of Images From the 19th Century
There are those who argue that for sheer diversity and visual interest -- not to mention beauty -- the images made in the decade or two after the discovery of photography was announced in 1839 have never been surpassed.
A viewer emerging from the small show now on display at the Metropolitan Museum of Art would be hard pressed to dispute this notion.
Offering a selection of 19th-century European works recently acquired by the museum's department of photography, the exhibition includes a number of fascinating gems, the great majority made before 1860.
Many of the images demonstrate the fact that the new medium was often applied to familiar genres of art -- and soon helped transform them.
A moving portrait (1849-55) of Alfred Thomson Gobert by Louis-Remy Robert foreshadows the concerns of later artists in its emphasis on the psychological state of its subject.
Like many other early photographers, Robert, who would later become director of the Sevres porcelain factory outside Paris, was a dedicated amateur with an artistic bent.
Here he photographs his friend seated in a chair in a pensive moment, his eyes downcast; Gobert grips one arm of the chair with both hands, in a strangely twisted pose that suggests an inner struggle.


Kenya Opposition Group Leaders Detained
The Kenyan Government arrested five members of opposition groups who were calling for more political freedom.
The arrests early today appeared to be tied to a rally that the opposition has organized for Saturday but which President Daniel arap Moi has condemned as illegal.
A lawyer for the opposition, Kathurina M'inoti, said that the opposition leaders, all of whom have been calling for a multi-party political system, were arrested at their homes.


Mutombo Making N.B.A. Feel His Presence
It was during the National Basketball Association finals in 1986 that K. C. Jones, then coach of the Boston Celtics, matched up Houston's Hakeem Olajuwon and Ralph Sampson on occasion with his two centers, Robert Parish and Bill Walton.
This was when "Twin Towers," was the frontline religion, when the Knicks' coach, Hubie Brown, was barking out gridiron orders like "Power Right," when post-up offense was considered the fastest means to a championship end.
Parish was listed as 7 feet 1 inch tall, Walton 6-11, but when they stood side by side, Walton, who was actually at least 7-3, appeared half a head taller.


FRESH DATA OFFER MORE INDICATIONS OF AILING ECONOMY
Signs of economic woe mounted today, as Government agencies reported that retail sales edged down in October while average earnings slumped and the ranks of people applying for state unemployment benefits rose to the highest weekly level since May.
Still another batch of figures showed surprisingly little consumer-level inflation last month, in sharp contrast to yesterday's report of a large rise in prices at the producer level.
But the favorable news on consumer prices was tempered by the realization that they, too, pointed toward an economic recovery that has all but come to a halt.
No Signs of Strength
"The economy seems to have lost steam no matter where you turn," said Neal M. Soss, chief economist for the First Boston Corporation.
He called retail sales, which declined one-tenth of 1 percent last month after a sizable rise in September, "decidedly punk."


Corrections
A brief article on Tuesday about a "Doonesbury" comic-strip sequence centering on accusations of drug use by Dan Quayle listed one newspaper incorrectly, in some editions, among publications that usually carry the strip but are omitting the sequence.
That newspaper, The Orlando Sentinel, is publishing the strips.


Seeking First Aid, Mets Show an Interest in Murray
The Mets, as part of a strategy to avoid becoming stranded in the free-agent market holding dollars but not options, have expressed interest in first baseman Eddie Murray.
General Manager Al Harazin said yesterday that he had spoken with the agent for the 35-year-old switch-hitter, a 15-year veteran with 398 career home runs who played for the Los Angeles Dodgers the last three seasons.


On Stage, and Off
Well, my dears!
The moment we've all been waiting for has arrived.
Nov. 10, the original opening date for the long-awaited Broadway musical "Nick and Nora," has come and gone, so the unofficial statute of limitations has run out on holding back the dish.
Pull up a chair.
There are two parts to the story.
The first is what's been going on at the theater since the show, starring Barry Bostwick and Joanna Gleason as Nick and Nora Charles, the characters created by Dashiell Hammett in the "Thin Man" books, first previewed on Oct. 8.
The second is the press reaction to the postponement of the show's opening date, first to Dec. 2 and then to Dec. 8.


Stocks Move Lower in Heavy Trading
Stocks closed lower in heavy trading yesterday after receiving mixed signals about the economy in the October consumer price and retail sales data.
The Dow Jones industrial average was off 1.79 points to finish at 3,063.51.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 200 million, up from 184.5 million on Wednesday, as losing issues narrowly outpaced gainers by 853 to 804.


Korea's Bomb, China's Choice
The Bush Administration's China policy will face a major test as Secretary of State Baker arrives in Beijing for a weekend of high-level talks.
The Administration needs Chinese help in international efforts to halt North Korea's reckless rush toward nuclear weapons, but the Chinese are reluctant to give it.
The issue is urgent.
President Bush has rightly called Pyongyang's nuclear program the "greatest threat to regional peace." A nuclear-armed North Korea would not only menace its neighbors but would almost certainly set off a nuclear arms race in East Asia.


Weak Data on Economy Bring Losses for the Dollar
The dollar fell against other currencies yesterday amid new evidence of economic weakness.
Gold prices also dropped.
The dollar slipped after two Government reports indicated the economy continued to waver.


Review/Theater; Bluebeard Legend As Retold By Ludlam
Charles Ludlam's "Bluebeard" has returned and the comedy is as bizarre and crack-brained as ever, even without the author in the title role.
Everett Quinton, the late Mr.
Ludlam's successor as artistic director and star of the Ridiculous Theatrical Company, has placed his sinister signature on the character.
Mr.
Quinton's revival opened last night at the Charles Ludlam Theater.
Enter the Baron Khanazar von Bluebeard, the tyrannical landlord of the legendary lost island.
In Mr.
Quinton's impersonation, the baron has closely cropped blue bristle on his face, a wild gleam in his eyes and a turban that makes him look like a swami.
Introducing himself, he adds five k's to Khanazar, strangles his vocal cords and finally exclaims his name so melodramatically that it sounds like a strike of thunder.


Fire at a Subway Yard Releases Asbestos
About 85 Transit Authority workers and firefighters were exposed to asbestos early yesterday when a suspicious fire at a subway yard in upper Manhattan damaged a wooden shed where workers remove asbestos from subway cars they are repairing, officials said.
The asbestos, which posed no direct health threat to people in the neighborhood, was released during the fire.
It was the type that is not easily friable, and did not flake off into microscopic fibrous particles, as do the more dangerous types of asbestos, a spokesman for the New York City Department of Environmental Protection said.


Abroad at Home; Hate Against Hate
Two years ago, we celebrated the fall of the Berlin wall and then of totalitarian rule in Czechoslovakia.
As recently as this past summer, we gloried in the overthrow of Communism in the Soviet Union.
Those victories for freedom remain.
But the joy we felt in them has been overtaken by renewed realization that there is a human instinct as deep as the desire for freedom -- and that it may have terrible consequences.
That is racial and national feeling.


Concerned Over Morale, Post Office Asks Why
Concerned with the morale problems of some employees, the United States Postal Service has begun a pilot program to survey all its workers about their hopes, fears and views on job fulfillment, a postal official said today.
But he said officials saw no way the survey, begun earlier this month in five cities, could prevent incidents like the one that left three people dead at a Michigan post office today.


Rolling Stone's Musical Reality
The advertising industry is about to get an earful of Rolling Stone's long-running "Perception/Reality" campaign.
In 10,000 copies of the Nov. 18 issue of the trade weekly Advertising Age, which will be distributed in the New York area, Rolling Stone's agency, Fallon McElligott, will insert a special musical advertisement costing $100,000.


Haitian Army Miscast as Champion of Rights
To the Editor:
Re "Haitian General Says Misdeeds Prompted the Coup" (news article, Nov. 4): It takes audacity for Brig.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, who has just presided over the murder of at least 300 civilians, the silencing of the Haitian press, and the arrest and torture of political opponents, to offer human rights as justification for the coup that brought him to power.
The conduct of his own forces in overthrowing Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's first elected president, trivializes the worst abuses he attributes to the Aristide Government.


CHRONICLE
It has been a long time since ROGER ROSENBLATT, an essayist for Life magazine and the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour," wrote a play: 30 years to be precise, when he wrote his high school senior class show.
So it is no wonder that he was a touch nervous when he heard that PAUL NEWMAN and JOANNE WOODWARD were in the audience at a recent preview for his new one-man show, "Free Speech in America," at the American Place Theater in Manhattan.
The show is intended to foster Mr.
Rosenblatt's premise that "free speech is an instrument of revelation; that we are a country of words; that our culture, our politics, our sense of fun is revealed by what we say and write." It is humorous, but he said, "I want the audience to see something serious at which they laugh."


Ex-Ruler of Haiti Faces Human Rights Suit in U.S.
Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega is not the only deposed strongman of a Caribbean country who is facing charges in a Federal court here.
In an unusual case with broad political and foreign policy implications, a former President of Haiti is being sued for $120 million by six countrymen who say he was responsible for their illegal arrest, torture and "intentional infliction of emotional distress."
The civil complaint against Gen.
Prosper Avril, which is not expected to come to trial until next year, is by a group of Haitian opposition figures who say members of the Presidential Guard and other military forces acting on General Avril's "order, approval, instigation and knowledge" abducted and detained them.
Though eventually released and allowed to go into exile, the men "suffer severe health problems resulting from the detention, beatings and torture" inflicted on them, the suit argues.


Ferraro Steps Back Into the Political Ring


Trump's Bank Talks May Trim Plaza Stake
Donald J. Trump is negotiating a deal with bankers that could result in his giving up part-ownership of the jewel of his empire, the Plaza Hotel, people involved in the talks said yesterday.
The negotiations, aimed at changing the terms on about $430 million in bank debt, were forced by Mr.
Trump after he refused to pay $1.6 million in interest due on the $300 million first mortgage he used to purchase the hotel.


Salvador Rebels to Halt Attacks; Government Sees an End to War
With the Salvadoran peace talks approaching their expected successful conclusion, the guerrilla front announced today that it was unilaterally suspending "offensive actions" after nearly a dozen years of civil war.
President Alfredo F. Cristiani immediately responded to what he termed a "signal of good will" and said that the Government and army would take "corresponding unilateral measures" when the rebel measure goes into effect Saturday.


Choosing Motherhood as a Career Option; Birth's Mystery
To the Editor:
As a modern mother, I must disagree with "Modern Mothering" by Judith D. Schwartz (Op-Ed, Oct. 28).
In my experience, all the knowledge and technology available to would-be parents only increases the mystery surrounding successful conception and gestation.


7 Soviet Republics Agree to Seek New Union
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and the leaders of seven republics agreed today to work toward a new confederated "Union of Sovereign States," with the central authorities exercising powers delegated by sovereign republics.
There was no immediate indication exactly what powers would be delegated to the center, and participants said the agreement was still subject to approval by the parliaments of all the republics.


New Giants in Times Square Light Brigade
TIMES SQUARE is about to get a sizable infusion of new neon.
The array of illuminated billboards that have dominated the Manhattan crossroads for decades have been joined by two gigantic electric advertising signs, for the South Korean conglomerate Samsung and the Japanese whisky Suntory.
And on New Year's Eve, a third, for Coca-Cola, is scheduled to join them.
The trio of multimillion-dollar signs, on a building at Duffy Square called 2 Times Square, might at first light seem like souvenirs of a quaint era typified by a Planters sign, with its cascading peanuts, urging passers-by to buy "a bag a day for more pep."


On Eve of Louisiana Vote, Nothing Is Certain
The polls say Edwin Edwards, but the voices in the air say don't count out David Duke.
After coming from behind and building an unusual coalition of blacks and business interests, Mr.
Edwards now appears within reach of victory, perhaps by a comfortable margin, political experts say.
The question is whose voters will get to the polls, and there are more questions about Mr.
Edwards's supporters than about Mr.
Duke's.


Whatever the Job, Burkett Lends His Special Touch
This is the first season with the Jets for special-teams coach Al Roberts, but it hasn't taken him long to notice that good things seem to happen when Chris Burkett is in the game and bad things seem to happen when he's not.
First there was the game against Miami on Sept. 23 when Burkett blocked a Reggie Roby punt and drove off the dribble into the end zone, delivering what Coach Bruce Coslet called the "first right-hand punch" in what turned out to be a 41-23 rout.


Refugees Pack Boat Out of Dubrovnik
The coastal steamer Slavija docked here this evening carrying about 2,000 refugees from the besieged harbor city of Dubrovnik on a voyage that will take them to more misery but also to more safety up the coast in Croatia.
They left Dubrovnik under the flags of the 12-member European Community and the republic of Croatia, which is striving for its sovereignty amid the cannons, rockets and missiles of the Yugoslav federal army.


Campbell-Mithun-Esty Loses Two Accounts
Campbell-Mithun-Esty yesterday lost two advertising accounts when one client reassigned its account and another went out of business.
Following a review, the Norwest Corporation, Minneapolis, the biggest banking company between Chicago and San Francisco, moved its estimated $3.5 million account, to Carmichael Lynch, Minneapolis.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League
NFL -- Suspended Terry Long, Pittsburgh guard, without pay for four weeks for violating the league's policy on anabolic steroids and related substances.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Signed Vance Hammond, defensive tackle, to the practice squad.
Released Neal Fort, tackle, from the practice squad.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Placed Delton Hall, cornerback, on the injured reserve list.


Joyous Sihanouk Returns to Cambodia From Exile
A joyous Prince Norodom Sihanouk returned home to Cambodia today after spending most of the last 20 years in exile -- with the elusive, perhaps impossible, goal of establishing a permanent peace in his shattered nation.
Pressing his hands together in a traditional Cambodian greeting, the 69-year-old Prince emerged slowly this morning from the Chinese jetliner that had carried him on the final leg of what has been a long journey home, and he bowed gratefully to the thousands of Cambodians who gathered at Phnom Penh's international airport to celebrate his arrival.


Reviews/Film; Damaged Merchandise: The Illness Of a Model
Erika (Erika Nagy), the photographer's model who is the heroine of Sharon Greytak's "Hearing Voices," has two shelves in her bathroom, one for things that make her feel beautiful and the other for those that make her feel otherwise.
On the latter shelf, beneath the potions and perfumes, are the medical supplies Erika needs for tending to her ileostomy, which is a source of much psychic pain.
The film deals frankly with Erika's medical condition, and even more so with the problems it has created.
From the vain, unpleasant boyfriend who taunts her about this intestinal bypass to the doubts Erika now feels about modeling and making herself a kind of merchandise, the film contrasts culturally acceptable notions of beauty with the disability that shapes Erika's inner life.
Ms.
Greytak is more successful in formulating that dichotomy than in giving Erika's private feelings much color.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 572 money market mutual funds decreased by $654.7 million, to $469.13 billion, in the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 211 institutional funds increased by $612.5 million, to $150.59 billion.
The assets of the 270 general-purpose funds were down by $790.2 million, to $172.72 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $477 million, to $145.82 billion, the institute said.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about stock market trading misstated the performance of Nike Inc.
Its stock on the New York Stock Exchange rose $1.125, to $62.25.


Tony Richardson, the Director Of 'Tom Jones,' Is Dead at 63
Tony Richardson, who won an Oscar for the film "Tom Jones," died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 63 years old.
He died of a neurological infection that was apparently brought on by AIDS, said his physician, Dr.
Michael J. Scolaro.
Mr.
Richardson developed a fever after treatment on Saturday, and he became semicomatose on Monday, Dr.
Scolaro said.


Thomas Dickey, 74, An Aircraft Engineer
Thomas Atherton Dickey, an aircraft engineer and aeronautical innovator, died on Nov. 2 at his home in Westport, Conn.
He was 74 years old.
He died of lung cancer, said his wife, the former Barbara Morris.


Steelers' Long Is Suspended After Losing Steroids Appeal
TERRY LONG, the Pittsburgh Steeler guard who apparently tried to kill himself with rat poison after testing positive for steroids during training camp, lost his appeal on steroid use yesterday and was suspended for four games -- games he might have missed anyway because of an injury.
In his ruling, Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE rejected Long's contention that an unusually high natural level of testosterone had triggered a false positive reading for steroids.


Jurors in Gotti Case To Be Sequestered And Not Identified
Jurors will be sequestered and their names kept secret in John Gotti's racketeering case in order to "protect the integrity" of the trial, a Federal judge ruled yesterday.
The judge, I. Leo Glasser, said housing the jurors under guard and insuring their anonymity would protect them from potential harm and publicity in the trial of Mr.
Gotti, the reputed boss of the Gambino organized-crime family.


Milton Farber, 81, Retired Head Of Farberware Company, Is Dead
Milton H. Farber, the retired president of the Bronx company that manufactures Farberware pots, pans and appliances, died on Tuesday at his home in Atlantis, Fla.
He was 81 years old and died of heart failure, his family said.


Capriati Expected To Work With Slozil
Jennifer Capriati, who confirmed yesterday at the Virginia Slims of Philadelphia that she will no longer be coached by Tom Gullikson of the United States Tennis Association, is expected to pair with Steffi Graf's former coach, Pavel Slozil, on the Kraft Tour next year.
The 15-year-old Capriati was associated with the U.S.T.A.'s player-development program for the last two years.
A financial dispute over Gullikson's proposed contract for next year reportedly led to the breakup of the working relationship, a decision that was announced jointly by Capriati's agent, John Evert, and U.S.T.A. representatives.


Rowdiness Rocks Hotel During Police Convention
A hotel where the Massachusetts Police Association is holding its annual convention this week has been besieged by false fire alarms and other rowdy behavior, bringing embarrassment to officials of the police group.
The Cape Cod Plaza Hotel had 22 false fire alarms from 3 P.M.
Wednesday to 2 A.M. today, said Michael Lynch, the general manager of the hotel.
Several hundred people are attending the convention, which will end Friday.


Washington Talk; On How Gossip and Ambition Mingle
For about 24 hours this week, the rumor mill drafted Bill Bradley.
The story that the New Jersey Democrat was a candidate for President started on a weekend television talk show and made its way through cocktail parties, over the phone lines of Democratic political consultants and into offices on Capitol Hill at lightning speed.
But it wasn't true.
At least not yesterday.
And probably not today.
But in the nation's capital, where few ever seal off ambition entirely, one never really knows.


The Spoken Word
GALLERY TALKS, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Washington Avenue, Crown Heights.
"Art in America: New York's Role in the Fine and Decorative Arts," by Jean Tisne, today at 2 P.M.; "Ancient Splendors: The Figure in Pre-Columbian and South Asian Art," by Marlene Holtan, tomorrow at 1 P.M.; "Objects of Myth and Memory: American Indian Art at the Brooklyn Museum," by Armando Chisari, tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "African Art and the Cycle of Life," by Leonore Krieger, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "Quattrocento: Early Italian Panel Paintings," by Betty Kahn, Sunday at 2 P.M.
All talks free with museum admission of $4 ($2 for students and $1.50 for the elderly).
Information: (718) 638-5000.
READING, Rizzoli, 31 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
Norman Mailer is to read from his novel "Harlot's Ghost." Tonight at 6:30; admission is free, seating is limited.
Information: (212) 759-2424.


Classes at Columbia Are Moved Off Campus During 2-Day Strike
Scores of Columbia University classes were moved off the Morningside Heights campus to churches, cafes, fraternity houses, professors' apartments and other locations yesterday as a two-day strike of university clerical workers began with picketing and protest rallies.
"It was really great," Karen Van Dyck, a Greek instructor, said after meeting with 15 of her students for coffee and conjugations at the Symposium, a Greek restaurant on 113th Street.
"The waiters and waitresses were helping us with our exercises."


Credit Card Rate Caps Draw Fire
Bankers warned yesterday that a measure approved by the Senate to limit credit card interest rates to 14 percent would bring a sharp reduction in the availability of credit cards that would disrupt the economy.
Although the credit card business has been highly lucrative for several years, the bankers said the profit margin was not so great that they could afford to cut interest rates to 14 percent from the current average of 18 percent or 19 percent and still earn a profit.


41 Light-Hanging Days to, You Know
BOY, this year Christmas has just snuck up on Bob Stadalnik.
Here it is two weeks before Thanksgiving and he's only now starting to put up his Christmas decorations.
Some people haven't thrown out their rotting porch pumpkins yet.
But the guys down at his auto shop in Waterbury are already ribbing Bob, who's a mechanic, about being late.
So here he comes out of the attic with another armload of Christmas decorations.
In another week or so he'll have all the boxes down and the reindeer up from the basement and the sleigh out of the shed.
Robin and Rob, the children, will be checking the bulbs while 3-year-old Mandy removes every light bulb she can.
And Mr.
Stadalnik's wife, Cynthia, will be arranging the Wise Men in the living-room windows.
Mr. and Mrs.
Claus emerge later.


Resorts Hires Bear, Stearns
Resorts International Inc., a casino company that emerged from bankruptcy last year but is still not out of the woods, said yesterday that it had hired Bear, Stearns &amp; Company to advise it on how to proceed now that a planned sale of its Bahamian property has run into problems.
The gambling company, roughly one-fifth of which is still owned by Merv Griffin, the entertainer, has been seeking for some time to sell its Paradise Island real-estate holdings to reduce the roughly $400 million in debt left on its books.
But the level of interest has been disappointing, and the company said yesterday that it is not sure whether it would go ahead with the sale.


INSIDE
Implants to Stay on Market
A Food and Drug Administration panel voted to let breast implants stay on the market, but sought further data on their safety.
Page A14.
Soviet Republics Seek Union
Leaders of seven Soviet republics agreed to work toward a new union, with central officials exercising powers delegated by republics.
Page A7.
A Plan to Aid Long Island
Governor Cuomo unveiled a plan to help Long Island's distressed economy but admitted he lacked new state money to finance it.
Page B1.
First Close-Up of an Asteroid
By manipulating the Galileo's impaired instruments, scientists got a clear picture of the asteroid Gaspra earlier than expected.
Page D19.


How Gotti's No. 2 Gangster Turned His Coat
In the inner sanctums of the Mafia, Salvatore Gravano was affectionately known as Sammy Bull, a gimlet-eyed gangster with a reputation for fast fists, violence and unflinching devotion to John Gotti.
But some investigators were not always sure he was so tough.
Or so loyal.
At a strategy session several years ago, Federal agents speculated that he might actually be a vulnerable link in the Gambino organized- crime family hierarchy.


Rexene, Awash in Debts, Turns Up as Golf Sponsor
William J. Gilliam, chairman of the Rexene Corporation, has walked tall as a deal maker on Wall Street, especially after he and some employees of Drexel Burnham Lambert led a buyout of the Dallas-based petrochemical company in 1988, then took it public four months later at a huge profit.
But last month, Rexene, which Mr.
Gilliam has headed since the buyout, crash-landed in a Delaware bankruptcy court in a way that made it more than just another victim of too much debt piled atop an inefficient, cyclical business.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-13 2 CHARGED IN PAM AM ATTACK
The United States indicted two Libyans in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, but said there was no evidence to link Syria and Iran to the attack.
The White House all but blamed Libya's leader for the bombing, which killed 270.
Page A1 An inquiry that ranged from the Scottish countryside to Malta.
A8 A SALVADORAN TRUCE
The Salvadoran guerrilla front said it was unilaterally suspending "offensive actions" after nearly a dozen years of civil war.
A1 CHINA'S LONG NUCLEAR ARM
The Bush Administration failed to act promptly on intelligence data indicating that China was helping Algeria build a nuclear reactor, officials report.
A1 China hampers efforts against North Korea's nuclear program.
A12 GHOST OF TIANANMEN SQUARE
As China prepares to be the host of James A. Baker 3d, human-rights concerns are already clouding its sense of triumph at luring the American Secretary of State.
A12 A ZAIRIAN CITY CRUMBLES
Kikwit Journal: The departure of foreign workers has driven a stake into the heart of Kikwit, which had been one of the most affluent cities in equatorial Africa.
A4 SAD EXODUS FROM DUBROVNIK
About 2,000 refugees left the besieged Yugoslav city of Dubrovnik on a steamer.
A woman with a heart condition lay near death in an ambulance on one of the decks.
A3 ARGENTINE LEADER VISITS U.S.
President Carlos Saul Menem of Argentina began a state visit to Washington, boasting that his country had finally put its economic and political house in order.
A3 KURDISH PACT WITH BAGHDAD
Kurdish leaders say Baghdad has agreed to end a partial blockade of their region in return for a pullout of most Kurdish guerrillas from major cities in northern Iraq.
A9 PRINCE IS BACK IN CAMBODIA
A joyous Prince Norodom Sihanouk returned home to Cambodia after spending most of the last 20 years in exile with the elusive goal of establishing peace in his nation.
A10  Seven Soviet republics agreed to seek a confederation of states.
A7 Britain's Communists admit they accepted Soviet payments.
A6 Germany passed a law on access to secret police files.
A11 NATIONAL A14-21, D19 MORE BAD SIGNS
Further troubling signs about the economy emerged: Retail sales fell in October, average earnings slumped, and the ranks of people applying for unemployment benefits rose to the highest level since May.
A1 UNEMPLOYMENT BILL HITS HURDLE
A bill to provide unemployment benefits to people who have used up their basic 26 weeks of coverage won easy approval in the House but stalled in the Senate.
Some senators said their states' workers would be short-changed by the bill's complex formulas determining the number of extra weeks of coverage.
A16 BANKING MEASURE DEFEATED
The House of Representatives rejected legislation that would have significantly changed the nation's 60-year-old banking laws.
A1 TENUOUS LEAD IN LOUISIANA
After building an unusual coalition of blacks and business interests, Edwin Edwards appears to be within reach of victory in Louisiana's election for governor tomorrow.
But the question is whose voters will get to the polls, and there are more uncertainties about Mr.
Edwards's supporters than about David Duke's.
A1 Neither candidate had to use TV in the way campaigns usually do.
A20 Nearly half of Duke's contributions came from out of state.
A21 THE RACE FOR PRESIDENT
Washington Talk: The '92 campaign and the rumor mill.
A18 Seven national broadcast outlets will televise the Democrats' debates.
A18 The columnist Patrick J. Buchanan is edging closer to a run.
A19 VOTE BACKS BREAST IMPLANTS
A panel of advisers to the Food and Drug Administration voted to recommend that silicone breast implants remain on the market, although under limited conditions.
A14 A MISSION ACCOMPLISHED
In a surprising reversal of fortune, flight controllers managed to coax enough data from the Galileo spacecraft, crippled with a stuck main antenna, to produce a close-up photograph of an asteroid only two weeks after Galileo's rendezvous with it and a year earlier than expected.
D19 GUNMAN KILLS 3 AT POST OFFICE
In the latest of a number of shootings at post offices around the nation in recent years, a former postal employee enraged at his dismissal killed three supervisors and wounded six workers in a Detroit suburb.
A14 The Postal Service is surveying its employees, many unhappy.
A14 Santa Monica Journal: The sexes and the restroom.
A14 A study was issued on abuses in the U.S. penal system.
A15 Law Page B10 Haitians sue a former Haitian president, but in an American court METROPOLITAN DIGEST, B1 FROM THEATER TO COURTROOM
Under an unusual plan, a darkened Times Square theater, the Longacre on West 48th Street, will become the new home of a section of the New York City Criminal Court.
The aim, officials say, is to speed the handling of offenses like vandalism, illegal peddling, subway fare-beating and prostitution.
A1 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Weekend The Greeks of Astoria, Queens.
C1  Theater: On Stage, and Off.
C2  Ludlam's "Bluebeard." C3  Film: At the Movies.
C8  "Fist of the North Star" C8  "Cheap Shots" C11  "And You Thought Your Parents Were Weird" C13  "Prospero's Books" C15  Music: Saffire, the Uppity Blues Women.
C3  Restaurants C20  Art: SoHo's new galleries.
C1  The Art Market.
C24  Roundup of reviews.
C26  Nineteenth-century photos.
C27  Word and Image: Stories by Susan Engberg.
C28  TV Weekend C30 Obituaries  Milton H. Farber, the former chief of Farberware maker.
D18  Tony Richardson, film director.
D19 Sports B11-18  Baseball: Mets eye Murray.
B11  Basketball: Suspension unlikely for Ewing.
B15  Columns: Rhoden on Auburn.
B11  Lipsyte on Magic Johnson.
B14  Football: A game for all the oranges.
B11  Hockey: Islanders top Devils.
B11 Editorials/Op-Ed  Editorials A30  Korea's bomb, and China.
Cable TV customers, gouged.
A man for some seasons.
Helping working families.
Letters A30  Anthony Lewis: Hate against hate.
A31  A. M. Rosenthal: Hidden harassment.
A31  C. Vann Woodward: Pests of the lower South.
A31  David N. Dinkins: Culture is a very big deal ($6 billion).
A31


Haitian Army Miscast as Champion of Rights; Not Comparable to U.S.
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 22 news analysis of Haiti takes a very jaundiced view of Haiti's democratically elected president and exhibits little understanding of Haitian politics.


Duke Forgiven His Past By Out-of-State Donors
Nearly half of David Duke's campaign contributions have been sent in from states outside of Louisiana -- from people who are willing, they say, to forgive his Nazi and Ku Klux Klan past because they appreciate his conservative agenda.
They sent their money, some of these contributors say, because they perceive "a collapse of society" with taxes out of hand and because "white people are not being given a fair shake." And they find in Mr.
Duke an anti-establishment candidate who "says what perhaps the majority of people are thinking but are afraid to say," in the words of one of those supporters, Herbert B. Fischer of Whitehouse Station, N.J.


In Louisiana, Both Edwards and Duke Are Sending Voters a Message of Fear
Instead of engaging in the usual mudslinging, the candidates in the Louisiana's governor's race have used their televison commercials to turn up the emotional volume among voters who are making their choices on the basis of fear and resentment.
The contest between State Representative David Duke and former Gov.
Edwin W. Edwards is unusual in many respects, not the least of which is the fact that both candidates started the race as very familiar figures here.


French Group Picked to Run Executive Life
California regulators selected a French consortium today as the winner of the bidding for the Executive Life Insurance Company, moving efforts to rescue the failed insurer a big step closer to completion.
The French group, which includes Altus Finance, the investment arm of Credit Lyonnais, and Mutuelle Assurance Artisanale de France, a large insurer known as MAAF, was selected over a bid led by Hellman &amp; Friedman, a San Francisco investment firm.


Choosing Motherhood as a Career Option
To the Editor:
Although I am a longtime fan of Anna Quindlen's writings, I disagree with "Reading Hepburn" (column, Oct. 23), on role models for women.
As a woman who has chosen full-time motherhood, I take offense at the idea that it is a brainless, uninteresting life option: a poor role model for today's young women.


Platinum Prices in Retreat After Forecast of a Surplus
Platinum futures prices fell yeterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange, erasing most of their recent gains, after a leading refiner said new platinum supplies would exceed consumption by 210,000 troy ounces this year.
Platinum for delivery in January fell $4.20, to $361.20 a troy ounce.
January deliveries had risen $7 in the three previous sessions on news of strike-related mine closings in South Africa, the world's largest platinum producer.


Germans to Get to See Who Spied on Them
The German Parliament approved a far-reaching law today that will allow millions of citizens to see what information the former East German secret police gathered about their private lives and political activities.
They will also be able to learn the names of people who spied on them.
This information is considered certain to destroy many friendships and other relationships.


On My Mind; Hidden Harassment
When I was a boy, I would announce to my mother my latest startling sociological findings, some of which she believed any boy with one eye and half a brain should have known long before -- like how white people tend to be mean to black people.
On those occasions she would look at me in mock wonder and say:
"Look at him. He is discovering America, a regular Christopher Columbus."


Cable TV Customers, Gouged Again
The Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, and Hollywood's Jack Valenti have just buried a bill to prevent monopolistic cable companies from gouging their customers.
The sponsors expected a Senate vote this week, but Mr.
Mitchell scheduled no floor time and has excluded the proposal from the list of bills to be considered before the Senate adjourns for the year.
Unless the bill is promptly disinterred, cable customers around the country will know who's to blame for the next outrageous cable price hike.


Sounds Around Town
Sax and Trio
Donald Harrison, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Manhattan, (212) 228-6440.
Donald Harrison, one of the most inventive young saxophonists working in jazz, is at his best when playing in intimate clubs like Bradley's.
Using rhythm-and-blues ideas, be-bop and modern harmonies, Mr.
Harrison brings together all sorts of worlds.
He will be joined by a trio that includes the pianist Larry Willis.
Shows tonight through Sunday are at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.
The cover is $12 ($10 on Sunday), and there is an $8 minimum.
Double Improvisation
Art Farmer, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street, Manhattan, (212) 242-1785.
Art Farmer has one of the sweetest tones around on fluegelhorn, and occasional echoes of Miles Davis can be heard in his playing.
Mr.
Farmer is spare, poised and graceful.
His group features the saxophonist Clifford Jordan, who is playing better than ever, and together they offer two different perspectives on improvisation.
Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 10 P.M., midnight and 1:30 A.M.; there is no third set on Sunday.
There is a $15 cover charge, plus a $6 minimum.
Drumming Everywhere
Andrew Cyrille, Condon's, 117 East 15th Street, Manhattan, (212) 254-0960.
Andrew Cyrille is one of the master drummers who came of age in the 1960's, and his playing is unabashedly eclectic.
He'll play driving, straight-ahead jazz, then use the walls, or his body, as percussion instruments.
He always puts together better-than-average bands, and this one is no exception, featuring the trumpeter Hannibal Marvin Peterson, the saxophonist Oliver Lake and the pianist Reggie Workman.
Sets tonight and tomorrow are at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is no third set on Sunday.
There is a $15 cover ($12.50 on Sunday), plus a two-drink minimum.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY NOW PLAYING: CRIMINAL COURT?
Nearly 80 years after it opened on Broadway with an ill-fated show called "Are You a Crook?" a darkened Times Square theater is trying out for a dramatic new role as a real-life criminal courtroom.
Under a plan being advanced by state and city officials, a part of the city's Criminal Court would be moved into the West 48th Street theater, the Longacre, for a three-year trial run.
Page A1.
CRIME DECLINES IN THE SUBWAYS
Major crimes declined by 13 percent in the subways during the 12 months that ended Sept. 30, transit police officials said.
The decrease was the first since 1987.
Page B3.
POETRY IN MOTION
Thomas Ostrowski gets behind the wheel of a yellow cab at 5 o'clock just about every afternoon, and as he careens around the city streets, he composes poetry.
Now, he and other cab drivers have formed a Hack Poets Society to gather their works and read them aloud.
Page B3.
CLOSE ENCOUNTER: MAYOR AND NOVELIST
In a cozy South African living room, a quietly challenging query on race relations from the Nobel Prize-winning novelist Nadine Gordimer moved Mayor Dinkins to rare candor on his feelings as a black American.
Page B4.
Key witness in Miller trial admits history of lying.
Page B6.
Clerical workers' strike disrupts classes at Columbia.
Page B3.
Bronx mother charged with abusing infant.
Page B3.
Jury in Gotti trial to be anonymous and sequestered.
Page B4.
As a child, defendant in gay-bashing case saw his father kill his mother.
Page B8.
REGION RABIES OUTBREAK IS SPREADING
The rabies outbreak among raccoons that reached New Jersey in late 1989 has spread across much of the state, the southern tier of New York and western Connecticut.
Page B5.
TAPPAN ZEE: BRIDGE OF COMMUTER SIGHS
With more than three miles of pavement soaring across the Hudson River, the Tappan Zee Bridge offers motorists a majestic drive.
But lately crossing the bridge has brought more misery than majesty.
Congestion has grown so severe that some business leaders fear that it could thwart economic growth.
Page B5.
REPUBLICAN CHIEF IN CUOMO'S COURT
The Republican national chairman went to Governor Cuomo's home turf and said that the Governor's failure to disclose his Presidential plans was "evidence of indecisiveness." Page B7.
NEW CAMPAIGN FOR FLORIO: HEALTH CARE
After pushing through a blitzkrieg of legislation on insurance, gun control, education and taxation, Governor Florio says he will now concentrate on a campaign to revamp health care in New Jersey.
Page B5.
TROOPERS ACCEPT PAY FREEZE
Faced with the painful choice of losing money or their jobs, Connecticut State Police have voted to accept a pay freeze and other concessions so that 111 laid-off troopers can return to work.
Page B6.
Our Towns B6 Law B10


Magic as Hero: It's Not the Most Comfortable Fit
I WRITE this wearing the black Magic Johnson T-shirt I bought last Sunday night at the Forum in Los Angeles during the pre-game feeding frenzy at the souvenir stands.
Were we being sentimental?
Making wise investments?
Showing our solidarity with a hero?
The questions and the backlash are just beginning after a week that felt like a trip on a Magic kingdom ride that was part political campaign and part Oscar run.
It was a public canonization.
But where is the cold-eyed Devil's Advocate from the Vatican or the Basketball Hall of Fame or the National Institutes of Health to ask about the orchestration of Johnson's media blitz and disappearance, the obscene rush to declare him heterosexual, about all the charitable and commercial and journalistic clatter around the need to make his infection pay off?


Film Theater to Open
The Film Society of Lincoln Center is to open its new Walter Reade Theater on Dec. 9 with a series titled "Great Beginnings: First Films by Great Directors." The series will include the New York City premiere of Pedro Almodovar's "High Heels," Satyajit Ray's "Pather Panchali," Elaine May's "New Leaf" and Stanley Donen's "On the Town," the opening-night feature.
The 268-seat theater is in the new Samuel B. and David Rose Building, on the plaza level of 165 West 65th Street.
Tickets are $7.
Information: (212) 875-5600.


Bryden Thomson Dies; Scottish Conductor, 63
Bryden Thomson, a Scottish conductor who specialized in the music of British composers, died in Dublin yesterday.
He was supposed to conduct the London Philharmonic Orchestra this week, but he collapsed during rehearsals last Friday.
He was 63 years old.
Mr. Thomson died of cancer, The Associated Press reported.


Kikwit Journal; Once a Colonial Jewel, a City Hurtles Backward
The wheel of history, it almost seems, has come full circle here.
Nearly a century ago, when the first Europeans ventured into Zaire's vast interior, Kikwit was a small village whose people and institutions existed in a quiet, self-contained world wholly uninterrupted by the frenetic rhythms of modernity.


Review/Film; A Collector's Inventory of the Renaissance World
"Prospero's Books" was shown as part of the 1991 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 28.
The film opens today at the Angelika Film Center, Mercer and Houston Streets, in Manhattan.
"Knowing I lov'd my books, he furnish'd me from mine own library with volumes that I prize above my dukedom." Thus speaks Prospero when, early in "The Tempest," he tells his daughter, Miranda, how they came to be living on this isolated isle.
Though Prospero's dukedom was usurped by his brother, and though he and the 3 1/2-year-old Miranda were sent into exile, all was not perfidy.


Florida State vs. Miami: It Doesn't Get Any Juicier
From the Panhandle to the Keys, from the Gulf to the Atlantic, the points of view within the state of Florida will be distinguishable by their colors.
This week, the differences between the Garnet and Gold of the Florida State Seminoles and the Orange and Green of the Miami Hurricanes -- a clash, if there ever was one -- may even take precedence over whatever relatively insignificant bonds have been created by wedding vows.


Midway Set To Sell Off Its Property
Midway Airlines, the troubled Chicago-based airline that symbolized the successful upstart carrier of the 1980's, stopped flying yesterday -- for good.
"There's no choice -- we don't have any money," said David Hinson, chairman of the airline.
A credit line of $40 million that had been available under an agreement in which Northwest Airlines would take over the carrier dried up after Northwest backed out of the deal on Wednesday.


Two Louisiana Universities Hold Rallies Against Duke
The prospect of David Duke becoming Louisiana's next Governor prompted a group of professors and students at two universities in New Orleans to hold a teach-in on racism, Nazism and the Ku Klux Klan at Tulane today, drawing about 300 people for a noon rally.
Steve Blumenthal, a Tulane senior from Germantown, Tenn., who helped organize the event, said the goal was to inform students at Tulane and Loyola Universities about Mr.
Duke's past.


House Votes Help for Jobless
The House approved up to 20 weeks of extended benefits for people out of work at least six months.
But the bill then stalled in the Senate.
Page A16.


J. J. Petuchowski, 66, A Rabbi and Professor
Jakob Josef Petuchowski, a Reform rabbi and a leader in Christian-Jewish dialogue who was the Sol and Arlene Bronstein professor of Judaeo-Christian Studies at the Cincinnati campus of Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion, died Tuesday at Christ Hospital in Cincinnati.
He was 66 years old and lived in Cincinnati.
He died of pulmonary complications after cardiac bypass surgery, said Jean Rosensaft, a college spokesman.


Disney's Net Down by 25.2%
The Walt Disney Company reported today that its earnings fell 25.2 percent in the three months ended Sept. 30, largely because of a sharp downturn in its theme park business.
The results for the quarter, the fourth of Disney's fiscal year, reflected the effects of the recession on vacation travel to Walt Disney World in Florida and Disneyland in California, Disney executives and analysts said.
The company's earnings, which were in line with analysts' expectations, were also depressed by a downturn in profitability in Disney's film and television business.


Ex-Postal Worker Kills 3 and Wounds 6 in Michigan
A former postal clerk, furious that he had been dismissed from his job, walked into a regional postal center Thursday morning and opened fire with a sawed-off .22-caliber rifle, killing three workers and wounding six, before fatally wounding himself, the authorities said.
Three other workers were injured while trying to escape by jumping out windows of the two-story building during the shooting spree, which the police estimated lasted five or six minutes.


ALGERIAN REACTOR CAME FROM CHINA
The United States received clear intelligence data three years ago indicating that China was helping Algeria build a nuclear reactor that many Administration officials suspect is intended for nuclear weapons research and production, according to current and former senior Administration officials.
But American officials did nothing with the data until late last year, after satellite photos revealed that the secret plant was well under construction.
By that time, the project had advanced too far to be easily stopped.


Eskimo Company Attacks Indians on Oil Drilling
An Eskimo corporation yesterday accused Indians who oppose drilling in the Arctic Wildlife Refuge of hypocrisy, saying the Indians have tried to promote drilling on their own land.
But opponents of drilling contend that the refuge is more sensitive to development because the area where oil companies want to drill is used by a migrating herd of caribou for calving.


Art in Review
Shelby Lee Adams and Steve Hart
Opsis Foundation 561 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Dec. 7
Shelby Lee Adams photographs in the hills and hollows of eastern Kentucky, in tiny towns with names like Neon, Ice, Happy and Hooterville.
Many of his black-and-white images fall into the poor-folks-on-the-porch genre of documentary photography, with extended families gathered on the back stoops of rundown shacks.
Other pictures record such bits of local color as a home funeral and worshipers handling snakes during a religious service.
In a particularly telling image, a sour-faced woman sits in a junk-strewn backyard, a baby on her lap; tattooed on her arm is the phrase "Born to Loose," its ambiguous misspelling both sad and comical.


Argentine Proclaims His Country Stable
President Carlos Saul Menem of Argentina swept through Washington today, boasting that his country had finally put its economic and political house in order and was set to claim a high-visibility role in the new international order.
"We have credibility," he told reporters this afternoon as the first hectic day of his state visit began to wind down.
"We have stability."


Sihanouk Returns to Cambodia After 20 Years in Exile


Art in Review
Fariba Hajamadi and Scott Lifschutz
Christine Burgin Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Nov. 30
Fariba Hajamadi works a little like an art-smart interior decorator in making her large photographic constructions, combining black-and-white images of sculpture and other artworks with pictures of churches, museums and the like to create settings that are both fictional and dense with meaning.
Printed on large doorlike panels made of different kinds of expensive wood, these images become imposing objects that recall finely crafted furniture while retaining the suggestiveness of photographs.


BUCHANAN WEIGHS PRESIDENTIAL RACE
Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative columnist and commentator, is edging closer toward a challenge to President Bush for the 1992 Republican nomination, friends and associates said today.
Mr.
Buchanan, who served in the Nixon and Reagan Administrations, is "very excited about it," said Angela Bay Buchanan, the commentator's sister, who is a former United States Treasurer and the organizer of his exploratory campaign.
"But he wants to make that final determination over Thanksgiving."


Traders Reassured by Weak Data
A raft of Government statistics yesterday showing soft economic conditions and no problem from inflation reassured credit market participants and helped lift prices of Treasury notes and bonds.
The data showed retail sales lackluster in October.
Weekly claims for unemployment insurance moved back to their highest level in six months.
And inflation as measured by the Consumer Price Index rose by a modest tenth of a percent last month.


Santa Monica Journal; In Land of Liberals, Restroom Rights Are Rolled Back
This bastion of social conscience and liberalism on the edge of the continent has now confronted the ultimate issue separating men from women: restrooms.
But as ever in the City of Santa Monica, where the rich and the homeless alike share a splendid view of the Pacific Ocean, nothing is simple.
Last year in Houston, a woman made national headlines when she was arrested for using the men's room at a concert because the line at the women's room was too long.
Santa Monica, it seems, has the opposite problem: California has no such law governing restroom use and city officials say men have been frightening women away from public lavatories by loitering inside to sell drugs or commit lewd acts.


A Man for Some Seasons
Women are unfit for political office, Dr.
Edgar Berman said 21 years ago when he was a member of the Democratic Party's Committee on National Priorities.
Why?
Because of "raging hormonal influences." At what used to be called "her time of the month," he said, a woman was all too susceptible to irrationality.
He asked voters to imagine her in the Oval Office, her finger poised over the Button.
No, a woman was better off in a place where she couldn't do too much damage.
At the kitchen sink, for instance.
Now there is yet more interesting news about hormones and their effects on behavior.
It may be that men should not be asked to hang pictures, design buildings or parallel park in autumn.
For them, it's the wrong time of the year.


At the Movies
Off Broadway to Hollywood
The leap is being made once again, this time by "Breaking Legs," the comedy by Tom Dulack that played its 200th performance last Saturday at the Promenade Theater.
Following the route taken by "Driving Miss Daisy," "Frankie and Johnny," "Other People's Money" and "Steel Magnolias," "Breaking Legs" has been acquired as a motion-picture property.
The deal was made by Tri-Star, and "Breaking Legs" is to be produced and directed by Bud Yorkin.
Bruce Jay Friedman is adapting the property for the screen.


Morton Steven, Television Composer, 62
Morton Stevens, a composer of television music including the theme for "Hawaii Five-0," died on Monday at his home in Encino, Calif.
He was 62 years old.
He died of pancreatic cancer, said a spokeswoman for the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, of which he was a longtime member.


Culture Is a Very Big Deal ($6 Billion)
The following article is adapted from remarks made recently by the Mayor of New York to leaders of the city's major cultural institutions.
This week, the City Council Finance Committee held hearings on legislation to dismantle the Department of Cultural Affairs.
What a foolish idea in a city that is a beacon to all artists and home to the premier cultural institutions in the nation!
Last year, some members of our budget staff, thinking that they were helping me, made such a proposal.
I thought it was a terrible idea and immediately buried it.
I wish the City Council had let it rest in peace.


Books of The Times; People at Turning Points in Their Inner Lives
Sarah's Laughter  And Other Stories  By Susan Engberg  194 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $18.
At first glance, the characters in Susan Engberg's latest collection of stories seem like a varied lot: an elderly man, suffering from loneliness and colitis; a teen-age girl, shuttling between her estranged parents; a menopausal woman, attempting to come to terms with aging; a young waitress trying to cope with the mundane rigors of her job; a housewife remembering her decision to put her family before her career.


Main Witness Against Speaker Acknowledges Lying in the Past
The prosecution's main witness against Mel Miller admitted under cross-examination yesterday that he had lied many times in the past to his employers, his business partners and the Internal Revenue Service.
But the witness, Avi Cohen, insisted that he was telling the truth in his current testimony in the fraud trial of Mr.
Miller, the New York Assembly Speaker, and a top aide, Jay Adolf, in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Market Place; Toys 'R' Us Faces Tougher Rivals
HAVING quelled its most threatening rivals in the toy supermarket business, Toys "R" Us Inc. must now confront a more formidable group of challengers -- the discounters that have changed the rules of retailing over the last decade.
Analysts estimate that Wal-Mart Stores Inc. controls at least 8.6 percent and possibly 10 percent of the $13 billion toy market and that the K Mart Corporation has gobbled up almost as much.
They now hold bigger shares of the market than such Toys "R" Us lookalikes as Child World, with about 5 percent, and Lionel Kiddie City, with a little more than 2 percent.


British Schools Train Narrow Specialists
To the Editor:
Like Deborah Harrington, who endorses the three-year degree system (letter, Nov. 6), I have just come to this country's educational system from Britain.
In my case it is as a returnee, after 17 years of teaching in a British university.


Cooper Tire and Rubber Picks New President
The Cooper Tire and Rubber Company announced yesterday that Patrick W. Rooney, the president of its tire division, would succeed William T. Fitzgerald, who is about to retire, as the company's president and chief operating officer effective immediately.
Mr.
Rooney was said to be unavailable yesterday and a company spokesman declined to comment on the company's succession plans.
But one analyst who follows the industry said the move makes the 56-year-old Mr.
Rooney likely to eventually succeed Ivan W. Gorr, the company's 62-year-old chairman and chief executive.
"I think it becomes a little more obvious now," said John Casesa, an automotive analyst at Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company.


2 Housing Officers Hit by Sniper
Two housing police officers were shot last night by a sniper firing out of a seventh-floor window of a Brooklyn housing project, the police said.
One officer, Detective Thomas Deutsch, 35 years old, was shot in the leg, and the other, Officer Daniel Crimeni, 25, was hit in the left foot, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.
She said the injuries were not life-threatening.


Handley Plays Down Absence of Bavaro
A year ago at this time, the Giants were cruising along with a 10-0 record en route to becoming Super Bowl champions.
Now they are 5-5 and hoping to make the playoffs, and people want to know what happened.
One popular answer is the loss of Mark Bavaro, a prototype tight end for his six pro seasons.
Early in this summer's training camp, the Giants sent Bavaro into retirement at age 28 because of a deteriorating left knee.


Laundry Defeats a Pair of Rangers
Lunchtime, and there is nothing in the refrigerator except some disgusting turkey, two plastic bottles of ketchup, a package of hot dogs with a marginal expiration date and a six-pack of beer.
It is Tony Amonte's turn to go shopping, said his roommate, Doug Weight.


Down In San Antonio, Buechler Waves Hello
Jud Buechler sees no point in feeling bitter toward the Nets; he is too happy playing for the San Antonio Spurs.
Buechler was waived by the Nets last week, not because he wasn't good enough to make the team, but because the Nets had to get rid of some salaries to make room under their salary cap for the rich contract of Kenny Anderson, their first-round draft choice.


Rights Complaints Plague Beijing Before Baker Trip
As China prepares to be the host of James A. Baker 3d on Friday, it is finding that human-rights concerns are already clouding its sense of triumph at luring the American Secretary of State.
The latest disclosures and allegations -- that China is continuing to export prison-made products, that a Communist Party document dismisses human-rights concerns as "garbage," and that political prisoners are planning a hunger strike unless guards stop beating them -- appears to be robbing Beijing of some of the glow of international respectability that it had hoped to earn from the visit.


Cascade Quartet
The Cascade String Quartet is to present a children's concert on Sunday at 3 P.M. at Boerum Hill Talent Education, 186 Bergen Street, Brooklyn.
The concert will feature the instruments of the string quartet and how they work together and will include selections from quartets by Mozart, Ravel and Brahms as well as an oral presentation by the faculty member Lauren Lemmler.
Tickets are $5.
Information: (718) 802-1653.


Ewing Can Relax, And So Can Holyfield
The Knicks are lucky that Patrick Ewing doesn't throw punches as accurately as he shoots a basketball.
It appears that Ewing will not be suspended for his role in Wednesday's fight with Detlef Schrempf of the Indiana Pacers.
Because none of Ewing's punches landed, and because no one was injured, league officials are expected to rule that suspending Ewing would be too severe.


House Rejects Plan to Revamp Banking Laws
For the second time in 10 days, the House of Representatives overwhelmingly defeated legislation today that would have significantly changed the nation's 60-year-old banking laws.
The vote tonight, a defeat for both the White House and the House Democratic leadership, seemed likely to force President Bush and Congress to limit banking legislation this year to a measure that would do little more than shore up the nearly depleted deposit insurance fund by providing tens of billions of dollars in taxpayer loans.


British Communists Admit Accepting Soviet 'Aid'
The tiny British Communist Party, prodded by leaks of secret files in Moscow, acknowledged today that it had received hundreds of thousands of dollars between 1959 and 1979 in secret payments from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
Professing "shock and dismay," the party's executive committee said it had learned that the first payment, $:14,000, had been received in 1958 directly from the party.
Bigger payments, some of them as much as $:100,000, were received annually throughout the 1960's, but were reduced and finally ended in 1979.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Kings Get Past Hawks  Mitch Richmond scored 25 points and gave the Sacramento Kings the lead for good with a 20-footer with 44 seconds left in a 98-96 victory over the Atlanta Hawks last night in Sacramento, Calif.
After Richmond's go-ahead shot, Jon Koncak missed two free throws for the Hawks, and Lionel Simmons extended the Kings' lead to 98-93 on a breakaway dunk with 13 seconds left and a free throw with 5.9 seconds remaining.
The Hawks' Dominique Wilkins led all scorers with 28 points.
Kings guard Spud Webb, playing in his first game against the Hawks since being traded from Atlanta on July 1, scored 18.
Sacramento snapped a losing streak at three games and ended Atlanta's winning streak at three games. (AP) Cavaliers 115, SuperSonics 109: Brad Daugherty had 23 points, 10 rebounds and a career-high six blocks and Terrell Brandon sank two key baskets in overtime as Cleveland beat Seattle in Richfield, Ohio.
The loss snapped the Sonics' winning streak at three games, while Cleveland is 2-0 at home after going 1-4 on a season-opening road trip.
Daugherty sent the game into overtime by making one of two free throws with 5.2 seconds left in regulation after the Sonics pulled ahead by 101-100 on Derrick McKey's bank shot with 16 seconds remaining. (AP) Mavericks 95, Clippers 88: Rolando Blackman scored 30 points, including 5 free throws in the final two minutes, leading Dallas over visiting Los Angeles.
The Clippers trailed by only 84-83 with two minutes remaining after James Edwards's tip-in.
But Blackman's two free throws and Herb Williams's shot from under the basket put the Mavericks ahead by 88-83 with 1:07 to go.
Danny Manning led the Clippers with 27 points, while Edwards scored 18.
Fat Lever had 19 points and Derek Harper 16 for Dallas, which snapped a losing streak at three games and won for only the second time in eight games. (AP) GOLF  Joyce Leads Seniors  Defending champion Tom Joyce of the Glen Oaks Country Club on Long Island fired a one-under-par 71 yesterday to grab the lead by three strokes after three rounds of the $175,000 PGA Senior Club Professional Championship at Ballen Isles Country Club at Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
Joyce was one of just nine players in the 70-player field to shoot a subpar score on a windy day at the 6,562-yard East course. (AP)


It's Gorman, for the 7th Time
It's getting to be a habit, but the United States Tennis Association named TOM GORMAN captain of the nation's Davis Cup team for the seventh year.
Under Gorman, the Americans have compiled a 13-4 record and won the international competition last year after reaching the final the year before.
The United States plays France for the cup in Lyons in two weeks. . . .
Two years after being thrown out of the Australian Open, JOHN McENROE is returning to the tournament in Melbourne.
Tournament officials said yesterday that McEnroe had officially entered the first Grand Slam tournament of the year, scheduled Jan. 13-26. (AP)


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on Wednesday about a talk on herbs at the Abigail Adams Smith Museum in Manhattan misstated its address.
The museum is at 421 East 61st Street.


Art in Review
Ignacio Zuloaga  Wildenstein &amp; Company 19 East 64th Street Through next Friday
This large and fascinating overview of the career of the Spanish painter Ignacio Zuloaga (1870-1945) proves that history can't be repeated, no matter how determinedly one tries.
Highly successful during his lifetime, especially as a portraitist (he won the grand prize at the Venice Biennale of 1938), Zuloaga devoted his career to reviving the tradition of Manet, Goya, Velazquez and El Greco.
Paintings of dwarfs and toreadors, dark women in mantillas and reclining nudes thread their way through his career, but to no avail.
For the most part, his achievement is permeated by a sense of impassioned, ambitious and extraordinarily self-confident unoriginality.
Nearly every aspect of his images recalls some other artist, except perhaps his carefully orchestrated paint textures.


Review/Film; An Orgy of Martial Arts In a Postnuclear World
"Fist of the North Star," a Japanese animated action-adventure film, offers one of the more brutalizing examples of a malaise that permeates pop culture: technological dazzle as a substitute for content.
Set in a postnuclear wasteland that shares some similarities with the world of "Mad Max," this "splatter-toon," as its distributor calls it, purports to be a cautionary tale about the use of lethal weapons.
But it is really a 100-minute orgy of blood and martial-arts violence carried on by futuristic Neanderthals so mountainously proportioned they make Arnold Schwarzenegger look like a 97-pound weakling.


A Downgrading For CBS Issues
The senior debt of CBS Inc. has been downgraded by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
The debt had been on the rating agency's creditwatch since Nov. 1.
The company's senior debt has been lowered to A-, from A, and the subordinated debt has been rated BBB+, down from A-.
Preference stock now bears an A- rating instead of an A. About $825 million of securities are affected, along with a registration to issue $400 million of debt.


ASTEROID PHOTO IS FIRST CLOSE-UP
The first close-up photograph ever made of a rocky asteroid hurtling through the solar system was made public today by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
In a surprising reversal of fortune, flight controllers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory here managed to coax enough data from the Galileo spacecraft, crippled with a stuck main antenna, to produce a single picture of the asteroid only two weeks after Galileo's rendezvous with it and a year earlier than expected.


Daniel E. Hogan; Industrialist, 74
Daniel E. Hogan, a founder and chairman of the Standex International Corporation, a widely diversified maker of consumer and industrial products, died last Friday in Carmel, Calif.
He was 74 years old and lived in Carmel and Windham, N.H.
Mr.
Hogan was driving his car when he died of a heart attack, said Lindsay M. Sedwick, a company vice president and treasurer.


Florio Vows To Revamp Health Care
Having pushed through a blitzkrieg of legislation on insurance, gun control, education and taxation during his first six months in office, Gov.
Jim Florio says he will now devote much of the rest of his term to revamping health care in New Jersey.
"It's going to be the issue of the 90's in this country, and it will be the issue of 1992 in New Jersey," Mr.
Florio said in an interview today.
His term expires in 1993.


Gerald M. Quinn, 50, A Dean at Fordham
Gerald M. Quinn, dean of Fordham University's College at Lincoln Center in Manhattan, died in a traffic accident in New Jersey on Tuesday.
He was 50 years old and lived in the Bronx.
Mr.
Quinn was a passenger in a car that went out of control and crashed, killing him instantly, the university said.


Review/Art; New Galleries in SoHo, From Glittery to Not So
IT seems that the signs of boom and bust are co-existing for the moment in SoHo, creating a giddy, precarious sense of excitement.
Despite the softening of the art market and continued gallery closings, at least a dozen new galleries and exhibition spaces, ranging from blue-chip to no-frills, have opened in the area this fall.
Everything from painting and sculpture to throw-away Xerox art is to be found in them, and the extremes in art can cause an invigorating kind of mental whiplash.
The top of the line is the austere, generously proportioned new downtown gallery of the uptown dealer Larry Gagosian, recently opened on Wooster Street near Prince Street.
Then there are the low-budget efforts that reflect young artists and their supporters taking things into their own hands, often with art proudly displayed in raw or nearly raw exhibition spaces.
While sales are still a goal in these ventures, they stand in sharp contrast to the scores of over-designed galleries that framed so much 80's art.


Subway Crime Declines In First Drop Since 1987
Serious crimes declined by 13 percent in the New York City subways during the 12 months that ended Sept. 30, transit police officials said yesterday.
The decrease was the largest in many years and the first since 1987, when serious crimes -- felonies such as assaults, robberies, rapes and murders -- declined by 8 percent compared with 1986, said Albert W. O'Leary, a spokesman for the transit police force.
Over the recent 12-month period, there were 16,184 felonies, 2,414 fewer than during the previous year.


For Children
Children's Park and Kate Wollman Rink  Prospect Park Brooklyn (718) 282-1226 Recommended for all ages
The Parade Grounds, part of the 40-acre playing field set aside in 1868 for drills, recently received a face lift that should please nearby Brooklynites, particularly those living in Flatbush, where the field is.
Though the metal-and-wood jungle gyms are conventional, the small, square children's park is under an umbrella of shedding maple trees, so you can pretend you're far from the madding crowds.
The park is also set off from busy streets, making the quiet seem almost alarming.
The jungle gym, swings, monkey bars, single and double junior-size slides and bridge have padding beneath them, and there are plenty of new benches and the grounds are clean.
The park is at Parade Place, near the intersection of Caton and Parkside Avenues, close to the blue indoor tennis courts.


F.D.A. Panel Sees Need To Keep Breast Implants
Saying there was a "public health necessity" for silicone breast implants, both after cancer surgery and simply to enlarge breasts, a Food and Drug Administration panel voted today to recommend that the devices remain on the market temporarily, under limited conditions.
Panel members said the companies should be required to establish a permanent registry to list all women who receive implants and keep track of their conditions.
Saying the manufacturers' safety data were inadequate, they said the companies should collect and submit new data.
But they recommended that the companies be allowed to continue sales and profits.


Whoa, Nellie! It's 1 vs. 2 in a Barnburner!
KEITH JACKSON is talking about snake pits and Big Uglies -- without a hint of a verbal fummmmmmble -- and thinking that maybe tomorrow's Miami-Florida State barnburner in Tallahassee will wind up among his personal favorites like Alabama's 14-7 victory over Penn State in the 1979 Sugar Bowl and Southern California's 21-20 regular-season triumph over U.C.L.A. in 1967.
"They're old foes and they don't like each other," says Jackson, who will call the game with Bob Griese for ABC at noon.
"Miami in the past had those big old defensive tackles, who'd shut you down in the last few minutes of a game. They don't have them now. They have babies in there. It'll come down to knuckles bleeding and bodies heaving -- down to the Big Uglies."


Flight 103: A Solution Assembled From Fragments and Debris
A shard of circuit board no bigger than a fingernail, a fragment of an explosive timer embedded in a shirt and the entries in a private notebook led investigators to two Libyan intelligence agents who have been charged with planting the bomb that destroyed Pan Am Flight 103 in December 1988, Federal law enforcement officials said today.
The worldwide detective chase ranged from the Scottish countryside to the back streets of Malta.
Investigators tracked down leads in 50 countries and questioned 14,000 people.
Scottish and American forensic experts examined hundreds of thousands of bits of debris combed from an 845-square-mile area where the wreckage of the Pan American plane fell to earth.


Diner's Journal
Les Celebrites
It is no coincidence that the only two luxury restaurants to open in Manhattan this year are in hotels, first Lespinasse in the St.
Regis, and now Les Celebrites in the Essex House on Central Park South.
Only hotels seem to have the resources to open such grand establishments during these economically difficult times.


Review/Film; Marxist Revolutionaries Unaware They're Dated
Jeff Kahn's "Revolution" is an earnest, intentionally clunky low-budget satire of Marxism as practiced by three passionate young East Villagers, who are unaware that they're at least a quarter-century out of date.
The leader of this very small ring is Ollie, who sits all day in the bathtub reading "Das Kapital." He shares his pad with Suzy, a sometime dress designer and artist who dreams of a new world order, and Steve, a rich boy and an irrepressible naif who is inclined to say such things as, "Hey, guys, when are we going to have this revolution?"


Detective Rescues Baby From Street; Mother Is Arrested
A crying 3-month-old infant whose carriage was suddenly pushed into a busy Bronx street by his mother, who then began kicking the child, was rescued yesterday by a plainclothes detective who had stopped at a traffic sign and witnessed the attack, the police said.
The bruised, unconscious infant was taken to North Central Bronx Hospital with head injuries, the police said.
The mother, Yvette Osorio, 38 years old, of 2230 Grand Concourse in the Fordham section, was charged with assault.


Pepsico's Snack Unit Names a Europe Chief
In another sign of the growing global ambitions of Pepsico Inc., the company's international snack foods division said yesterday that James H. O'Neal would be assigned to the new post of president of Northern European operations on Jan. 1.
Mr.
O'Neal, 54 years old, will command a territory that currently includes Britain, the biggest market for snack foods outside the United States, and Poland, as well as continuing to oversee operations of Pepsico Foods International in the Middle East.
He has been executive vice president of the unit since 1989, after rising through the ranks of Frito-Lay's operations management for 23 years.


Do Computer Bulletin Boards Have Free Speech Protections?
To the Editor:
The Anti-Defamation League rejects as inaccurate and misleading in "Computer Speech -- Also Free" (editorial, Oct. 30) your characterization of our complaints to the Prodigy Services Company about its computer-based discussion service as a "censorship strategy." A more accurate depiction of our objection to anti-Semitic messages on Prodigy bulletin boards would note that we questioned Prodigy's interpretation and application of its self-imposed guidelines regarding offensive material.


Economic Scene; Old Issue Back With a Bang
"GET our economy moving again," President Bush said this week, echoing the theme of John F. Kennedy's successful campaign against Richard M. Nixon in 1960.
Mr.
Nixon blamed the Eisenhower Administration's failure to take strong enough action to wipe out the recession for his defeat.
A myth exists that Mr.
Kennedy, soon after he took over the White House, swiftly delivered on his pledge to get the country moving again by a big tax cut.
Actually, Mr.
Kennedy was slow.
Although the economy began to recover a month after he took office, the unemployment rate, which had been 5.6 percent in 1960, rose to 6.7 percent in 1961 and held at 5.6 percent in 1962 and 5.7 percent in 1963.


When Duke Was a Young, Neo-Nazi Orator
To the Editor:
"Duke's Disguise" by Jason Berry (Op-Ed, Oct. 16), writing of the poor job by the Louisiana press in reporting on David Duke, Republican candidate for governor, is on the mark.


It Just Might Be Time For Another Banner In the U.C.L.A. Gym
In the rafters high above the polished wooden floor at Pauley Pavilion, the national championship banners hang with a kind of regal aura, each linked inescapably with the past.
But now, more than 16 years after the last one was raised, they are more like museum pieces, less like shadows stretching over teams of the present.
Most alumni haven't forgotten the glory years of U.C.L.A. basketball, but they aren't so demanding anymore.
Enough time has passed that the Bruins can usually please their fans and student body by simply qualifying for the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, which they do almost annually.


The Art Market
The last two weeks' auctions of Impressionist, modern and contemporary artworks were the first real test of the art market's strength since last spring's poor sales.
They proved that the market, if weak, is far from moribund.
Works were actively traded, but in a bargain-hunter's paradise.
Buyers called the shots, acquiring art at prices that were not only lower than those of a couple of years ago, but also often well below the auction houses' estimates for these sales.
The speculators who had fueled the market of the 1980's were long gone, and the old-guard collectors returned to take their places.


New Chance to Help Working Families
A moderate and sensible bill that would guarantee unpaid leave to workers who must cope with family emergencies has been approved by the House of Representatives, following similar action in the Senate.
That would ordinarily be reason to cheer.
But last year President Bush vetoed a more expansive bill, and he has threatened to veto even this year's scaled-down version.
Mr.
Bush could certainly make good on his threat.
The House passed its version of the bill by far too small a margin to override a veto.
But he would be wise to heed poll results that show Americans dissatisfied with his performance on domestic issues.
This is an opportunity for him to reconsider a measure that helps working families.


Reviews/Film; A Motor Court And a Death Plot
"Cheap Shots," opening today at Cinema 3, is a melodramatic comedy of gloomy ineptitude and amateurishness, about the owner of a run-down motor court who becomes involved in a murder plot.
The film was made in Batavia, N.Y., by Jeff Ureles and Jerry Stoeffhaas.
The two writers and directors are described in the publicity kit as "the resident critics for the Little Theater," a successful movie theater in Rochester.
It is their first feature.
"Cheap Shots," which has been rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned), has some vulgar language and partial nudity.
Cheap Shots  Directed and written by Jeff Ureles and Jerry Stoeffhaas; director of photography, Thom Marini; edited by Ken McIlwaine; music by Jeff Beal; production designer, Carl Zollo; produced by William Coppard, Mr.
Stoeffhaas and Mr.
Ureles.
At Cinema 3, 2 West 59th Street, at the Plaza Hotel, Manhattan.
Running time: 92 minutes.
This film is rated PG-13.
Louie . . .
Louis Zorich Arnold . . .
David Patrick Kelly Dotty . . .
Mary Louise Wilson Jack . . .
Michael Twaine


Dinkins and South African Discuss Race
For three days, Mayor David N. Dinkins has seen and decried injustice in the squalor of South African shantytowns.
But it was a quiet challenge on race relations from the Nobel Prize-winning novelist Nadine Gordimer that moved him to rare candor on his feelings as a black American in her cozy living room tonight.
"I'm going to ask you something hard, and I hope it's not going to upset you," Miss Gordimer said, turning what mayoral aides had billed as strictly a "photo opportunity" into an exchange of ideas.
"I find having been coming back and forth between the States now for years that there's more separation now between black and white than there was some years ago, even among the small circle that I move in, of writers, journalists, TV people and people in the arts.


Quotation of the Day
"I am very happy." -- PRINCE NORODOM SIHANOUK.  [ A10:3. ]


CHRONICLE
DAVID B. KRISER, the vice chairman of the Beth Israel Medical Center, recently gave the hospital $3 million for a new emergency department, but somehow that did not seem quite enough.
So tonight Mr.
Kriser, a philanthropist who used to be in what he described as industrial liquidation, is giving a party at the Harmonie Club for the entire emergency-room staff -- physicians, nurses, aides, registrars, clerks, housekeepers.
"I consider these people family," Mr.
Kriser said, "and this will be a family party, a sit-down dinner so that people who slave together can enjoy each other for the evening, with no pressure."


At the Bar; In Tribute to a Dedicated Scholar and Ambassador of New York's Highest Court.
Walter Mordaunt never sat on the New York Court of Appeals, or argued before it or parsed its decisions for a law school class.
But no one ever cared for it more, or studied it more lovingly, or knew so well its every alcove or imparted his erudition about it so enthusiastically.
When he died last week, at the age of 72, New York's highest court lost one of its most authentic scholars as well as its most effective ambassador.
Benjamin N. Cardozo, who served as Chief Judge of the Court of Appeals from 1926 to 1932, when he was named to the United States Supreme Court, once defined the mission of New York's highest court to be "translating into law the social and economic forces that throb and clamor for expression." Too often, however, the expressions emanating from it or any other court are unintelligible to the naked eye, and the process by which they are reached incomprehensible.
Sometimes, it seems, lawyers and judges prefer it that way.


TV Weekend; A Dentist With a Murderous Touch
Television has to get it right once in a while.
The bulk of made-for-television movies about sociopaths and dysfunctional families on current schedules are, at best, forgettable exploitations.
But CBS manages to salvage the genre's reputation this Sunday at 9 P.M. with "In a Child's Name." Based on the Peter Maas book of the same name, the production gets beyond the grisly details of the case to some broader observations about life in America.
The drama, based on a true story, begins on Staten Island as Teresa Silvano (Karla Tamburrelli) decides to marry Kenneth Taylor (Michael Ontkean), a dentist.
Ken has just been divorced.
Teresa's close-knit Italian family knows that, but doesn't know that it is his second divorce, and that he left his first wife when she was nine months' pregnant.


Art in Review
Robert Kushner
Holly Solomon Gallery 724 Fifth Avenue (near 57th Street) Through Dec. 7
These large scroll-like paintings of flowers make explicit Robert Kushner's debt to Asian art, particularly its blurring of distinctions between depiction and decoration.
Composed of ink, acrylic paint and metal leaf on handmade Japanese paper, the works offer a season-by-season roster of flowers, from galanthus to barberry.
As in his watercolors, Mr.
Kushner relies on an exceptionally fluid line and flat areas of color that seep into the paper to produce luscious images that teeter on the brink of abstraction.
Most of the paintings present one or two blossoms in extreme closeup and enlarged to a mammoth size, furthering this abstracting process.
Hung side by side and covering the walls of the gallery, the images take on the character of exceptionally elegant wallpaper.


Study Finds Abuse in High Security Prisons
A study of prisons by a human rights group has concluded that super-maximum-security prisons in 36 states are the source of the most troubling abuses in the American penal system.
The report by Human Rights Watch, an international rights group, says these prisons, for inmates who misbehave in general prison populations, often have badly ventilated cells and prisoners are denied access to classes or to outdoor exercise, sometimes being kept in their cells all day.
Some states, like New York, have converted an entire prison into a super-maximum institution while other states are using a prison wing for this purpose.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Archer Daniels Midland Co., Decatur, Ill., a food producer, has bought 5.65 percent of American Fructose Corp., a unit of American Maize-Products Co., Stamford, Conn., for $3.4 million. *
Cray Research Inc., Minneapolis, is negotiating a pact with Digital Equipment Corp., Maynard, Mass.
Under the deal, Digital would distribute Cray's Y-MP EL supercomputer.


An Unlikely Martyr Focuses Gay Anger
Julio Rivera, his friends say, was the most improbable gay martyr -- a Hispanic drug user from Queens who lived on the far fringes of gay society.
Yet the stabbing death of this 29-year-old man in July 1990 has served to rally gay people throughout New York City.
And the killing's impact has been especially strong in Mr.
Rivera's neighborhood of Jackson Heights, which has with little outside notice become home to the city's second-largest gay community.


U.S. ACCUSES LIBYA AS 2 ARE CHARGED IN PAN AM BOMBING
The United States indicted two Libyan intelligence agents today in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland and left open the possibility of military retaliation for the attack that killed 270 people and became a horrific symbol of terrorism.
As the authorities in Scotland issued similar indictments against the two Libyans, who are believed to be in Libya and are unlikely to be extradited to the United States for trial, the White House all but blamed Libya's leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, for the bombing.


Aetna Sees Problems In $1.2 Billion of Loans
In a sign that the Securities and Exchange Commission is putting pressure on publicly traded insurance companies to estimate future real estate losses, the Aetna Life and Casualty Company disclosed yesterday in its third-quarter filing with the agency that it expected about $1.2 billion, or slightly more than 5 percent, of its real estate portfolio to run into problems in 1992.
The estimate represents the insurer's first specific forecast of the extent of problems in its property portfolio, and it follows a similar move by the Cigna Corporation in the second quarter.


Long Inquiry on the House Bank Is Predicted
Rejecting calls for a quick resolution to the House bank affair, the chairman of the House ethics committee said today the fact that the institution's records were not computerized would make the investigation a long one.
The House voted last month to close the bank by Dec. 31 after the General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, disclosed that members overdrew their accounts more than 8,000 times from July 1989 to June 1990.


Real-Life Courtroom Drama May Play on Broadway Stage
Nearly 80 years after it premiered on Broadway with an ill-fated show called "Are You a Crook?," a darkened Times Square theater is auditioning for a new role -- as a real-life criminal courtroom.
Under an unusual plan being advanced by top judges and other New York State and City officials and business executives, a section of the New York City Criminal Court now centralized in downtown Manhattan would be moved into the donated West 48th Street theater, the Longacre, for a three-year trial of a "community based" court, the city's first.


Review/Film; Real-Life Opera, Wagnerian Style
BEHIND the scenes in the elegant world of grand opera, there is at least as much scheming, flirting and back-stabbing as there is anywhere else.
That is the message of "Meeting Venus," a thoroughly enjoyable backstage drama that also functions as a political parable, since the opera company under consideration is a hotbed of prickly national stereotypes.
"This is the Opera Europa," one member of the film's large international cast explains.
"Here you can be misunderstood in six different languages." There is also a seventh: the language of love.
Glenn Close, lofty and radiant as a world-famous Swedish diva, makes a perfect centerpiece for the film's romantic intrigues, which constantly threaten to upstage the production of Wagner's "Tannhauser" that is in the works.
As Karin Anderson, she makes a spectacularly nonchalant grand entrance by arriving late at the Paris opera house where rehearsals have begun and by offering genteelly effusive greetings to everyone except the conductor, Zoltan Szanto (Niels Arestrup), who gets a dirty look.


State Police Vote for Pay Freeze So Laid-Off Officers Can Return
Faced with the painful choice of losing money or losing jobs, Connecticut state troopers have voted to accept a pay freeze and other concessions so that 111 laid-off troopers can return to work.
One of the affected officers, David Aflalo, a 28-year-old trooper who had spent two years on the force before he was laid off last month, came back to Troop G in this Fairfield County town this afternoon, just hours after the union members' votes had been counted.
"We all made our sacrifice," he said.
"We made our attempt to help the state with this budget crisis."


Edward Schreiber, Geology Expert, 61
Prof.
Edward Schreiber of Queens College, a geologist and lunar expert, died in an automobile accident Monday on the Bronx River Parkway.
He was 61 years old and lived in Piermont, N.Y.
A college spokesman said he was driving to the college from his home when another vehicle crossed the center divider and struck his car.


Venezuela Sale Of Phone Stake
A consortium led by the GTE Corporation and another led by the Bell Atlantic Corporation are among 12 finalists being considered by Venezuela to buy 40 percent of the national telephone company.
The Government is expected to make its selection on Friday, ending its monopoly ownership of Compania Anonima Nacional Telefonos de Venezuela.


Kurds Reach Accord With Iraq to End Blockade
Kurdish leaders meeting in northern Iraq say they have reached an agreement with Baghdad for the Iraqi Government to end a partial blockade of Kurdistan in return for a withdrawal of most Kurdish guerrilla forces from major cities in the region.
For more than two weeks, the Iraqi Army had slowed or stopped gasoline supplies to Kurdish areas and deliveries of food rations were halted.


Burton Hall, a Lawyer For Workers, Dies at 61
Burton H. Hall, a lawyer who specialized in representing employees against labor union officials and employers, died on Wednesday at his home in St.
George, Staten Island.
He was 61 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his law partner, Wendy E. Sloan.


Penning Street Poetry With One Eye on the Meter
Homer was no hack.
Neither were the New Agrarians, the Surrealists or the painterly writers of the New York School.
And none of them knew the Throgs Neck Bridge from the Bridge of Sighs.
But the latest school of poets -- they are true hacks.


Tappan Zee Traffic Enrages Commuters, Worries Planners
With more than three miles of pavement soaring across the Hudson River at one of the waterway's widest junctures, the Tappan Zee Bridge offers the motorist a majestic drive.
But lately that drive has brought more misery than majesty.
Traffic congestion has grown so severe on the bridge and on the connecting Cross Westchester Expressway (Interstate 287) that some business leaders fear it might thwart economic growth in Westchester County.
Many commuters, especially Rockland County residents traveling to work in Westchester, have started to lambaste politicians and transportation officials in public forums and on the telephone.


Corrections
A film review in Weekend on Nov. 1 about "29th Street" misidentified the locale where it was photographed.
It was filmed in Wilmington, N.C., not in Wilmington, Del.


Review/Film; A Typical Family With a Robot For a Dad
The starry skies, cute prodigies and perky suburban family are redolent of a Steven Spielberg movie, but even Mr.
Spielberg would balk at the premise of "And You Thought Your Parents Were Weird," in which two boys invent a miraculous, E. T.-size robot.
This robot, which Josh and Max Carson (Joshua Miller and Edan Gross) call Newman, is an obvious substitute for their father, who committed suicide two years earlier.
That would be fine if the father did not then return to inhabit the robot's body.
But he does, playing Frisbee with his sons and saying things like "I've got good hands, considering they're aluminum."
The merriment in this is forced, to put it mildly.
The father's tendency to wisecrack ("I've been trying to get back for a long time, but you know me with directions") borders on the bizarre.
Even when he explains that the suicide was merely a fatal accident, the film never picks up much good cheer, nor does it gain anything from weak subplots involving bullies and spies who want to steal the boys' invention.
As a special nod to Bill and Ted, it is also revealed that Dad became close friends with Albert Einstein in the spirit world.


Times Square, Past and Present: Just Add a Few Miles of Neon . . .


EXECUTIVES
*
American Express Information Services Corp., New York, an American Express division, named Angela M. Biever to the new position of senior vice president of finance and planning. *
Blount Inc., Montgomery, Ala., a manufacturing and construction company, named James E. Herndon president and chief executive of its construction division.


CHRONICLE
About 70 women from 20 states who are known as Friends of First Ladies converged on Beverly Hills, Calif., yesterday to further their cause: raising money for the restoration of inaugural and other dresses worn by Presidential wives.
Their weekend will include lunches with two of former First Ladies, NANCY REAGAN and BETTY FORD.
In addition, over the next four days the women, donors of at least $10,000 each, will take field trips to such sites as Rodeo Drive and Wilshire Boulevard for breakfasts at Hermes and Tiffany's; lunch at I. Magnin with James Galanos, designer of Mrs.
Reagan's inaugural dresses; cocktails with Nolan Miller, creator of the fashions for "Dynasty," and tours of the Nixon and Reagan libraries.


Rangers in Trouble at Center
Ever dream of playing center for the Rangers?
Now would seem to be your chance.
Five of the team's six centers have one medical complaint or another, including DARREN TURCOTTE, who cut his ankle during Wednesday night's 5-3 loss to the Capitals, but did not break it as had been feared.
Another center, Capt.
MARK MESSIER, missed half of yesterday's practice and didn't handle the puck because of a sore left wrist, while a third center, DOUG WEIGHT, didn't practice at all because of a sore back.


Top Rank's AIDS Tests
Top Rank Inc., perhaps the biggest promoter in the United States, says that, beginning in January, it will require all fighters on its cards to be tested for the AIDS virus.
BOB ARUM, the president of Top Rank, said yesterday that mandatory testing would be written into all of its contracts.
Top Rank, based in Boseman, Mont., has put on between 60 to 70 programs a year.
Currently, only Nevada requires AIDS testing for boxers who fight in that state.
Arum's plan calls for boxers to be tested within six months. . . .
A spokesman for Kent County Memorial Hospital in Warwick, R.I., where VINNY PAZIENZA is recovering from injuries suffered in a car accident, issued a statement yesterday disputing reports that the World Boxing Association junior-middleweight champion had suffered a fractured neck.
"No fracture has been identified at this time; the X-ray and cervical studies have shown a dislocation in the cervical spine," said ROBERT BAUTE, medical director.
Pazienza's Jan. 10 W.B.A. junior-middleweight title defense was canceled Wednesday. (AP)


Astoria, a Greek Isle in the New York City Sea
THE city across the river is part of New York, but the Greeks have a word for it: Astoria.
It's a very special word because Astoria, Queens, is the heartland of the Greek-American settlement in New York City, said to be the largest Hellenic city in the world except for the ancient city of philosophers and poets, Athens.
It is so nearby that the visitor from Manhattan or from anywhere else in the metropolitan area will not have time to dance in the aisles of any conveyance headed there (a ridiculous concept in any case in New York transportation.) But the chances are there will be a sort of rhythm coursing through the body on the way home after a tour of its restaurants, coffee houses, nightclubs and grocery stores.


Orion Pictures Posts a Loss
The Orion Pictures Corporation said today that it lost $48.1 million in the quarter ended Aug. 31, raising further questions about the troubled movie studio's ability to survive.
Orion, which has been struggling for months to avert bankruptcy and raise money to release its movies, attributed the loss to the poor performance of some its recent films; writedowns in the value of both upcoming and previously released movies, and costs associated with moving its headquarters from New York to Los Angeles.


China Undercuts U.S. Anti-Atom Effort on Korea
American efforts to mount an international campaign to persuade North Korea to halt its nuclear-weapons program were dealt a setback today when North Korea's main backer, China, declared that "dialogue," not pressure, was the way to deal with Pyongyang.
The Chinese pronouncement was made at a news conference by Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, at the close of a two-day meeting of the 15-nation Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
It was certainly not the kind of public position that Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, who was also attending the Asian-Pacific meeting, was hoping to hear from Beijing -- especially coming on the eve of his first official visit to China.


Sounds Around Town
From Sumatra
The Batak of North Sumatra, Kathryn Bache Miller Theater, Broadway and 116th Street, Manhattan, (212) 854-7799.
The music of the Batak peoples of Sumatra will be performed by a 15-member troupe directed by Rizaldi Siangian, a leading Indonesian cultural figure.
The concert will feature ceremonial and secular music of the Toba, Karo and Mandailing ethnic groups.
Batak music blends the sounds of the Middle East, southern Asia and the Far East.
The instrumentation includes melodic drums and other percussion, plucked lutes, flutes and oboes.
Show time is tonight at 8.
Tickets are $15 and $18.
Collins at Carnegie Hall
Judy Collins, Carnegie Hall, (212) 247-7800.
Judy Collins's enormous repertory ranges from Bob Dylan to Stephen Sondheim and touches on country and rock as well.
At her annual holiday concert, which is earlier than usual this year, one can expect to hear the singer apply her silvery soprano to such concert staples as "Send In the Clowns," "Both Sides Now" and "Amazing Grace." But the best moments are always her own classically flavored, piano-based reveries.
Show time is tonight at 8.
Tickets are $20 to $30.
Devil's Advocate
Denis Leary, "No Cure for Cancer," Actors' Playhouse, 100 Seventh Avenue, at Fourth Street, Manhattan, (212) 691-6226.
Denis Leary, who is from Boston, makes dangerously funny comedy by playing the devil's advocate.
He stands up for red meat, chain-smoking and aerosol spray, among other products and pleasures, and inveighs against such enemies of mindless consumption as Sting.
It is all largely ironic, of course, and done with a furious but charming rock-and-roll energy.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 8:30 and 10:30 and Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets are $18 tonight and tomorrow and $15 on Sunday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
New signs of economic woe: Retail sales edged down in October, while average earnings slumped and the ranks of people applying for state unemployment benefits rose to the highest weekly level since May.  [ Page A1. ]  Consumer prices rose a modest 0.1 percent in October.  [ D17. ]


Cuomo Offers to Jump-Start Long Island
Saying that Long Island had been severely damaged by local and national economic forces, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today unveiled an economic revitalization package that he said should breathe some life into its distressed economy.
Among the initiatives in the program are a $35 million fund for Long Island's parks and a proposal to accelerate hundreds of millions of dollars worth of road projects to jump-start the economy by putting people to work as early as next year.


Water Therapy Comes of Age for Athletes
In her own way, Lynda Huey is leading the masses into the water, taking them there and then showing them its gentle healing powers.
Bo knows, but others do, too.
If water is the coming rage, Huey is ready.
She took the plunge in 1975, and now, with legions of disciples diving in and with a second book on water therapy almost finished, Huey is predicting a kind of cult following that could surpass even aerobics.


Doctors Warn of a Looming TB Threat
The cases of drug-resistant tuberculosis in New York prisons are among a spate of outbreaks in the last year that are causing great alarm among infectious disease experts.
The drug-resistant strains threaten to spread wildly among poor people with AIDS, they say, and in some cases could also affect people with normal immune systems.
As a result, some public health experts are calling for very aggressive efforts to diagnose the disease, particularly among people infected with the AIDS virus.


Democratic 'Ploy' to Roll Back Taxes Is Now a Real Plan
A Democratic plan to roll back all of the $2.8 billion tax increase that Gov.
Jim Florio pushed through the Legislature last year has evolved into a serious proposal that could enable the Democrats to spare their programs from being gutted by the powerful new Republican majority.
Democratic legislators are pinning their hopes on a proposal to add a "sunset" provision to the tax increases that would let them expire next June, just when the Republican majority must approve a budget.


POINDEXTER WINS IRAN-CONTRA CASE IN APPEALS COURT
A divided Federal appeals court today threw out the five felony convictions against John M. Poindexter, the former national security adviser, who was the highest-ranking Reagan Administration official to be found guilty of criminal acts in the Iran-contra affair.
In another Iran-contra case today, a Federal judge sentenced Elliott Abrams, the former Assistant Secretary of State for Central America in the Reagan Administration, to two years probation and 100 hours of community service for withholding information from Congress about the affair.
Roller-Coaster Inquiry
The 2-to-1 appellate court reversal of Mr.
Poindexter's convictions and the coincidental sentencing of Mr.
Abrams reflect the roller-coaster fortunes of the Iran-contra prosecution, which will be five years old next month.
The initial focus of the inquiry on Reagan White House officials has collapsed with the Poindexter decision and the recent dismissal of charges against Oliver L. North, the former staff member on the National Security Council.
Mr.
North was the central figure in the arms sales to Iran and the diversion of some profits to the Nicaraguan rebels.


Public &amp; Private; The Waiting List
It took four days to find a clown.
Choco had a party already, Corky had a party already, Abbracadabra had a party already, and Buster had a family emergency.
A friend passed on the number of Marcia the Musical Moose.
"Hello," said the machine, "you've reached the home of Marcia the Musical Moose. My animal puppet friends and I aren't home right now -- we're out grazing." Marcia the Musical Moose passed on the numbers of four other clowns, all female.
I had visions of women clowns getting together in rap groups, talking about how male clowns get all the good gigs.
Marcia the Musical Moose was gentle but firm.
"You're a little late," she said.


Morton Stevens Television Composer, 62
Morton Stevens, a composer of television music, including the theme for "Hawaii Five-0," died on Monday at his home in Encino, Calif.
He was 62 years old.
He died of pancreatic cancer, said a spokeswoman for the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, of which he was a longtime member.


Panel Orders A Settlement In Police Pact
A three-member arbitration panel handed down a binding decision last night under which New York City's 18,000-member police union will have to accept contact concessions to help pay for wage increases, city officials said.
The officials said the decision grants the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association a 4.5 percent wage increase for the last 15 months.
But they said that it calls for no more city funds than the city had already allocated, which amounts to a 3 percent raise.
The union would be required to make up the difference by agreeing to changes in work rules and the pension plan and by accepting lower salaries for new officers, high-ranking city officials who spoke on condition of anonymity said.


Resolved: Subway Fares Will Rise. Debate Question Is, By How Much?
The fight over the transit fare has begun again, but this year the traditional and all-too-familiar sparring has two special twists that guarantee at least one thing for bus and subway riders: The fare will go up.
The only question is by how much.
One difference in this year's negotiations is that the politicians who usually ride to the fare's rescue, and revel in that role, find themselves strapped and thus less able to help.


Government Realigning Fees Doctors Get Under Medicare
The Government issued a nationwide fee schedule for Medicare today that will increase payments for family doctors while reducing payments to medical specialists.
It represents the biggest change in Medicare since the program was created 26 years ago.
Bowing to pressure from the American Medical Association and Congress, the Bush Administration backed away from its earlier plan to slash payments to most doctors treating Medicare patients.


Russian Republic Imposes Ban on Some Oil Exports
The Russian republic sent a shudder through the oil market yesterday, announcing that it was suspending permission to export some cargoes of oil.
But outside experts were not certain whether this was a symptom of the continuing decline in production in the Soviet Union, which is the world's largest producer, or part of an internal power struggle or the restructuring of the Soviet economy.
The announcement, the kind of news that the market has been more or less anticipating for two years, pushed crude prices up 60 cents a barrel early in the day on the New York Mercantile Exchange, but prices declined later, with oil for December delivery closing at $22.79, up 27 cents on the day.


METRO DIGEST
TUBERCULOSIS KILLS 13 IN PRISONS
Drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis have killed 12 inmates and a guard in the New York State prison system this year, correction and health officials disclosed yesterday.
They called it the most alarming medical problem in the prison community since AIDS was discovered a decade ago.
Page 1.
ESPECIALLY VULNERABLE: PEOPLE WITH AIDS
The cases of drug-resistant tuberculosis are among a spate of outbreaks in the last year that are causing alarm among infectious disease experts. the strain of the disease threatens to spread wildly among poor people with AIDS, and to some degree also threatens those with normal immune systems.
Page 22.
BABY DIDN'T DIE OF POISONING
A five-month-old girl whose death last month raised fears that someone was tampering with Beech-Nut baby food did not die of food poisoning after all, officials said.
They said she died of unidentified disease.
Page 22.
ONE SURE THING: A FARE INCREASE
The fight over the subway and bus fare has begun again.
But the traditional and all-to-familiar minuet has some special twists this year, which means the issue is not whether the fare will go up but by how much.
News analysis, page 23.
WITNESS ASSAILED AT MILLER TRIAL
The chief witness against Mel Miller, the Speaker of the State Assembly, was portrayed by a defense lawyer as a liar, a forger, a fraudulent businessman and a tax cheat.
Page 23.
A 'BREAK' IN WESTCHESTER
Declaring that Westchester's taxpayers "deserve a break," Andrew P. O'Rourke, the County executive, unveiled a $1.18 billion spending plan for 1992 that calls for a slight property-tax cut that could cost 500 county jobs.
Page 25.
THE DEMOCRATS' GAMBIT
A proposal by New Jersey Democrats to roll back the $2.8 billion tax increase they rammed through the Legislature last year could allow them to preserve enough legislative power to protect their programs from being gutted by the new Republican majority.
Page 25.
SPORTS AGENCY'S AGENDA
The New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority will ask the state for the power to refinance its debt, to the tune of $416 million, which would allow the authority to construct and manage the proposed Atlantic City Convention Center and to expand and upgrade Rutgers University's football stadium.
Page 25.
A TRUCE IN THE BUDGET WARS
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and New York State legislative leaders spent the day repairing budget negotiations that seemed on the verge of collapse.
Mr.
Cuomo used a statewide radio broadcast to accuse Senate leaders of pursuing "An obstructionist course" in their private negotiations over an unusual multiyear budget plan.
Page 25.
NO. 2 AT REGENTS BECOMES NO. 1
R.
Carlos Carballada, the Vice Chancellor of the New York State Board of Regents, was elected Chancellor after a turbulent closed-door session in which he agreed to no longer promote use of publicly financed tuition vouchers to send students to private schools.
Page 24.


American Airlines Details Its Plans to Cut Spending
American Airlines, which for the last five years has been a leader in expansion, is cutting its capital expenditures by $8 billion.
The company has already announced plans to reduce its five-year, $22 billion capital spending program but until now has given no details.
On Thursday, Robert L. Crandall, chairman, president and chief executive of American's parent, the AMR Corporation, said the airline's fleet of 602 planes would increase to 682 by 1995 instead of the 775 planned originally.


Classical Music in Review
'La Traviata' Metropolitan Opera


Public Sells Thousands of Guns to St. Louis
After receiving 7,469 guns, the St.
Louis Police Department has ended a monthlong campaign to get firearms off the street by buying them from the public.
All the guns collected, including sawed-off shotguns, automatic weapons and handguns, will be melted down to create a sculpture of Christopher Harris, a 9-year-old boy killed this summer in a gun battle between two drug dealers in front of his house.


2 Killed in Massachusetts Roof Collapse


CHRONICLE
Everyone, it is said, has 15 minutes of fame.
ROMAN POPADIUK will have a little more than that tomorrow.
A Ukrainian-American, he is the White House's principal deputy press secretary and steps forward only when Marlin Fitzwater is off duty.
Tomorrow he will be honored as Ukrainian of the Year by the Ukrainian Institute of America at a luncheon at the Plaza Hotel.
"I have really only been in the limelight twice," he said yesterday, "once when the Iraqi war broke out and once when the coup in the Soviet Union took place."
Tomorrow he will hear nice words about him spoken by a longtime colleague who recently drew considerable attention himself: ROBERT M. GATES, the new Director of Central Intelligence.


Why Louisiana's Voting System Is Unusual
David Duke and Edwin W. Edwards owe their roles in the runoff, at least to some extent, to the actions of Mr.
Edwards as a headstrong governor in the early 1970's.
Political analysts here say both candidacies were fostered by Louisiana's unusual nonpartisan election system, which allows candidates of all parties to compete in a primary.
If neither of the two top vote-getters receives more than 50 percent of the vote, they compete in a runoff election.


Indians Trade Swindell
The Cleveland Indians, the worst team in the major leagues last season, traded one of their best pitchers to the Cincinnati Reds yesterday when they exchanged left-hander GREG SWINDELL for three right-handers: JACK ARMSTRONG, SCOTT SCUDDER and minor leaguer JOE TUREK.
Swindell, 26 years old, was 9-16 last season with a 3.48 earned run average in 33 starts.
He has a career record of 60-55 with a 3.79 e.r.a. with the Indians and led them last season in innings pitched (238), strikeouts (169) and complete games (7).


Home Builders Throw In the Extras
A survivor like David Stenger, with 20-odd years of watching the starts and stops of the home-building industry, knows that selling a house in a near-comatose market can require flexibility.
This time, his notion of flexibility is being stretched.
"We're bending over backward all right," said Mr.
Stenger, a 39-year-old builder with a can-do smile.
"Way over."


Suspect in Florida Church Fires Is Arrested
The authorities investigating fires at 50 Florida churches have arrested a suspect on unrelated charges, but said today that they believed the fires were the work of more than one person.
The suspect was identified as Patrick Lee Frank, a 41-year-old former convict from Chattanooga, Tenn.
Bruce Snyder, a spokesman for the group of state and Federal officials investigating the church fires, said the inquiry was continuing.


Dow Chemical In Czech Deal
The Dow Chemical Company agreed today to buy a majority interest in Chemicke Zavody Sokolov A.S., a major Czech chemical manufacturer, in the biggest United States investment yet in Czechoslovakia.
Under the agreement in principle, Dow is to buy 51 percent of Sokolov in a deal expected to be completed in January.
Dow will have an option to buy at least 90 percent within three years, which Dow officials said would entail a total investment of about $100 million.


Tax-Free Childhood
To the Editor:
Re "With Allowances, Every Parent Differs" (Consumer's World page, Nov. 2), in which you suggest parents collect taxes from their children: Children daily face traumas no one would wish on an adult: beatings, neglect, sexual exploitation, abandonment.
Even the best cared-for children live in the same uncertain world as their parents and cannot be protected from hurt, disease, loss and death.
Of all the miseries adults endure, children are immune from only one: taxes.
Let childhood be tax free.
HELEN EGGER, DANIEL EGGER New Haven, Nov. 2, 1991


Michael Ballard, A Nikolais Dancer And Teacher, 49
Michael Ballard, a dancer with the companies of Murray Louis and Alwin Nikolais in the 1970's and early 1980's, died on Sunday at Barnes Hospital in St.
Louis.
He was 49 years old.
He died of AIDS, said Norman Ader, his companion of 25 years.


Johnson Agrees to Join Commission on AIDS
After he announced last week that he was infected with the AIDS virus and would retire from the Los Angeles Lakers to serve as a spokesman in the fight against AIDS, MAGIC JOHNSON was deluged with so many invitations to join so many AIDS committees that he needed help just to sift through them all.
Yesterday, Johnson said he had accepted an invitation from PRESIDENT BUSH to join the 15-member National Commission on AIDS.


Turf's Fine, and McNeil Wants In
When Freeman McNeil heard that New England had resodded the field at Foxboro Stadium for a second time this year, he was as happy as could be.
Opposing teams used to have nightmares about the hard and slick artificial turf at Foxboro.
Natural grass was finally installed this year, but the sod didn't take, and the Jets will help inaugurate the new batch on Sunday.


To Russia, et Alia, With Love
As a humanitarian gesture, the United States Postal Service is offering a low-cost airlift for aid packages to the Baltic nations and the Soviet Republics.
The service will run through March 31.
Packages must be clearly marked "Humanitarian Airlift" in red next to the address.
Also, since the United States has recognized the independence of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, addresses in those Baltic nations must not include "U.S.S.R." Addresses in the Soviet republics should use "U.S.S.R."


Gender Perfect
The following is a letter from a University of Kentucky journalism professor to a student.
It was published in the November issue of The American Spectator.
Dear Victoria,
On your recent scholarship application, members of the review committee noticed the inappropriate use of the term "chairman." (We women of the university enjoy the support of the majority of our male colleagues in using language which is either gender inclusive or gender free when referring to a generic position.)


Baker Asks China to Free Prisoners
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d opened talks with Chinese leaders tonight, making a series of specific requests that China cease any transfers of nuclear weapons technology to countries like Algeria and Iran and that it release some of the pro-democracy political prisoners.
A senior State Department official said after Mr.
Baker's first meeting with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen that the Chinese gave no concrete responses to the proposals.
The official added that it was not clear from what was said tonight that there would be any specific responses while the Secretary is here.


Rising Fraud Worrying Car Insurers . . .; . . . And Thefts Bedevil Automobile Renters
You are on a business trip, or better yet, on vacation, and rent a car at the airport.
Simple.
Tens of thousands of people do it every day in the United States.
But what if you park the car and never see it again?
When a rented car is stolen, what happens next may not be so simple.


A Truce in Albany's War of Words on the Budget
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the state's legislative leaders spent the day repairing budget negotiations that seemed on the verge of collapse this morning.
Mr.
Cuomo, trying to send a stern warning to the Republicans who control the State Senate, used a statewide radio broadcast Thursday night to accuse Senate leaders of pursuing "an obstructionist course" in their private negotiations over an unusual multiyear budget plan.


Drifter Is Indicted in 1990 Florida Slayings
A drifter from Louisiana was indicted today in the August 1990 slayings of five college students who were stabbed in their apartments here.
After 30 minutes of deliberations, the grand jury indicted the drifter, Danny Harold Rolling, 37 years old, of Shreveport, La., on five counts of first-degree murder, three counts of sexual battery and three counts of armed burglary.


GTE-Led Group Wins Venezuela Phone Stake
Venezuela today accepted a $1.9 billion bid from a consortium led by the GTE Corporation for a 40 percent stake in the state telephone company.
GTE's partners include the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, Telefonica Internationale de Espana and C.A. la Electricidad de Caracas.
A representative of GTE said the Stamford, Conn., company would finance at least 51 percent of the purchase price itself.


Music Industry Group Names Director General
The International Federation of Phonographic Industries, the worldwide recording industry organization that negotiates music copyright protection, has appointed Nicholas Garnett to be its next director general.
Mr.
Garnett will succeed Ian Thomas, who is 57 and plans to retire in March.
At 37 years old, Mr.
Garnett will be the federation's youngest director general ever.


Nets Lose Sixth in Row as Bullets Pull It Out in Overtime, 116-111


Eugene J. Kupjack, 79, Creator Of Miniature Rooms for Museum
Eugene J. Kupjack, who produced the 30 American miniature rooms at the Art Institute of Chicago, died on Nov. 8 at Resurrection Hospital in Chicago.
He was 79 years old and lived in Park Ridge, Ill.
He died of congestive heart failure, his son Henry said.


Knicks Questioned on Move
Carlton McKinney's agent is angry because he believes the Knicks waived McKinney without justification.
The agent, Torrell Harris, said today that McKinney, a strong outside shooter, could have helped the Knicks if he had been given a fair opportunity.
McKinney was waived Thursday, replaced on the roster by Kennard Winchester, a 6-foot-5-inch swingman who had been waived by the Houston Rockets after four games.
Harris said the roster move did not make sense.


Religion Notes
Reform Request
Reform Judaism is the most liberal of the branches of American Judaism.
Traditional religious observances, liturgies and customs are not required of its members or congregations.


CHRONICLE
PRINCE BANDAR BIN SULTAN, Saudi Arabia's Ambassador to the United States, congratulated Sgt.
ROBERT SNOW and his wife, the former KARIN PAJOR, at their wedding reception last night at the Farmington (Conn.) Club.
And he gave them a surprise gift, a check for $100,000 to help them buy their first home.
It was a happy ending to a story that began in March at Walter Reed Army Hospital where Sergeant Snow was recovering from wounds incurred in the Persian Gulf war, and the Prince, King Fahd's nephew, was being treated for a back problem.


Dubrovnik Diary: Shelling, Sniper Fire, Chaos and for a Few, Escape by Sea
The writer of this article was evacuated on Thursday after spending a week in Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia, whose Croatian defenders are besieged by Yugoslav federal forces.
Here is a diary of the final five days of the visit.
Nov. 10
The Hotel Belvedere caught fire about 10:15 A.M. under heavy shelling from two Yugoslav Navy patrol boats and from mortars on Mount Zarkovica, just above.
It belches dark-gray smoke and flames.


Classical Music in Review
Thomas Buckner Baritone Merkin Concert Hall


METRO DIGEST
TUBERCULOSIS KILLS 13 IN PRISONS
Drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis have killed 12 inmates and a guard in the New York State prison system this year, correction and health officials disclosed yesterday.
They called it the most alarming medical problem in the prison community since AIDS was discovered a decade ago.
Page 1.
ESPECIALLY VULNERABLE: PEOPLE WITH AIDS
The cases of drug-resistant tuberculosis are among a spate of outbreaks in the last year that are causing alarm among infectious disease experts. the strain of the disease threatens to spread wildly among poor people with AIDS, and to some degree also threatens those with normal immune systems.
Page 22.
BABY DIDN'T DIE OF POISONING
A five-month-old girl whose death last month raised fears that someone was tampering with Beech-Nut baby food did not die of food poisoning after all, officials said.
They said she died of unidentified disease.
Page 22.
ONE SURE THING: A FARE INCREASE
The fight over the subway and bus fare has begun again.
But the traditional and all-to-familiar minuet has some special twists this year, which means the issue is not whether the fare will go up but by how much.
News analysis, page 23.
WITNESS ASSAILED AT MILLER TRIAL
The chief witness against Mel Miller, the Speaker of the State Assembly, was portrayed by a defense lawyer as a liar, a forger, a fraudulent businessman and a tax cheat.
Page 23.
A 'BREAK' IN WESTCHESTER
Declaring that Westchester's taxpayers "deserve a break," Andrew P. O'Rourke, the County executive, unveiled a $1.18 billion spending plan for 1992 that calls for a slight property-tax cut that could cost 500 county jobs.
Page 25.
THE DEMOCRATS' GAMBIT
A proposal by New Jersey Democrats to roll back the $2.8 billion tax increase they rammed through the Legislature last year could allow them to preserve enough legislative power to protect their programs from being gutted by the new Republican majority.
Page 25.
SPORTS AGENCY'S AGENDA
The New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority will ask the state for the power to refinance its debt, to the tune of $416 million, which would allow the authority to construct and manage the proposed Atlantic City Convention Center and to expand and upgrade Rutgers University's football stadium.
Page 25.
A TRUCE IN THE BUDGET WARS
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and New York State legislative leaders spent the day repairing budget negotiations that seemed on the verge of collapse.
Mr.
Cuomo used a statewide radio broadcast to accuse Senate leaders of pursuing "An obstructionist course" in their private negotiations over an unusual multiyear budget plan.
Page 25.
NO. 2 AT REGENTS BECOMES NO. 1
R.
Carlos Carballada, the Vice Chancellor of the New York State Board of Regents, was elected Chancellor after a turbulent closed-door session in which he agreed to no longer promote use of publicly financed tuition vouchers to send students to private schools.
Page 24.


Officer Shot in Brooklyn
A police officer was shot and wounded in Brooklyn early this morning, the police said.
The officer, who was not identified, was patrolling Eastern Parkway at Saratoga Avenue in Brownsville when he was shot three times, a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, said.
There were no arrests early this morning, and Sergeant Mohrmann said she had no other details about the shooting.
The officer was taken to Brookdale Hospital.


Girl Not Killed By Baby Food, Examiner Says
A five-month-old girl, whose death raised fears throughout the city that someone was tampering with baby food, did not die of food poisoning after all, a spokeswoman for the New York Medical Examiner said yesterday.
The death last month of the girl, Linda Lin, initially linked to tainted food, caused frightened parents to check baby food jars and drove down sales of Beech-Nut products.


A Drug-Resistant TB Results in 13 Deaths In New York Prisons
One or more new strains of drug-resistant tuberculosis have killed 12 inmates and a guard in the New York State prison system this year, correction and health officials disclosed yesterday.
They called the discovery of the new strains the most alarming medical development in prisons since AIDS was discovered a decade ago.
Eight inmates of the Downstate Correctional Facility in Long Island City, Queens, died of one new drug-resistant strain at St.
Clare's Hospital in Manhattan, and four more from the Auburn Correctional Facility died of the same or another new strain at University Hospital of the Health Science Center in nearby Syracuse, the officials said.
The officer who died had been assigned to guard the inmates treated in Syracuse.


Macy Loses Support of a Big Factor
Some of R. H. Macy &amp; Company's suppliers were told by Heller Financial Inc. yesterday that it was no longer assuming the risk of payment for new merchandise shipped to the department store chain.
The move by the country's second-largest factoring company reflects the increasing jitters on Seventh Avenue over the prospect of a third consecutive weak holiday sales season for retailers.


After Heated Debate, Vice Chancellor Is Selected to Lead Regents
The New York State Board of Regents today selected R. Carlos Carballada, a Rochester banker who has been a vigorous proponent of school vouchers, to become the board's Chancellor.
The formal vote this morning was unanimous, but it came after a turbulent closed-door debate Thursday night and unusual pressure from top legislators to delay the vote.
The selection of Mr.
Carballada, now Vice Chancellor, also came after he pledged not to reopen last summer's vigorous debate over his proposal to give parents publicly financed tuition vouchers to send their children to private or parochial schools.


News Summary
International 2-5  HOPE FOR SOLUTION IN HAITI
Haitian lawmakers and a delegation from the Organization of American States have agreed on steps toward restoring constitutional government.
Officials said the process might pave the way for the return of Haiti's deposed President.
Page 3


Credit Card Rate Cap In Doubt
With a politically popular move to cap the interest rates on credit cards spreading through Congress like a shipboard fire, the White House and banking lobbyists began damage control today, and the prevailing view by nightfall was that the measure probably would not be enacted.
Democrats see the issue as an embarrassing one for President Bush and want to keep it alive as long as possible.
But many lawmakers, insisting on anonymity, said they would vote against it if they thought it stood a chance of becoming law.


Chambliss Fielding Inquiries as Teams Search for Managers
Chris Chambliss, who could not get past first base with the Yankees when it came to coaching opportunities, has been invited to interview for the managerial job with the Chicago White Sox and has received an overture from the Cubs.
Chambliss has also been asked by his current employers, the Atlanta Braves, to take over their Class AAA affiliate in Richmond, putting him in position to become the only black manager at that level.
Meanwhile, Don Baylor, who also was hoping to land a managerial job and had been interviewed in Seattle and Milwaukee, has decided not to wait for an invitation from the Cubs, which was reportedly in the offing, and has accepted a job as batting instructor with the St.
Louis Cardinals.
He served in that role with the Brewers the last two seasons.


Will Exceptional Arazi Be Top-Award Exception?
Forget about Arazi as Horse of the Year.
Or, if you prefer, rave about Arazi as Horse of the Year.
Sometime in the next month, ballots will be mailed for the Eclipse Awards, the Oscars of the thoroughbred business.
Turf writers and racing secretaries will start coming to grips with the issue of the year: Who is the Horse of the Year?
And for the first time in history, a 2-year-old colt from Europe could crash the barriers of age and geography and win the biggest race of all.


More Tinkering With Acoustics at Avery Fisher
Fifteen years after the last major renovation of Avery Fisher Hall, the New York Philharmonic and Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts announced yesterday that they had engaged Russell Johnson, the acoustician, to improve the sound the musicians hear on stage.
Mr.
Johnson and the Philharmonic's music director, Kurt Masur, said they hoped to redress many longstanding complaints of musicians and listeners.
"If the musicians can hear each other better on stage," Mr.
Masur said at a news conference, "they will be better balanced, and they will play with better coordination. And that will sound better to the audience."


High Noon for Sunshine State and the Rest of Country
We forget how young these people are, Big Men on Campus playing a game that can paralyze much of a state and demand attention well beyond its borders.
Florida State and Miami will meet shortly after noon Saturday, risking perfect records and clarifying high-stakes bowl matchups.
"It has been called the national championship game, right here," recited Miami linebacker Darrin Smith.
"It's the biggest game of my life."


Regulators' Lawyers: A Growth Industry/A special report.; U.S. Said to Squander Millions For Legal Work on the Bailout
Two studies commissioned by the Government say the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, now the world's largest employer of private lawyers, has been wasting a significant portion of its outside legal expenses, which are expected to reach $700 million this year.
The studies found, among other things, that the F.D.I.C. and its affiliated agency, the Resolution Trust Corporation, failed to use competitive bidding or to negotiate steep-enough discounts or fixed fees when hiring lawyers, even though many lawyers are eager for the work.
The lawyers were hired to help the Government clean up the problems caused by the failure of banks and savings and loan institutions.
Once on the job, lawyers earning $100 an hour or more were allowed to perform routine work, like reviewing bills, that could have been done by clerks, the studies say.
The reports did not name specific law firms in these instances.


New Hampshire Heeds Stern Tsongas Message
Paul E. Tsongas has a vision of America's future.
It looks a lot like a snake wrapped around a pole.
In fact, it is a sine curve tilted on its side, which, Mr.
Tsongas explains, represents the economy and its periodic business cycles.
A line sloping downward shows what will happen to the American standard of living as the recessions grow deeper and the recoveries less lofty.


Ethnic Politics at City Hall
When things go wrong at City Hall, mayors often name new committees or new advisers.
Mayor David Dinkins of New York is no exception.
Faced with anger from Hispanic groups over the forced resignation of the city hospitals' president, Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo, the Mayor decided to create a new job and give it to a Hispanic.
State Welfare Commissioner Cesar Perales will soon become the new Deputy Mayor for Health and Human Services.
Mr.
Perales's appointment may solve Mr.
Dinkins's political problem.
But it is not likely to solve New York City's health and welfare problems, and may even exacerbate them.


O'Rourke's Budget Plan Keeps Taxes Level in '92
Declaring that Westchester's taxpayers "deserve a break," Andrew P. O'Rourke, the Republican County Executive, today unveiled a $1.18 billion spending plan for 1992 that calls for a slight reduction in the county's property tax collections, possibly at the cost of some 500 county jobs.
The total amount of property taxes to be collected would dip by only $45,526, or .01 percent, to $329,158,661.
But if approved by the County Legislature, the budget would represent the first time in a decade that Westchester did not increase county taxes.


U.S. Aides Worry About Spread of Arms From Sales by the Soviets
Pentagon and Western intelligence officials are expressing growing alarm that aggressive new efforts by the Soviet Union to sell weapons and advanced technology for badly needed cash are setting off a new wave of arms proliferation.
Advanced Soviet MIG-31 fighter jets were on the block at a weapons trade fair in Dubai this month, an American intelligence officer said.
Syria is buying upgraded Soviet T-72 tanks, while Iran is acquiring advanced Soviet fighter planes, Western intelligence officials say.
The Pentagon is investigating suspected sales of improved Soviet-made Scud missiles to third-world countries.


Mary Sommers Weds
Mary Anne Sommers, a vice president of the Women's Publishing Division of The New York Times Company Magazine Group and the founding publisher of Child magazine, was married yesterday to Robert F. Reilly, a financial consultant in the men's wear industry.
The Rev.
Thomas R. Peterson officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
The bridegroom was a widower; the bride's first marriage ended in annulment.


Doctors Warn of a Looming TB Threat
The cases of drug-resistant tuberculosis in New York prisons are among a spate of outbreaks in the last year that are causing great alarm among infectious disease experts.
The drug-resistant strains threaten to spread wildly among poor people with AIDS, they say, and in some cases could also affect people with normal immune systems.
As a result, some public health experts are calling for very aggressive efforts to diagnose the disease, particularly among people infected with the AIDS virus.


Guidepost; Early Birds Are Thankful
A traditional Thanksgiving dinner, with all its courses, side dishes, vegetables and other trimmings, takes a long time to prepare.
But many dishes can be made in advance and frozen, some a week or more ahead.
The turkey and steamed vegetables must be cooked the day they are served.
Here are tips on how far in advance other foods can be prepared and how long they will keep.
Dish
Preparation and Storage
Soups
3 days refrigerated; several weeks frozen
Potato dishes
2 to 3 days refrigerated
Vegetable purees
2 to 3 days refrigerated; several weeks frozen
Creamed onions;
vegetable casseroles
2 days refrigerated; several weeks frozen
Bread stuffing
2 days refrigerated; 1 week frozen
Cranberry sauce
Several weeks refrigerated
Bread; rolls
1 day at room temperature; 2 weeks frozen
Apple pie
1 day at room temperature; 2 weeks frozen
Pumpkin pie
1 day refrigerated; 2 weeks frozen
Pecan pie
2 days at room temperature; 2 weeks frozen
Fruit crisps; cobblers
1 day at room temperature; 2 weeks frozen


Fred Perlberg Is Dead; Dressmaker Was 90
Fred Perlberg, a retired manufacturer of women's evening dresses in New York, died yesterday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 90 years old.
He died of heart failure, his son, Edward, said.


Senate Passes Bill to Extend Jobless Aid and Bush Signs It
The Senate tonight passed and President Bush signed legislation to provide up to 20 weeks of additional unemployment benefits to people already out of work at least 26 weeks.
The 91-to-2 vote quieted four months of intense partisan debate over the effect of the recession.
The action also ended a furious 24 hours of arguments from some senators that their states were treated unfairly by the bill, which the House passed 396 to 30 on Thursday.


Review/Rock; New Video Opens the Jackson Blitz
The Michael Jackson hoopla kicked into gear on Thursday night with the premiere of "Black or White," an extended 11-minute video clip for the first single from Mr.
Jackson's album, "Dangerous," due for release on Nov. 26.
Even Mr.
Jackson's hype is popular.
On Thursday, Fox Television , which showed the video simultaneously with MTV and Black Entertainment Television, had its highest Nielsen ratings ever.
The network also received complaints about linking sex (Mr. Jackson grabbing his crotch) and violence (Mr. Jackson smashing windows) directly after the animated comedy of "The Simpsons."


Welcome Back, Carter
GARY CARTER, the former Mets catcher who spent the first 10 years of his 17-year career with the Montreal Expos, came full circle yesterday.
He was claimed on waivers by the Expos.
The 37-year-old Carter spent last season with the Los Angeles Dodgers after being cut by the Giants, with whom he had signed after the Mets released him when the 1989 season ended.
He said he was delighted to be returning to Montreal after being waived by the Dodgers.


Your Taxes; Snags in System On Withholding
A new Internal Revenue Service procedure is subjecting thousands of investors to backup income-tax withholding, many of them improperly, because of difficulties in verifying identification.
Anyone opening a brokerage, bank, mutual fund or other investment account must supply a Social Security number, which the I.R.S. checks to be sure it will get its own record of the interest, dividends and proceeds paid to that person.
If the number is deemed incorrect, the I.R.S. notifies, say, Merrill Lynch of this discrepancy, and the broker in turn sends its customer a letter explaining what has happened.
A second notification by the I.R.S. within three years requires backupwithholding of 20 percent, meaning that Merrill Lynch pays its customer only 80 percent of the amount due.


Ukraine Has No Wish To Be a Nuclear Power
To the Editor:
Contrary to your statement in "The Soviet Disunion's Missiles" (editorial, Nov. 4) that "ardent nationalists threaten to overwhelm the nuclear abolitionists in the Ukraine," no organized political group opposes the position of the Ukrainian parliament on the republic's nonnuclear status.
The Ukrainian parliament reaffirmed its position in a declaration of Oct. 24, 1991.


Review/Dance; Performing Atop Eggs To Suggest Life's Risks
Three women in hammocks swing out with pendulum force at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Five men traipse across, carrying trays of eggs, trying to avert the flailing arms of these sirens who try to ensnare them.
Later a woman plants her feet on the stomachs of two men who lie on top of the eggs on the floor.
She steps off, they roll across the eggs; other performers toss one egg at a time down a line to a man at the end.
"Chicken" or "Cock" he says, predicting the future if the egg reaches him intact.
Some do not and the cast whistles as it works, wiping up.


R. M. Paiewonsky, 84, Virgin Islands Leader
Ralph M. Paiewonsky, who served eight years as Governor of the Virgin Islands in the 1960's, died Nov. 9, on his 84th birthday, at St.
Thomas Hospital in St.
Thomas, V.I.
Mr. Paiewonsky died of congestive heart failure, said his daughter, Joyce Adolfsen.


George Olsson, 88, Head of Cooperative Built on Cranberries
George C. P. Olsson, a former chairman of Ocean Spray Cranberries Inc., a farmers' cooperative that now has more than 800 grower-members and annual sales of almost $1 billion, died Wednesday in Jordan Hospital in Plymouth, Mass.
He was 88 years old and lived in Plymouth.
He died of heart failure after being in declining health for the past year, said his son Philip C. Olsson of Washington.


Rhodes to Kentucky
RODRICK RHODES, rated one of the top high school forwards in the country, signed a letter of intent yesterday to attend the University of Kentucky.
In 1990-91, the 6-foot-7-inch Rhodes averaged 21 points, 9 rebounds, 4 blocked shots, 4 steals and 4 assists during his junior season at St.
Anthony's High School in Jersey City.


Dollar Posts Heavy Losses: Big Drop in Stocks a Factor
The dollar tumbled yesterday against most currencies in trading in the United States in reaction to strength in the German mark, worries about the economy and a sharp decline in stock prices.
The dollar had risen in Europe.
Gold prices rose in New York after falling overseas.
The Republic National Bank in New York quoted a bid for gold of $359 an ounce late yesterday, up $4 from Thursday's late bid.


To Jobless on Gary's Streets, Sense of Too Little Too Late
This city, haunted by long-silent steel mills and boarded-up stores, is a deep pocket of unemployment in a state where the overall level of joblessness is below the national average of 6.4 percent.
In Gary, the unemployment rate is at least 15 percent, officials say.
Knots of out-of-work men, young and old, while away the days on street corners or in unemployment offices, hurt and disgust etched on their faces like scars.


President for TV Unit At New Line Cinema
The New Line Cinema Corporation, the film company that released the "Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtle" films, said yesterday that Robert Friedman had joined the company as president of its new television operation.
Mr.
Friedman has been president of the Playboy Entertainment Group, the television and video arm of Playboy Enterprises Inc.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Capitals Beat Penguins  The Washington Capitals won their fourth consecutive game and assumed the National Hockey League's best overall record last night after a 6-2 victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins in Landover, Md.
Todd Krygier scored twice in a four-goal second period for Washington (15-4). (AP) GOLF  Love Leads by 4 Shots  Davis Love 3d birdied five of the last seven holes for a seven-under-par 66 and jumped into the lead yesterday after three rounds of the $750,000 Kapalua International in Hawaii.
Love's three-day total of 14-under-par 204 on the par-72 Plantation course puts him four shots ahead of Mike Hulbert and Jim Hallet going into today's final round.
Hulbert appeared to have finished with a three-under 70, but was assessed a two-stroke penalty for moving a long piece of grass before hitting his second shot from a patch of weeds on the 12th hole.
The penalty gave him a round of 72 and a 208 total.
P.G.A. rules forbid moving, bending or breaking any growth that is attached to the ground.
Hulbert said that when he moved the reed-like grass behind his ball, he thought it was loose and unattached. (AP)


Russ Togs Pact
Russ Togs Inc., the New York apparel maker that filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection last week, said it had reached a financing agreement with its banks.
The banks, led by the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, agreed to increase a cash-collateral financing agreement to $15 million from $5.5 million.
The agreement, considered debtor-in-possession financing, will carry Russ Togs through next Thursday, when a hearing is scheduled to consider longer-term financing.
Earlier in the day, Societe Generale, the French bank, canceled a $15 million debtor-in-possession loan to Russ Togs that was agreed to last week.


3 Americans Reach A.T.P. Semifinals
Boris Becker won the match, but Pete Sampras salvaged a set, which was all he needed to reach the semifinals of the A.T.P. tour world championship today.
When the two shook hands after the match, the winner reminded the loser, "You're in." The winner was out.


Leon G. Telsey, 84, Ex-Manhattan Lawyer
Leon G. Telsey, a retired Manhattan lawyer and a former rear admiral in the United States Coast Guard Reserve, died Nov. 8 at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 84 years old and lived in Mamaroneck.
His death was apparently caused by heart failure, his family said.


Rising Fraud Worrying Car Insurers . . .
Auto-insurance fraud is big business.
The insurance industry estimates that at least 10 percent of the claims each year are fraudulent.
"Sixty billion dollars last year went for auto insurance claims," said Sean Mooney, chief economist of the Insurance Information Institute, which is supported by the property-casualty insurance industry.
"So the total savings would be about $6 billion."


Spotlight on Cuomo Frustrates Harkin
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa today became the first Democratic Presidential candidate to express his frustration that the political spotlight has been focused so intently on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who has yet to announce whether he is running.
In an article published today on the Op-Ed page of The Washington Post, Mr.
Harkin faulted the news media for paying too much attention to Mr.
Cuomo's deliberative process.
But he also seemed, at least by implication, to be criticizing Mr.
Cuomo for encouraging the coverage.


Ethel Halsey Blum, 90, Painter and Journalist
Ethel Halsey Blum, a painter, water colorist and former journalist, died on Wednesday at her home in Lakeville, Conn.
She was 90 years old.
She died of pneumonia, her family said.


Limiting Babel in the Supermarket
"The misleading stuff is going off the label," proclaims David Kessler, Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, speaking of the sweeping overhaul of the nation's food labeling rules announced jointly this month by his agency and the Department of Agriculture.
Dr.
Kessler may exaggerate some.
But for health-conscious Americans, frustrated and confused by the present babel of supermarket claims and hype, the proposal promises welcome relief.
Dr.
Kessler and Agriculture Secretary Edward Madigan deserve praise for respecting the consumer's right to make informed dietary choices.


Palestinian Negotiator May Face Israel Charge
The Israeli police recommended today that Hanan Ashrawi, the main voice of the Palestinians at the recent Middle East peace talks held in Madrid, be brought to trial for supposedly having met with officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Mrs.
Ashrawi, who rose to international prominence at the Madrid conference, denounced the action as "vindictive and petty," and Jordan's Foreign Minister, Kamel Abu Jaber, asked the United States and the Soviet Union to protect her from prosecution.


Clerical Workers Continue Their Walkout at Columbia University


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.87
4.75
7.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.57
4.63
7.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.60
4.69
7.03
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.93
6.99
8.17
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.81
7.81
8.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.81
8.81
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.81
6.80
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Privatizing Can Only Harm New York City
To the Editor:
Mayor David N. Dinkins has announced service and job cuts and a plan for the privatization of some New York City services (news article, Oct. 9), but has yet to provide details about what to cut and what to privatize.
We don't think he should bother working out the details.


Tip-Off Goes to U.C.L.A.
One hundred years ago next month, at the Y.M.C.A. in this town, a man who held degrees in medicine and theology invented a game called basketball, which gave some people a lot of wintertime recreation, which was his motivation for the game in the first place.
Along the way, and totally by accident, the game also became for many a kind of religion.
The game that Dr.
James Naismith originated with peach baskets, placed 10 feet high because that's where the balcony was, grew into one of the world's most popular pastimes.
And tonight, in the Civic Center here, the 100th anniversary was celebrated with a game between two of the best college teams around, Indiana and U.C.L.A.
It will be the first of numerous such bows to hoops.


EXECUTIVES
*
American General Corp., Houston, a financial services company, named James L. Gleaves vice president and treasurer. *
Andersen Consulting, New York, a unit of Arthur Andersen Worldwide, named Joellin Comerford managing partner for its financial markets practice in the Americas.


AIDS Blindness Drug Priced Much Too High
To the Editor:
The Food and Drug Administration's approval of foscarnet -- a drug that not only slows AIDS-related blindness, but may also prolong life -- means that people with AIDS are confronted with some devastating choices beyond "a longer life, feeling poorly, or a shorter life, feeling better" (Science Times, Oct. 22).


Attorney General Nominee Advances
After several Democratic lawmakers praised William P. Barr for his candor, the Senate Judiciary Committee voted unanimously today to recommend his confirmation as Attorney General.
The vote cleared the way for approval of the nomination by the full Senate, possibly next week.
The panel's eight Democrats and six Republicans voted to confirm Mr.
Barr after a brief session at which liberal members said he would be a welcome change from the last two Attorneys General: Dick Thornburgh and Edwin Meese 3d.


Patents; Identifying That Song On the Radio
While some inventions are strokes of inspired genius, and others result from diligent research, some inventions are both so technologically simple and seemingly useful that the mystery is why they have not been offered for years.
Consider the patent issued to David Alwadish, an entrepreneur in New York, who invented a radio that displays written information about songs as they are being broadcast.
The intention is to help those listeners who do not hear the disk jockey announce the name of the artist or the song.
The problem is especially common for people who listen on car radios and often reach their destinations and leave their cars before the recording is identified on the air.
One Stumbling Block
The technology underlying the new radio is familiar in broadcasting and is used by many FM stations for other purposes.
But there is a chicken-and-egg problem, the inventor said.
Radio manufacturers are unlikely to make the new receivers unless radio stations broadcast the information.
But broadcasters may be unlikely to do that unless their listeners can pick up the signals.


For Soviet Foreign Minister, a Shrinking Portfolio
Reporting on plans to merge his Ministry of Foreign Affairs with that of Foreign Trade into a pared-down new Ministry of External Relations, Boris D. Pankin uttered what might well be the slogan of these confusing times.
"We've agreed on the basic scheme," he said, "but in practice it still has to be worked out."


Battle for Votes, and Emotions, as Louisiana Governor's Race Is Concluded
The brawl between Edwin W. Edwards and David Duke for Louisiana Governor staggered to a close today, and voters go to the polls on Saturday to decide a racially charged contest that has attracted national attention like few other races for governor in history.
The final day of a campaign that has defied many of the normal laws of politics was dominated by Mr.
Duke's airing of 20-year-old accusations that Mr.
Edwards sold state jobs to campaign contributors in his first term in 1971.


The Man Who Took the Picture on Iwo Jima; The Second Flag
To the Editor:
It was a pleasure reading G. Greeley Wells's account of the flag raising at Iwo Jima (letter, Oct. 17).
What he did not mention was that he was wounded before climbing Mount Suribachi, but convinced a medic to fortify him with morphine and a sulfa packet to make the climb.
He remained on top to witness the flag raisings and lead his platoon in mopping up the Japanese in the foxholes in the crater.


Classical Music in Review
Julian Lloyd Webber Cellist 92d Street Y


OZONE DEPLETION HARMING SEA LIFE
A leading marine scientist said today that the thinning of the atmospheric ozone layer over Antarctica had allowed ultraviolet radiation to penetrate much deeper into the ocean than suspected, causing sizable reductions in the productivity of the single-cell organisms that form the base of the oceanic food chain.
Dr.
C.
Susan Weiler, a marine ecologist at Whitman College in Walla Walla, Wash., and executive director of the American Society of Limnology and Oceanography, also said that rising ultraviolet radiation in the Antarctic had caused increased genetic damage in the organisms, phytoplankton.


Louisiana Politics Dances to Music of Rage
The Cajun music still rockets through the night in clubs from Bourbon Street to Breaux Bridge, but there's no big fun on the bayou these days in Louisiana.
One day before Saturday's runoff for governor between former Gov.
Edwin W. Edwards and State Representative David Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan leader and neo-Nazi, this is a state full of rage, fear and frustration.
Instead of politics as loopy theater, it's politics as primal scream.


Seeking Better Schools, Parents Lie About Where They Live
The second graders at Slackwood Elementary School were writing their Christmas letters to Santa last year when one little boy burst into tears.
"No! no!" he cried, pointing to the return address his teacher was copying out for him from school records.
"Not that house. I want Santa to come to my real house."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets  The Dow recorded its largest drop in more than two years.
The average fell 120.31, to 2,943.20.
The losses were not limited to blue chips as other measures of the market were also sharply lower.
An abrupt downturn in biotechnology stocks was among the explanations for the decline as was the sudden reports of real estate problems at several leading insurers, including Aetna Life.  [ Page 1. ]


Investors Rush to Buy Treasury Securities
Investors fleeing the stock market piled money into Treasury bills and notes yesterday, and short-term interest rates fell sharply.
In addition to the stunning 120.31-point drop in the Dow Jones industrial average -- a plunge that analysts said was at least partly a reaction to attempts in Congress to cap credit card interest rates -- credit market participants received another batch of economic reports that did nothing to dispel the notion that the economy, after a summer upturn, is sliding again.


Miller Lawyer Assails Prosecution Witness
The chief witness against Mel Miller, the Speaker of the New York State Assembly, was portrayed by a defense lawyer yesterday as a liar, a forger, a fraudulent businessman and a tax cheat.
In the second day of cross-examination in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, the credibility of the witness, Avi Cohen, who owns a real-estate business, was vigorously attacked by Mr.
Miller's lawyer, Gerald B. Lefcourt.


Observer; The Kevin Excess
People whose memories reach back to Elvis Presley will confirm my testimony that before 1955 there were only three men in America named Kevin.
That year, I believe, a large celestial body nearly collided with the Earth.
I don't think it was an asteroid.
I think it was a kevinoid.
As it passed over the United States it must have drenched us with something, probably powerful kappa particles, that set off the Kevin explosion.
Science didn't notice.
Neither did I until a dear relative recently named his new son Kevin.
It was a remarkable name for our family, whose culture is Low Wasp.
Our name style runs to Harry, Willie, Allen, Gene, Benjamin, Miller, Harvey, and such.


Sports of The Times; Different Floridas Colliding
Picture Yankee Stadium, circa 1975, with Red Sox fans and Yankees fans chanting vile slogans at each other.
Down here, there's a whole stateful of that.
Official Florida license plates proclaim loyalty to the football factory of choice.
The bumper stickers in the Panhandle tend to be short and unprintable, while Miami tends to be a bit more expressive: "Friends Don't Let Friends Go to Florida State. Just Say No."


Aftermath of a Storm: Toting Up the Cost of the Damage


Jobless Bill Signed After Compromise
After four months of intense partisan debate, the Senate passed and President Bush signed legislation that will provide up to 20 weeks of additional unemployment benefits to people already out of work at least 26 weeks.
Under the compromise that resolved the issue, the Senate first passed the House bill, which provides either 6, 13 or 20 weeks of additional benefits.


Classical Music in Review
Mikhail Yanovitsky  Pianist 92d Street Y


Hi, Bobby, We're the Mets
The Mets, who have said their interest is real and their willingness to spend enormous dollars is genuine, are set to meet with Bobby Bonilla tomorrow.
The meeting is expected to be the first stage of a courtship the organization hopes will result in the marquee free agent's agreeing to perform at Shea Stadium next season.
Al Harazin, general manager of the Mets, will get together with Bonilla, who drove in 406 runs for the Pittsburgh Pirates over the last four seasons, and the player's agent in New York.
Bonilla, who has turned down a four-year offer for $18.5 million from Pittsburgh and is widely known to be seeking a five-year deal, is scheduled to meet with the Phillies today.


Patents; Trying to Duplicate Stradivarius Violins
He is not the first to do so, and he will probably not be the last, but a retired organic chemist in Jupiter, Fla., has patented what he believes is the long-lost secret to duplicating a Stradivarius violin.
It is, he said, tung oil.
"I expect skepticism," said Mayne R. Coe, who became absorbed in the mystery while watching his father make and repair violins.
Several previous patents have been issued to inventors who described different approaches to the mystery.
The most recent such patent was granted two years ago.


Education Chief Urges College Accrediting Change
Education Secretary Lamar Alexander said in a letter made public today that he would favor changing the relationship linking Federal financial aid to the current method of accrediting colleges and universities.
In a letter Thursday to Martin Trow, the chairman of a Federal advisory committee investigating the accreditation process, Mr.
Alexander said that he would be interested in suggestions for new ways to evaluate universities and colleges, including bypassing the regional accrediting bodies that now have that responsibility.


Tony Richardson, the Director Of 'Tom Jones,' Is Dead at 63
Tony Richardson, who won an Oscar for the film "Tom Jones," died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 63 years old.
He died of a neurological infection that was apparently brought on by AIDS, said his physician, Dr.
Michael J. Scolaro.
Mr.
Richardson developed a fever after treatment last Saturday, and he became semicomatose on Monday, Dr.
Scolaro said.


It's Alive! (But Must Be Plugged In.)
The borough of Queens inspires certain associations for most New Yorkers.
There are the airports, the highways and the row houses.
There is Archie Bunker and the Mets.
And in a narrow room above the Honey Bunch Childcare center in Woodside, there is Joseph Weintraub, wildly pursuing the outer edges of human thought.


Fed Official's Inflation View
Wayne D. Angell, a Federal Reserve Board governor, said today that he was "pretty optimistic about the inflation outlook" for the United States.
Speaking to reporters after giving a private speech to executives here, Mr.
Angell said the report earlier this week that producer prices surged seven-tenths of 1 percent in October should not be taken out of context.


Iran-Contra Figure Didn't Confess Lying
To the Editor:
"Purge the C.I.A. of K.G.B. Types" (Op-Ed, Oct. 2), by Stansfield Turner, Director of Central Intelligence 1977-81, contains factual errors, misstatements and faulty logic.
I feel obliged to correct the errors and faulty logic that relate to me.


New Hampshire Heeds Stern Tsongas Message
Paul E. Tsongas has a vision of America's future.
It looks a lot like a snake wrapped around a pole.
In fact, it is a sine curve tilted on its side, which, Mr.
Tsongas explains, represents the economy and its periodic business cycles.
A line sloping downward shows what will happen to the American standard of living as the recessions grow deeper and the recoveries less lofty.


Peace Pipe for the City Budget
The Dinkins administration and Felix Rohatyn have settled on a reasonable way to break their impasse over New York City's latest plan for plugging the budget gap: They'll let the Financial Control Board act as referee.
City Hall and Mr.
Rohatyn, chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, have been at odds for a week over the plan, a four-year proposal so flawed that Mr.
Rohatyn balked at providing its key ingredient -- $1 billion in M.A.C. money.


U.S. Will Try Diplomatic Action Before a Military Strike on Libya
The White House indicated today that it would pursue diplomatic means before considering military retaliation against Libya for its role in the 1988 bombing of a Pan American World Airways jet that killed 270 people, but officials stressed they have ruled out nothing in their efforts to obtain two Libyan intelligence agents indicted in the crime.
One option gaining early support, the White House officians said, is an embargo of Libya's oil exports, which account for about 2.5 percent of the world's 60 million barrel a day average production.


A Holiday Tradition Has to Work Around Prometheus


Arguments End in Keating Case
Charles H. Keating Jr. has been widely portrayed -- unjustly in his view -- as an embodiment of all that went wrong with the savings and loan industry.
Now a jury gets the chance to decide, albeit on a somewhat narrower issue.
Arguments in Mr.
Keating's securities fraud trial drew to a close today, with jurors asked to decide if the real estate developer and former savings and loan owner should be held criminally responsible for losses suffered by small investors who bought high-risk junk bonds issued by his company.


Accord on Ending Haiti Crisis Reported
The Haitian Parliament and a delegation from the Organization of American States have agreed on a process to restore constitutional government to Haiti that officials say could pave the way for a return of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who was deposed in a military coup on Sept. 30.
Diplomats and officials cautioned, however, that restoring the Aristide Government would not be easy to accomplish in the present, volatile atmosphere in Haiti.


Abram D. Taylor, Social Worker, 69
Abram D. Taylor, a social worker for public and private agencies, died on Wednesday at Bellevue Hospital Center.
He was 69 years old and lived in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
He died of cardiogenic shock, said Karen Crowe, a hospital spokeswoman.


Poetry Prize for Haines
John Haines has been awarded the 1991 Lenore Marshall/Nation Prize for Poetry for his book "New Poems: 1980-88," published by Story Line Press.
The $10,000 award is given annually for the year's outstanding book of poems by an American poet.


From Punch To Slap: Ewing Gets $6,000 Fine
Patrick Ewing lost money today, but he will not lose any playing time.
Ewing was fined $6,000 by the National Basketball Association for his actions in Wednesday's fight with Detlef Schrempf of the Indiana Pacers.
But because none of his punches landed, and because no one was injured, he avoided a suspension.
Ewing said he would request that his fine money be donated to AIDS research.


Bridge
Students of Charles Dickens will recall that Mr.
Pickwick, leader of the Pickwick Club, was a whist enthusiast and took the game seriously.
So did the author: "The rubber was conducted with all that gravity of deportment which befit the pursuit entitled 'whist' -- a solemn observance to which the title of 'game' has been very irreverently and ignominiously applied."
If Mr.
Pickwick were with us today, he would be happy to discover that there is a Pickwick Club in the County of Westchester, playing a sort of whist, with a dummy and bidding.
But he would be astonished to find that instead of a membership of four men, the club has 250 members, all women.


The Trail From Lockerbie
American and Scottish authorities have now provided a breathtaking account of their investigation of the destruction of Pan Am flight 103, which killed 270 people just before Christmas three years ago.
Their work makes an exciting story.
It's also a challenge to nations to complete the task of doing international justice.
From the village of Lockerbie, where 11 people were killed, detectives fanned out in a dogged search for evidence that was blown clear across Scotland to the North Sea.
They ingeniously pieced it together and then followed microscopic leads to their two suspects, Libyan intelligence officers now accused by both countries of mass murder.


Slayings at Michigan Post Office Spur a Review of All Employees
The nation's Postmaster General today ordered a review of the personnel records of the Postal Service's 750,000 workers as well as of former employees to identify anyone who has displayed aggressive or violent behavior.
The order was issued one day after a former worker shot and killed four supervisors and then turned the gun on himself at a suburban Detroit post office.


Continental to Sell 108 Slots At La Guardia for $61 Million
In a bid to increase its already sizable presence at La Guardia Airport, USAir said yesterday that it had agreed to buy 108 arrival and departure slots at La Guardia from Continental Airlines for $61 million.
If the bankruptcy court that is overseeing Continental's reorganization approves the deal, USAir and its regional affiliate, USAir Express, will increase their combined daily departures from La Guardia to 152, from 98.


Prolonging the Agony, Nets Fall in Overtime
The Nets continue the losing habit.
Against the Washington Bullets tonight, they did it with the heartbreak of overtime, but it amounted to the same thing -- another loss, 116-111, at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Quotation of the Day
"I love this city. I was a tourist guide for 17 years. But now I have lost this love. I care only about the people." RANKO BAUTOVIC, a Red Cross worker in Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia.  [ 4:2. ]


3 LEADING FIGURES AT B.C.C.I. INDICTED IN U.S. BANK FRAUD
After weeks of criticism that it had been slow to move against the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the Justice Department today announced the indictment of two bank officials and a major shareholder on fraud and racketeering charges.
A Federal grand jury here indicted Aga Hassan Abedi, 68 years old, a resident of Pakistan who was the bank's principal founder and president; Swaleh Naqvi, 57, the bank's acting president who is believed to be in Abu Dhabi, and Ghaith R. Pharaon, 50, a Saudi Arabian who was a large shareholder in the bank.
If found guilty, each of the men could receive a maximum penalty of 30 years in prison and a $750,000 fine.


Bahr's Condition? It's . . . . . . . Good!
After the Giants' practice today, Matt Bahr said he felt fine, so he will apparently kick Sunday against the Dallas Cowboys.
Raul Allegre has kicked for the last three games because of Bahr's strained muscle in the right thigh.
Bahr kicked in practice Wednesday and Thursday and kicked apart from the team today.


From the Mouths of Giants: Musings From Meadowlands
What the Giants are saying as they prepare for Sunday's game here against the Dallas Cowboys:
COACH RAY HANDLEY, on chances of the Giants (5-5) to make the National Football League playoffs: "I haven't told the team, but I think a 10-6 record will get in. I think the last team in will be 9-7 and some team that doesn't make it will be 9-7."


A Survivor's Curiosity To Know Why It All Is
Caroline Schwelb gripped papers in her tiny hands, but seldom had to look.
She was delivering her latest academic paper, a treatise on 16th-century religious wars and the effect they had on the emergence of modern Europe.
Mrs.
Schwelb, known to everyone as Carla, spoke of Luther and Calvin, popes and kings, most doctrines' "grim conclusion that free will is an illusion." She was so engrossed that there was scant time for the questions students were chomping to ask.


Patents; Laser Used to Curb Sensitivity of Teeth
American Dental Laser Inc. of Troy, Mich., a manufacturer of lasers and cameras used in dental work, has patented a way to use lasers for anesthetizing and desensitizing teeth.
Invented by Terry Myers, a dentist and a consultant to the company, the lasers are already being used in Europe but have not yet been approved in the United States.
Company officials said the lasers, which transmit low-powered light pulses, can be used to help people whose teeth are overly sensitive to heat and cold, as well as serve as a substitute for Novocain in dental surgery.


2,000 Applicants Compete for 75 Jobs at Dance Club


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
AM International Inc., Chicago, a supplier to the graphics industry, said it had received a $35 million, three-year secured revolving credit facility, replacing the company's previous $50 million secured facility. *
Canon Sales Co., the Japanese distributor of Canon Inc. products, will begin selling IBM Japan Ltd.'s notebook-sized personal computers in Japan.  *
New England Business Software Inc., Groton, Mass., a printer of business forms, will acquire 1 million shares of its common stock for $15.25 each from its retired chairman, Jay R. Rhoads Jr.
The company will also buy up to 250,000 shares in the open market. *
Nord Resources Corp..
Dayton, Ohio, a mining company, received amendments and waivers to its bank loan agreements and equipment leases, eliminating technical default, but said that unless it could restructure its debt, it might not comply with bank and lease convenants in the future. *
Phonetics Inc., Media, Pa., a maker of environmental monitoring devices, will merge with a company formed by its president and other present and former company officials.
Phonetics' shareholders will be entitled to 55 cents for each share of the company's outstanding stock. *
SmithKline Beecham P.L.C., London, the pharmaceuticals group, was granted marketing approval by the British Government to market its Kytril anti-nausea drug.


INSIDE
Credit-Card Interest Debate Although the move to cap interest rates on credit cards is sweeping through Congress, it looks as if the measure will not be enacted.
Page 33.
Step Toward Haitian Solution
Haitian lawmakers and an outside diplomatic delegation have agreed on a process to restore constitutional government to Haiti.
Page 3.
Decision on Police Raises
An arbitration panel rules that New York City police officers will have to accept contract concessions to help pay for wage increases.
Page 21.


Sports Authority Nurtures a $416 Million Plan
The New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority plans to ask the state for $416 million and permission to use it to restructure its debt, to build the proposed Atlantic City Convention Center and to upgrade Rutgers University's football stadium.
The Authority wants the state to float bonds to pay for all this, according to authority officials who worked on the plan and who agreed to be interviewed on the condition they not be identified.
The proposal is being circulated among members of the Florio administration and the Legislature to try to elicit support.


Stocks Plunge, With the Dow Falling 120.31
The stock market, which has scored sharp gains for more than a year, came unraveled yesterday, with the market's most closely watched barometer, the Dow Jones industrial average, taking its largest plunge in more than two years.
When the dust settled, the Dow, which tracks 30 of the nation's leading companies, was down nearly 4 percent, closing at 2,943.20, off 120.31 points.
It was the fifth-largest point loss ever.
The largest drop was in 1987, when the Dow index fell 508 points.
The second largest was in October 1989, when the it fell 190.58 points.


Dvorak's Stabat Mater
The New York Choral Society is to open its 33d concert season at 8 tonight at Carnegie Hall.
John Daly Goodwin, the group's director, will conduct the 160-member chorus in Dvorak's rarely performed Stabat Mater.
The soloists are Rachel Rosales, soprano; Phyllis Pancella, mezzo-soprano; Gregory Mercer, tenor, and David Evitts, bass-baritone.
Tickets are $13 to $40.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Bacolor Journal; Pinatubo's Mud Keeps Burying Towns and Fields
When Mount Pinatubo erupted last summer, it sent vast rivers of volcanic mud coursing across the countryside and turned this stately Spanish settlement into a dwarf town, its two-story houses suddenly into one-story houses, and its one-story houses into little more than roofs resting on the mud.
Treetops and electric lines are almost within reach above the hardened seven-foot-deep mud, and residents now stand face to face with the busts of local heroes on their buried pedestals.


The Man Who Took the Picture on Iwo Jima
To the Editor:
Further to "The Man Who Carried the Flag at Iwo Jima" (letter, Oct. 17) and your Oct. 1 book review of "Iwo Jima: Monuments, Memories and the American Hero" by Karel Ann Marling and John Wetenhall:


Cambodians Clash on Memorials
The patina of conciliation among long-warring Cambodian factions eroded further today when Prime Minister Hun Sen rejected suggestions that the Government dismantle memorials marking atrocities committed in the 1970's by the Khmer Rouge and its leader, Pol Pot.
"History is history -- you cannot delete it," said Mr.
Hun Sen, whose Vietnamese-backed Government has joined in an arrangement sponsored by the United Nations to share power with the Khmer Rouge and two other rebel factions.


France and Germany Warn Britain on Europe
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany and President Francois Mitterrand of France concluded two days of talks by insisting that decisive steps toward European unity must be taken at a European Community summit meeting next month in the Dutch town of Maastricht.
Mr.
Kohl described the Maastricht meeting, which begins Dec. 9, as "a fateful hour for Europe" and warned that a failure of talks there would be "a catastrophe for European development" that could mark "the beginning of the collapse of our community."


More Than Just Another Fiscal Crisis
FOR fully a year now, maybe more, the New York region has been gripped by a crisis of unparalleled proportions.
This one is no mere municipal or state fiscal crisis.
It goes beyond yet another crisis of confidence in government.
Instead, New Yorkers are frozen in the most numbing crisis of all: a crisis crisis.
The $7 billion deficit facing New York City over the next four years and the projected $3 billion gap in New York State's budget this year and next represent the latest chapters in what has emerged as a perpetual crisis.
And because it has been so enduring, it has become routinized -- and so, arguably, has government's response.
Despite the magnitude of the deficits and their potential to disrupt and to refashion the delivery of services, no climate of crisis prevails.


Social Events
Human Rights Campaign
Nov. 17 -- A 10th-anniversary celebration of the New York chapter of the Human Rights Campaign Fund, an advocacy group for gay and lesbian rights and health issues, will be held at the Rainbow Room.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will followed by a buffet supper, entertainment, casino games and an auction.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 769-2610.


Crane Trowbridge Is Wed on Yacht
Lee Crane Trowbridge, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Calvin D. Trowbridge Jr. of Cross River, N.Y., and Ronnie Wade Gwyn, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth W. Gwyn of Burlington, N.C., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dean Johnson, a Presbyterian minister, officiated aboard the yacht Encore, at sea near Hilton Head Island, S.C.
Mrs.
Gwyn, who is known as Crane, is 29 years old.
A graduate of Pine Manor College, she is the membership director in Hilton Head of the United States Professional Tennis Registry, which certifies professional tennis teachers.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin.
Mr.
Gwyn, 35, is the head tennis professional at Shipyard Racquet Club on Hilton Head and a graduate of the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill.
His father is the sales manager of Sumner Automotive Inc. in Burlington, N. C.


CAMPUS LIFE: U.C., Irvine; Racial Graffiti Aimed at Friends Mar Ethnic Forum
Students, faculty members and administrators at the University of California, Irvine, were emerging from shock last week after learning that racial epithets had been scrawled on the walls and mirrors of a residence hall room assigned to a Latino freshman.
The incident was even more unnerving, students and administrators say, because it occurred in Sierra, a freshman multicultural hall intended to bring together students of different cultural backgrounds.
Furthermore, it occurred while the annual Rainbow Festival, which encourages awareness of different ethnic groups, was holding a forum on hate crimes.


Football Record Holder Never Wore a Uniform
WHEN the Yale Bowl opened on Nov. 21, 1914, Al Ostermann made sure to arrive early.
Then 9 years old, he had no ticket for the sold-out football game between Yale and Harvard, but he knew he would get in -- and without paying.
The previous afternoon the boy had spent almost an hour digging a hole under the fence surrounding the brand-new stadium and then filling the hole with leaves.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The center panels on the wood front door of my 22-year-old house have developed hairline cracks that are up to eight inches long and actually large enough to permit daylight to be seen through them.
I have tried filling these cracks with wood filler and paint, but nothing has lasted very long.
What can I do to repair the door, short of replacing it?
A.
There is no way I know to effectively fill in or patch such cracks in a thin panel.
The only way to "repair" these cracks is to cover the panel.
You can do this by gluing a thin panel of new plywood over the old panel, or by covering the panel with reinforced fiberglass cloth (fiberglass and resin).
In each case, it will be necessary to remove all of the old paint first to get the glue or resin to adhere.
Incidentally, if you cover one panel, you may have to cover the others so that all will look the same.


A Musical Tour of Swados's Worlds
FOR almost 20 years, reviewers have come up with classifications, new and old, for the musicals of Elizabeth Swados.
Song pieces, musical concerts, tapestries, mosaics, oratorios, collages and cycles, they have been called.
For one work, its title, "Nightclub Cantata," provided the designation, juxtaposing the composer's pop and classical sides.
And how to describe the music of Ms.
Swados?
Under influences ranging from Far Eastern to country-western, the composer has embraced the sounds of the jungle, the streets and the synagogue.
For her stage works, she has intermingled calypso, jazz, ragtime, raga and rock-and-roll -- and animal noises and multidenominational chants.


Currency; Dollar Is Down Across the Board
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
129.30
130.38
129.44
per Dollar
German
Mark
1.67451.6185
1.4705
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1296
1.1308
1.1632
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7855
1.7637
1.9660
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$359.00
$353.80
$379.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


New Ski Area In Pennsylvania
Whitetail, a new ski area -- the first in the Northeast in several years -- opens next month in southern Pennsylvania.
Its location near the Maryland line means it will probably attract most of its skiers from Washington and Baltimore and will rely to a great extent on snowmaking.
Whitetail is as far south as you can go to ski in the Northeast but it is by no means the southernmost ski resort.
There are ski operators in the mountains of Maryland, Georgia, North Carolina and Tennessee, among other states.
The new ski area is near Mercersburg.
Its planners studied 10 years of weather data and concluded that the region normally has temperatures low enough for making snow to mix with natural snowfall and cover the 100 acres of terrain.


Q and A
Approval for a Purchase Question: I wanted to purchase a co-op apartment that has been on the market for over a year.
The owner wants to sell it for what I offered.
But one of the board members is interfering with the sale, saying that the apartment is being sold too cheaply.
Can she prevent the sale? . . .
Dale McHugh, Astoria, Queens Answer: Not by herself.
It is up to the entire board to approve or reject a sale.
"One board member might be able to persuade others on the board not to approve the sale," said Bruce D. Friedberg, an attorney who specializes in real estate matters.
"But co-op bylaws make the transfer of shares subject to board approval."
In some co-ops, Mr.
Friedberg said, sales require the unanimous approval of the board while in others a sale can go through with the approval of a majority or two-thirds of its members.
The law does not require that a board provide a reason to either a seller or buyer for rejecting a sale.
However, co-ops are not exempt from housing bias laws, which forbid discrimination based on race, sex or religious or ethnic origin or marital status.
Finding Floor Plans Question: I am on the board of directors of a co-op building completed in 1937.
We are trying to obtain a floor plan but have been unable to locate it at the Select Register of Apartment House Plans.
Is there a way to find them?  . .
Mary Evans, Manhattan Answer: Probably.
Plans for your building as well as all others in the city should be on file with the city's Department of Buildings.
But according to Vahe Tiryakian, a spokesman for the agency, required documents, which include floor plans, for some structures have been misplaced or taken out and not returned over the years.
You would find your building's document file in the Buildings Department's borough office.
It will speed your search if you have the block and lot numbers for your building as well as the address.
The borough office has computerized profiles of each building's file, including the New Building, or N.B., number.
This is the number assigned to each building when its architect or engineer begins the application and approval process before construction.
According to Mr.
Tiryakian, the N.B. for your building is 38-217.
With this number you can retrieve the file for your building at the Plan Desk.
The floor plans should be in this file.
If you leave some form of identification, like a driver's license, you can take documents to be copied.
The Building Department's Manhattan borough office is on the fifth floor of 60 Hudson Street.
Flip-Tax Exemptions Question: I am a shareholder in a New York co-op that was converted from a rental building a few years ago.
The board, upon the recommendation of the shareholders, voted to impose a "flip tax" on sales.
In this change, the original owners are exempt from the payment of this fee.
It seems to me that this rule now establishes two classes of stock for our corporation by the creation of different valuations of the stock for original and nonoriginal shareholders.
Can this be enforced? . . .
Lisa B. Anzallag, Manhattan Answer: Maybe.
According to Ronald A. Sher, an attorney who specializes in real estate matters, a 1986 amendment to the New York State Business Corporation Law permits this new rule.
"A flip tax amendment that is properly enacted which provides for a disparity for an exemption of fees," Mr.
Sher said, "is valid and does not create two classes of stock."
Sec. 501 subdivision c says, in part, that with respect to co-ops, "providing that maintenance charges, general assessments pursuant to a proprietary lease and voting, liquidation or other distribution rights are substantially equal per share, shares of the same class shall not be considered unequal because of variations in fees or charges payable to the corporation upon sale or transfer of shares."


HOME CLINIC HDF&gt;hHED,30p,,2; Overcoming Problems Common With Plaster
PLASTER is harder, smoother and resists wear better than wallboard, but cracking and loosening are common problems, especially in older buildings.
Minor and some moderate damages are usually easy to repair; most major damage usually is best left to professional plasterers.
If you suspect moisture as a cause of damage (crumbling and discoloration are signs), cure the condition before making repairs; otherwise, deterioration will likely continue.


U2 Takes a Turn From the Universal To the Domestic
When U2 was last sighted, circa 1988, the group had succumbed to rock-star hubris.
Bono's breathy, dramatic singing and the Edge's ringing guitar became the sound of idealistic yearning in 1980's rock, but success had brought excess.
The Irish band released a feature-length tour movie, "Rattle and Hum," that didn't exactly break box-office records; tied up Los Angeles traffic with a Beatles-style rooftop concert for the sake of a video clip, and embarrassed itself in San Francisco when Bono painted inane graffiti on a public sculpture and had to apologize.
The "Rattle and Hum" album undertook, without a hint of self-consciousness, to teach America about blues and soul.


All About/Watches; Fighting the Recession By Spotting Some Fads And Inventing Others
Plagued by the recession, a 10 percent luxury tax on watches costing more than $10,000 and the waning of brand loyalty, watchmakers and marketers are pulling out all the stops these days to sell their wares.
They are doing it by spicing up their lines with high-tech sports watches, multi-featured diving watches, new lines of trendy art watches as well as traditional, jewel-encrusted fashion offerings.
They are also doing it by following the latest fad: offering reproductions of decades-old designs.


Camera
Tolstoy, Chekhov, Dostoyevsky and Eduard Vladimirich Talanov?
The last name in this sequence of Russian storytellers may be unfamiliar, but Mr.
Talanov's work can reach a larger audience in a single evening than all the others combined.
As the director of video still pictures at Tass Photokronica, or phoito news, an arm of the Soviet Government press agency, he turns still pictures into dynamic television.
Mr.
Talanov's most ambitious effort so far is an eight-minute documentary, not yet broadcast, "The Time of Truth," about the August coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Soon after the coup began, most of the Tass photographers in the Moscow area were assigned to the story, and those on vacation or on days off dropped everything and headed for the action.
Seventeen photographers started round-the-clock coverage that witnessed, in detail, every phase of the drama.


A Reminder That the 1980's Are Long Gone
If the 1990's were supposed to be more sober, it was hard to make sense of a stock market where biotechnology, long on promise and short on earnings, sets the pace.
Perhaps the market's plunge on Friday will help put things back on a more rational course.
By all the familiar measures, stocks had become costly.
Before Friday, the Standard and Poor's 500 sold at levels relative to earnings last seen in the feverish months before the 1987 crash.


CAMPUS LIFE: Bryn Mawr; Auto Mechanics: Nuts and Bolts Of Survival Skills
For the first time, a workshop on car maintenance and auto repair is being offered at Bryn Mawr College.
"When we talk about a college education, we talk about becoming fuller people," said Ingrid Johnson, a senior in histiory from Livingston, N.J. who began the workshop.
"But we don't know the things that will help us survive."


Thanksgiving On Amtrak
For most, Thanksgiving is turkeys and cranberries and football games, but for the folks at Amtrak, Thanksgiving is the single biggest travel period of the year.
To accommodate the people trying to rush home for their holiday feast, Amtrak is scheduling 86 extra trains along the Northeast corridor.
A special Thanksgiving schedule will be in effect from Tuesday, Nov. 26, through Sunday, Dec. 1. for travel between Boston and Washington.
Other Amtrak areas of operation will have holiday period service extended through the use of extra cars on regularly scheduled trains.


Old Sod Or New, Crusaders Just Win
There came Brennan and Butler, Sullivan, Reilly, McDonough, O'Connor, O'Doherty, O'Neill, O'Dougherty, O'Hagan and Riley, Hooey and Walsh.
No, not the bangers and tootlers of McNamara's band, but the footballers of Celtic origin from Fordham and Holy Cross who made Irish sports history here today by playing at the Limerick Gaelic Grounds.
Fordham Irish outnumbered Holy Cross Irish by about 2 to 1, and both teams scored three touchdowns.
But Fordham missed two extra points and Holy Cross kicked a field goal, so the final score was 24-19 in a game that Holy Cross was supposed to win by several touchdowns.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
SONG ON GREAT WHITE WAY
THE bright lights and big city are beckoning Doris Chwatsky of Oceanside.
Mrs.
Chwatsky is starting a career as a cabaret singer.
"I've decided to go professional in New York," she said.
"The time is right."


How the Dead See It
MURTHER &amp; WALKING SPIRITS
By Robertson Davies. 357 pp. New York: Viking. $21.95.


Deer Were Few on This Maine Course, But It Hardly Mattered
Reaching the summit of Carry Ridge in the Lake Umbagog region of Maine, I searched for signs of deer, my every movement remarked upon by legions of red squirrels whose little bodies vibrated with indignation.
The ridge was covered with young beeches, but when I scrabbled in the leaves and found only a few nuts I understood why deer were scarce.
There was almost no food.
Moving downhill, I encountered several ruffed grouse and, something of a surprise, a pileated woodpecker.
I became entangled in an astonishingly intricate blowdown in a spruce swamp and when I emerged on the other side 45 minutes later it was noon and time to have a snack.


SENATOR POTHOLE
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato deserves credit for stripping away the illusion that the purpose of a legislator is to make policy ("Senator Pothole" by Elizabeth Kolbert, Oct. 27).
A legislator's real purpose is to bring boodle back to his district.
The press has been perpetrating a myth that incumbents get re-elected because of their financial advantage.
The real reason they get re-elected is that they are properly rewarded for having brought back the boodle, and sophisticated voters understand that incumbents are more qualified at doing this than the neophytes who would challenge them for their seats.
The only time a legislative election has anything to do with political issues is when an incumbent declines to run and two nonincumbents vie for the newly available seat.


A Cherished Poet, Made for the Camera
A documentary that gives a rare dignity to television is "The Story of Anna Akhmatova," an hourlong program written, directed and produced by Jill Janows and presented on PBS by WGBH Boston.
It will be shown on Channel 13 in New York at 10 P.M. tomorrow.
The story in question is among the most poignant that our century has had to show.


L.I. Woman Is Killed, Apparently Trying to Stop Her Son's Suicide
A 34-year-old Long Island man and his mother were found dead in the basement of their ranch-style home in Roslyn yesterday -- both apparently the victims of the son's suicide, the police said.
The son, Charles Freed, frayed the wires on an electrical cord, wrapped it around his neck and plugged it in, electrocuting himself.
His 71-year-old mother, Mildred, appeared to have died trying to save him, said Sgt.
Daniel Severin of the Nassau County Police Department, though it was not clear if she had also been electrocuted or had died of a heart attack.


Soviet Lodgings
To the Editor: I applaud Allen R. Myerson's effort to tour the Soviet Union at a price approaching reality ("Life Without Intourist," Oct. 6).
Having heard stories of outrageous prices, shameful service and awful value from my grandmother, mother and sister, I was a bit hesitant to stay overnight in Moscow after a recent rail trip across the Soviet Union.
I had the fortune of having fought for a transit visa that permitted entry for 10 days and could be extended twice with little trouble.
The advantage of the transit visa is that no proof of hotel reservations, etc. is required aside from a ticket on the Trans-Siberian railway.
Because we could not obtain an onward ticket immediately on arrival, we spent a nearly sleepless night in the beautiful but noisy Kievskaya train station.
At that point, we were on the verge of footing the Intourist price for the night ($160 cash, U.S. dollars please).
Out of dumb luck we bumped into an acquaintance from the train who told us she had comfortable surroundings for the night: She had accepted the offer of one of many Muscovites offering a bed in an apartment for $10 She took us back to this apartment and we spent two nights there.
We were cheered by being able to support private enterprise and avoid Intourist.
The proprietor even sold us a few tins of caviar on the way out for much less than the hard currency shop.
ARI DAY Newton Centre, Mass.


Miss Hackl Has Wedding
Elizabeth Winslow Hackl, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George C. S. Hackl of Tuftonboro, N.H., and Stockton, N.J., was married yesterday to Jonathan David Nord Lurie, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold D. Lurie of Baldwin, L.I., and Lake Ariel, Pa.
The Rev.
William G. Thompson performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church of Lambertville, N.J.
Mrs.
Lurie, 29 years old, received a bachelor's degree in English from Princeton University and a bachelor's in biology cum laude from Rutgers University.
Until recently, she was an account representative with Sequoia Analytical Labs in Redwood City, Calif.
Her father is a pharmaceutical licensing consultant.
Her grandfather the late George F. Hackl was a vice chairman of the New York Stock Exchange.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Nov. 2 MANHATTAN Carnegie Hill 1.255 million
1165 Park Avenue (92d St.)  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 3,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, fireplace; maintenance $2,560, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Edita C. Nemes) East Village 188,000
265 East 7th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. co-op; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 3 exposures; maintenance $692, 42% tax-deductible (Broker: Coleman Neary Real Estate)  SoHo 265,000
292 Lafayette Street (Houston St.)  1,500-sq.-ft. open loft co-op; elevator, 12-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $505, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: J.I. Sopher Co.)  TriBeCa 390,000
28 Hubert Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, new windows, 11-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures, partial Hudson River view; maintenance $800, 50% tax-deductible (Brokers: Eychner Associates - Bascom &amp; Sears)  Upper East Side 335,000
118 East 60th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,325-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, windowed dining area, 2 exposures, terrace; maintenace $1,522, 58% tax-deductible (Broker: Equinox Property Co.)  BRONX  Parkchester 180,000
2030 Story Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, semi-attached brick and frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, private driveway, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  Riverdale 100,000
3777 Independence Avenue  (Hudson Towers)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining el, terrace, c/a, pool; maintenance $448, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors)  BROOKLYN  Midwood Park 285,000
685 East 18th Street  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family detached wood-frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 2 living rooms, 2-car garage, finished attic, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,880 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  Park Slope 460,000
444 7th Street  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in floor-through unit; eat-in kitchen, fireplace in each; 19- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  Park Slope 265,000
430 9th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 3-story, single-family brownstone; double parlor, eat-in kitchen, study, 18- by 72-ft. lot; taxes $1,032 (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS  Bayside 110,000
1 Bay Club Drive  (Bay Club)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. postwar condo; dining room, eat-in kitchen, health club; common charge $261, taxes $1,989 (Broker: Diane Arganoff Real Estate)  Elmhurst 150,000
94-36 46th Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 16- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $825 (Broker: Veterans Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Latourette 135,000
11 Essex Drive  (Essex Shire)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. condo; dining area, family room, 1-car garage; common charge $48, 100% tax-abated (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  Westerleigh 245,000
371 Woodley Avenue  2-family, detached Hi-Ranch; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths in other; eat-in kitchen in each; rear deck; 1-car garage, 45- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,800 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)


Answering The Mail
Q.
The center panels on the wood front door of my 22-year-old house have developed hairline cracks that are up to eight inches long and actually large enough to permit daylight to be seen through them.
I have tried filling these cracks with wood filler and paint, but nothing has lasted very long.
What can I do to repair the door, short of replacing it?
A.
There is no way I know to effectively fill in or patch such cracks in a thin panel.
The only way to "repair" these cracks is to cover the panel.
You can do this by gluing a thin panel of new plywood over the old panel, or by covering the panel with reinforced fiberglass cloth (fiberglass and resin).
In each case, it will be necessary to remove all of the old paint first to get the glue or resin to adhere.
Incidentally, if you cover one panel, you may have to cover the others so that all will look the same.


A Critic with Balance: A Letter From Norman Mailer
To the Editor:
John Simon was in a rut and Becky Sinkler was in a jam.
John, who knew that his faculties of review were inferior to no one's in the land, was nonetheless becalmed in a sea of mediocre status.
Having ascended no higher than theater critic for New York magazine and movie reviewer for National Review, he had had to content himself these many years by carving up a number of actresses' egos and smiting the majority of American authors, directors and actors more renowned than himself.
It was a condition not without grief -- to be the most brilliant, worldly and incorruptible mind of the 20th century and have to spend one's days macerating nonentities.
Yet, Simon could not break out.
The two most prestigious organs in town for exhibiting one's critical virtuosity were The New York Times Book Review and The New York Review of Books.
The latter had had nothing to do with Simon, and The Book Review at The Times, on the rare occasions they invited John to do a job, shunted his talents to a siding.
All the same, he did his best to ingratiate himself.
From 1980 to 1990, he gave sweet reviews to Alexander Sesonske's book on Jean Renoir, to Peter Stephan Jungk's work on Franz Werfel, to "Diary of an Erotic Life" by Frank Wedekind, and one Christmas, he even praised a $110 coffeetable book, "Balenciaga." Such esoteric assignments were due, doubtless, to his regrettable reputation for doing "demolition jobs." As John Leonard would later put it, "When I was editing The Book Review, I wouldn't trust him with anything except a book by a dead European. . . ."


Washington Tries to Sort Out Health Insurance Proposals
WITH voters making it clear that they are unhappy with rising medical costs and the fact that 34 million Americans have no health insurance, Democrats and Republicans are realizing that the issue will be important in the coming Presidential election.
Republicans in Congress introduced a health insurance bill last week.
The White House said it would speed up work on its own bill, and a coalition of businesses and labor unions unveiled theirs on Tuesday.
The system's flaws
Although medical care in the United States is the most sophisticated in the world, the system for delivering it has major flaws.


Lithuania Promises to Investigate Nazi Cases
President Vytautas Landsbergis of Lithuania has assured leaders of American Jewish groups of his Government's determination to conduct a thorough investigation of all Lithuanians suspected of having been Nazi collaborators and agreed to establish an independent commission of inquiry to review the cases.
The talks, held during a visit in New York this week, were aimed at regaining the confidence of Jewish leaders.
The leaders said Mr.
Landsbergis had acknowledged oversights in the exoneration process and expressed determination to cooperate with foreign governments and Jewish groups to insure there would be no further mistakes.


Telluride's Formula for Success
FEW moments are as inspiring (or dwarfing) as standing at the very foot of a newly snow-blanketed mountain, walking right up to its base, throwing your head straight back and staring skyward: snow whips around the mountain's peaks, its slopes are untracked and glistening.
The sun's rays breaking through the clouds intimates there is a heaven.
Such a sight is nearly commonplace from Colorado Avenue in Telluride.
Looking up at the mountains that box in the century-old village on a snowy day -- 12,000-foot rocky peaks dotted with aspen groves, rising from the folds of the San Juan Mountains -- makes even the most jaded traveler pause, on the verge of goose bumps.
You get a similar skin rippling when you poke your ski tips over the lip of Spiral Stairs on Front Face -- 500 feet of bumps and dives that lead into a similarly neck-breaking drop called simply Plunge.


There's a Lot More to the Patriots Than a 3-7 Mark
In contrast to Coach Bruce Coslet of the Jets, Dick MacPherson of the Patriots had no preseason expectations of making the playoffs.
New England finished last season in total disarray with the worst record in the National Football League at 1-15.
Sam Jankovich, the former University of Miami athletic director who was brought in on Dec. 20 to be the chief executive officer, hired the exhuberant 61-year-old MacPherson away from Syracuse University to replace the phlegmatic Rod Rust.


Jill S. Snyder, Lawyer, to Wed
April wedding plans have been announced for Jill Susan Snyder, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Snyder of Bellmore, L.I., and Martin Seth Burger, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard Burger of Huntington, L.I.
Miss Snyder, 27 years old, is a bankruptcy lawyer in the law office of Ellen G. Zindler in New York.
Mr.
Burger, 26, is an assistant vice president at the Related Companies, a real-estate development concern in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and the Boston University School of Law; he graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.


Miss Lippman, Student, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Spencer Lippman of Manhasset, L.I., and Palm Desert, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Sallie Lippman, to Farid Masjedi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Yahouda Masjedi of Beverly Hills, Calif.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Lippman, 20 years old, is a student at the University of California at Santa Monica.
Her father is the chief operating officer of the Halland Companies, insurance services, with headquarters in Jericho, L.I.
Mr.
Masjedi, 32, graduated from U.C.L.A. and is the president of Catsy Inc., a clothing manufacturer in Los Angeles.
His father is the president of Kings Inc., an importer and land developer in Beverly Hills.


Fighting 'Speeding' By Revising Limits
A recent article on the arrival of photo-radar in New Jersey, "Speeders Beware: New Device Looms," should have been titled "Drivers Beware." Despite official propaganda, most "speeders" are only drivers who drive at reasonable speeds where speed limits are unreasonably low.
A recent Federal report tells the truth: speed limits are artificially low and ignored by most drivers.
The report says that most speed zones are posted at 8 to 12 miles per hour below the prevailing travel speed and about 15 m.p.h. below the maximum safe speed.
A state official recently admitted that the high-accident areas of New Jersey interstate highways are not the areas where there are the highest number of "speeders."


'Edge Cities': The People's Answer to Planners
Many would argue that "North American city planning" is an oxymoron.
After all, the typical American city exhibits few of the physical features generally associated with the traditional planned cities of Europe.
There are exceptions -- the squared quadrants of Philadelphia and Savannah, the ceremonial axes of Washington, the formal civic parks of New York and Chicago -- but these only underline the fact that the regularly gridded cities of Canada and the United States appear to owe more to the surveyor than to the city planner.
And whether one looks down from an airplane or out from a moving car, not even the street grid is enough to dispel the impression that the development of most cities has been casual, almost haphazard.
No overpowering vision seems to have guided their evolution -- like Topsy, they just grew.


Wall Street; A Steinberg Extended Family Affair
In April 1988, Manhattan society watchers were agog over the lavish wedding of Laura S. Steinberg, the daughter of Saul Steinberg, who is chairman of Reliance Group Holdings, and Jonathan Tisch, president of Loews Hotels.
Mr.
Tisch is the son of Preston Robert Tisch, president of the Loews Corporation, and the nephew of Laurence A. Tisch, the chief executive of CBS.
This was no match, it was a merger, the Wall Street wags said.
At the couple's engagement party in 1987, a Tisch family member is said to have joked: "If they get married, it will have to be cleared by the S.E.C."


Miss Mamounis, Controller, Wed
Margaret Rose Elizabeth Mamounis, the controller of Martell Medical Products in Massapequa, L.I., was married yesterday to Stephen Michael Edward Harth, a teacher at St.
Andrew Avellino Roman Catholic Grammar School, Flushing, Queens.
The Rev.
Edwin J. Collins performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Lourdes Church in Malverne, L.I.
Mrs.
Harth, a cum laude graduate of St.
Francis College, has an M.B.A. from Adelphi University.
She is a daughter of L. Rose Mamounis of Lynbrook, L.I., and the late Paul Mamounis.
Mr.
Harth, a graduate of St.
John's University, is a son of Barbara A. Harth and George J. Harth of Wantagh, L.I.
His father is a supervisor in the composing room of The New York Times.


No Background Work
It's not easy finding the right man to head a state boxing commission, but California authorities think they've pulled it off in naming RICHARD DECUIR to head the California Athletic Commission.
And what attracted the commission to the 38-year-old DeCuir?
His experience as the assistant executive officer of the California Board of Dental Examiners.
DeCuir is the first to admit he doesn't have any boxing background.
Never mind.
He didn't know much about dentistry either.
"The state dental board hired me not because I knew anything about dentistry," he said, "but because of my fiscal and administrative ability." (AP)


Kurds Report Evacuation Order
Iraqi troops have ordered residents of two villages in northern Iraq to leave their homes within 24 hours, Kurdish rebels said today.
The rebels, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the order applied to the Motka and Shamamik, about 20 miles south of the city of Erbil.
The villages are reported to have mixed Kurdish and Arab populations.


Misguided Do-Gooders, Lost Ideals
JIMMY, a small-time politician, is taking his first bribe. He's a "virgin crook."
Peter, the F.B.I. undercover agent who sets him up, by posing as a development corporation's representative who needs a liquor license, has a conscience.
"I'm a sensitive guy," Peter announces.


Dartmouth Sets Up Showdown After Routing Brown
Senior Al Rosier rushed for a school-record 229 yards and 4 touchdowns today to lift Dartmouth to a 45-13 victory over Brown (0-9 over all, 0-6 in the Ivy League).
Dartmouth (6-2-1, 5-0-1) plays host to Princeton on Saturday.
If the Big Green wins or ties, Dartmouth would earn its first outright Ivy League title since 1978.
The Big Green tied with Cornell for the title last year.


Lenders Tightening Screws on Co-ops
THOSE who worry about qualifying for a personal mortgage loan might consider the plight of the co-op owners in a 24-unit building on West 83d Street, just off Broadway in Manhattan.
"It was as though we were standing on the corner with a tin cup," said Theresa Rocht, the building's attorney.
Shareholders in the co-op, converted from a rental in 1983, have just gone through an ordeal that is becoming increasingly common across New York City and its suburbs.
The problem is finding lenders who will refinance underlying mortgages that were taken out by sponsors who bought rental buildings in the 1980's to convert them into co-ops.
Typically ranging from $100,000 to several million, these mortgages are the joint obligations of the apartment owners in co-ops, who, as shareholders in their co-op corporations, assume their buildings' debts.


Wright Houses
To the Editor: You responded to a question about visits to Frank Lloyd Wright buildings that would maximize viewing time and minimize driving time (Q. &amp; A., Oct. 6).
But you omitted the southernmost point of the Frank Lloyd Wright compass in the Continental United States, here in Lakeland, Fla., just one hour from Orlando.
The 12-structure "Child of the Sun" Collection at Florida Southern College represents the world's largest one-site grouping of Wright work.
It is distinct from the other properties mentioned because it was designed for one client -- Florida Southern -- at one time, for one location.


Unhappy in Minnesota
It may not be too early to evaluate the 13-for-1 1989 midseason deal that sent HERSCHEL WALKER from Dallas to Minnesota for virtually an entire team: five players and eight high draft choices.
Since then the Cowboys have been riding higher each year and the Vikings have been in a virtual free fall, declining from 10-6 in 1989 to 6-10 last season.
If they're holding their own this season (5-6) it may be because the Vikings have finally become disenchanted with Walker's running abilities and stopped giving him the ball at every opportunity. (He carried only four times for 14 yards in last Monday's loss to the Bears.)


Can Foie Gras Aid the Heart? A French Scientist Says Yes
Here in the land of the Three Musketeers, the Gascony region of southwest France, goose and duck fat are slathered on bread instead of butter, the people snack on fried duck skin and eat twice as much foie gras as other Frenchmen, and 50 times as much as Americans.
It was no surprise when Dr.
Serge Renaud, in a 10-year epidemiological study that included surveys of eating habits, concluded that Gascons eat a diet higher in saturated fat than any other group of people in the industrialized world.
Dr.
Renaud is the director of research at the National Institute of Health and Medical Research, a Government center in Lyons.


Will Kenya's Bad Habits Jeopardize Its Aid?
IN the 1980's Kenya was among a handful of African nations that could rely on large infusions of aid from Washington and the World Bank.
Washington's interest in Kenya had a lot to do with its strategic position on the Indian Ocean, which made it a useful ally in the cold war.
The World Bank's generosity was largely based on Kenya's capitalist outlook.
In the last two years, American aid has dropped significantly, in part because the cold war evaporated and American aid budgets tightened in general, but also because of growing displeasure with President Daniel arap Moi's intransigence on the issues of democratization, human rights and corruption.


Brando's Daughter Arrested In France in Lover's Slaying
Cheyenne Brando, the 21-year-old daughter of the actor Marlon Brando, will fly to Tahiti on Sunday to face charges of acting as an accomplice in the killing of her lover last year, her lawyer said today.
Miss Brando was arrested on Friday near Orleans, south of Paris, after a judge on the French Pacific island of Tahiti reopened an inquiry into the killing of her lover, Jacques Drollet, at Marlon Brando's Beverly Hills estate.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FLYING LESSONS  By Susan Johnson. Faber &amp; Faber. $19.95.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on page 31 of the Arts and Leisure section today about Sam Waterston misstates the location of Mont-St.-Michel, the French abbey.
It is off Normandy.


Terrorists Are Indicted -- Now What?
AFTER a three-year investigation including a tedious search of every square inch of Scotland within 16 miles of the crash site of Pan Am Flight 103, authorities in Washington announced last week that they had confirmed what they suspected all along about one of the most horrendous acts of terrorism in recent years: the Libyan Government was responsible for planting the bomb that killed 270 people including 189 Americans.
Furthermore, officials suggested, the United States just might do something about it.
Specifically, officials said, they were indicting two men, Ali Basset al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah, who were identified as officials of Libyan Arab Airlines and Libyan agents.
The two were accused of concealing explosives in a radio-cassette recorder in a suitcase aboard Flight 103, which exploded above Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988, killing all 259 people on the plane and 11 people on the ground.
"This was a Libyan Government operation from start to finish," said a State Department spokesman.
The chances of extraditing the two men were deemed slim, but officials alluded to other options.


From an Artist, Sculptural Styling
Maria Snyder, a scupltor and painter by training, got into fashion through a chic accident.
At a party in Paris in 1981, her friend Marisa Berenson introduced her to Yves Saint Laurent, who asked her to model for him.
She ended up modeling for him and photographers like Helmut Newton.


Gourmet Dressing
These people are passionate about food.
No matter what they do for a living, their idea of a really good time is to get into the kitchen and stir up something scrumptious.
And not everyone considers an apron a must -- as long as a towel is handy.
The dress code of these pros: Be comfortable, even when entertaining.


Riot Police Break Up Opposition Rally in Kenya
Armed riot police officers fired tear gas and used batons today to disperse several thousand demonstrators attempting to attend an opposition rally banned by the Government of President Daniel arap Moi.
Five leaders of the opposition were arrested as they drove to the meeting place, making a total of 12 well-known opposition figures rounded up and jailed in the last two days.


Baedeker
To the Editor: I recently deposited my collection of Baedekers with the Lancaster Mennonite Historical Society but your article almost made me rue disposing of my books.
I recall that I found a copy of "Italy, From the Alps to Naples" in a used furniture store in Newport, R.I.
When my ship put into Venice after the war, the volume, dated 1909, proved an accurate guide for many treasured visits.
The book advised me to go to a small door to the right of the main doors of S. Giorgio Maggiore, where a monk would open to me and escort me past great paintings to the main church.
What was written in 1909 I experienced in 1947.
EDGAR S. BROWN JR.
Selinsgrove, Pa.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
FORDHAM PREP 18, MOUNT ST.
MICHAEL 14 Quarterback Damon McDougal, who completed 9 of 13 passes for 73 yards, passed for all three touchdowns yesterday as Fordham Prep (5-3-1) earned a trip to the C.H.S.F.L.
Class B championship game next week.
McDougal tossed 2-yard touchdown passes to Rich McCalla (20 carries for 102 yards) and Scott Wynne and a 15-yard strike to Pat Antolino.
"This is one of the biggest Fordham Prep football victories in the last 20 years," said Coach Ron Lombardi, whose team lost to Mount St.
Michael two weeks ago, 20-0.
"We knew we had a shot against them this week. We went out there and controlled the line of scrimmage and the the time of possession. It was a great win."


'Repatriation' Is the Trend For Refugees Worldwide
REFUGEES have almost always been seen as innocents adrift.
With the end of the cold war, the question is being asked, can they go home again?
In the vast archipelago of the displaced, which runs from the arid camps of Malawi and Eritrea through the rocky slopes of Pakistan to the tent cities in the jungles of Thailand, a new word is being heard: repatriation.
Depending on who among the world's 18.3 million refugees hears it, it means going home, going to a place that can never be home again, or being forced back to the things once fled from.


Labor; Where the Contract Negotiations Stand
In his five-year financial plan announced recently, Mayor David N. Dinkins pledged to offer no raises through mid-1994, except to unions that agree to improve productivity.
But the Mayor and his aides are revising that plan to satisfy the objections of the Municipal Assistance Corporation and other fiscal monitors.
A crucial question is whether deeper cuts in the work force are necessary.
The Mayor hopes to persuade the corporation to provide $1 billion in aid to the city.
He is also seeking unspecified union concessions on work rules to reduce the impact on city services that would result from cutting thousands of additional jobs.


Graduate Students' Union Seeks Official Recognition From Yale
A new labor union for Yale University graduate students has threatened to take a job action on Dec. 4 if the university does not move to recognize the group.
Last week the university warned that it would discipline members of the two other union locals on campus who supported any job action by the students.
The two union locals have been in contract negotiations with Yale since Nov. 7.
They have included in their contract demands a call for official recognition of the Graduate Employees and Students Organization, or G.E.S.O., as a collective bargaining unit for graduate students.
The two union groups are Local 34 of the Federation of University Employees, which represents clerical and technical workers, and Local 35, which represents maintenance, custodial and food service workers.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Mendham 1,380,000
Mountainside Road
6-bedroom, 6 1/2-bath, 16-year-old contemporary; security system, c/a, 2 fireplaces; taxes $12,437.
Oakland 220,000
15 Aspen Way
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 24-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,956.
Ramsey 335,000
124 Fuhrman Avenue
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old Tudor; new European kitchen, full basement; taxes $4,336.
Rockaway Township 173,000
35 McKeel Drive
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 27-year-old split level; h/w floors, vaulted ceilings, track lighting; taxes $3,516.
Rumson 438,850
21 Sunrise Drive
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 14-year-old ranch; ceramic tile, marble fireplace, pool; taxes $7,203.
Waldwick 180,000
16 Mary Lane
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old colonial; sun room off eat-in-kitchen, fireplace; taxes $3,354.
OTHER AREAS Armonk, N.Y. 420,000
14 Long Pond Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; family room, brick fireplace, eat-in kitchen, deck, 1.6 acres; taxes $6,455.
Middletown, Conn. 119,500
30 Laurel Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old colonial; dining room, fenced-in yard, sun room; taxes $1,403.
Kings Park, L.I. 195,000
99 Twin Oak Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $5,100.


Political Talk
Empire State Enemies
While President Bush was raising money for his re-election campaign at the Waldorf-Astoria last Tuesday, a White House political aide summoned five New York Republican leaders to a 1992 strategy session in a hotel meeting room.
The subject: How state Republicans might assist the White House if Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo decides to run for President.


New Effort To Collect On Parking Violations
IN an intensified effort to collect millions of dollars in outstanding parking fines, municipal courts across the state are increasingly using a six-year-old law that allows local judges to issue arrest warrants or suspend drivers' licenses for failing to pay even one parking ticket.
Officials say that the law, with the use of a statewide computer network, has enabled towns to track down hundreds of thousands of scofflaws who might otherwise fall through the cracks of the increasingly busy court system.


4th New York City Police Officer in 4 Days Is Shot
A police officer was shot four times and critically wounded early yesterday in a gunfight that began after he and his partner stopped two men in a car in Brownsville, Brooklyn, the police said.
He was the fourth police officer shot in New York City in four days.
The driver of the car was arrested at the scene but the gunman fled, said a police spokeswoman.


New &amp; Noteworthy
WHAT THE RIVER KNOWS: An Angler in Midstream, by Wayne Fields. (Fireside/Simon &amp; Schuster, $10.) Finding himself somewhat unhappily in life's midstream -- his 42d year -- Wayne Fields, an English professor and fisherman, set out to wade the length of Cook's Run, a 20-mile Michigan river.
This is "an honest, compelling account of Mr. Fields's encounter with the deep waters of Cook's Run and his own soul," Le Anne Schreiber said here last year.
PHILADELPHIA FIRE, by John Edgar Wideman. (Vintage Contemporaries, $10.) This novel, inspired by the 1985 bombing of the Philadelphia row house inhabited by the cult known as Move, also includes reflections by Mr.
Wideman on the incarceration of his young son, who pleaded guilty in 1988 to murder.
The book revolves around the search for a lost child who is alternately the lone boy who survived the Philadelphia conflagration and Mr.
Wideman's own son.
The author "takes his readers on a tour of urban America perched on the precipice of hell," our reviewer, Rosemary L. Bray, said last year, "a tour in which even his own personal tragedy is part of the view."


Mutual Funds; Packing Up Retirement Funds
A recent study by the Department of Labor found that one worker in five changes jobs each year -- even more in tough economic times.
Whether moving to a better position, departing because of layoffs or taking early retirement, some of the workers leaving a company face a difficult task: How to handle the lump-sum distribution of the money in their company-sponsored retirement accounts.
There are two basic options: Keep the whole sum and pay taxes on it or roll it over into an Individual Retirement Account within 60 days and pay no taxes until the money is withdrawn.
While most workers do not elect rollovers -- only 13 percent of people younger than 55 do -- that is a mistake, experts say.


Being Female and Jewish
To the Editor:
An otherwise interesting and penetrating review by Lore Dickstein of Letty Cottin Pogrebin's "Deborah, Golda and Me" contains one glaring inaccuracy that begs to be corrected.
Ms.
Dickstein states: "Orthodox Judaism is highly rigid, patriarchal and resistant to change. Men have 613 religious obligations; women, only 3." The latter statement is entirely incorrect.


The Soup King's Wife
TIME OFF FROM GOOD BEHAVIOR
By Susan Sussman. 274 pp. New York: Pocket Books.


Ellen Chaffin Wed in Boston
Ellen Marcia Chaffin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Chaffin of Needham, Mass., was married yesterday evening to James Mark Levenson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph J. Levenson of New York.
Rabbi Samuel Chiel officiated at the Copley Plaza Hotel in Boston.
Mrs.
Levenson, 30 years old, is an educational technology consultant for Prodigy, the computer services company, in White Plains.
She graduated from Harvard University, where she later received a master of education degree in interactive technology.
Her father is president of the Webster Lens Company, a manufacturing concern, and C-Optics, a laboratory, both in Webster, Mass.
Mr.
Levenson, 28, is a vice president in the taxable fixed-income department at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities in New York.
He graduated from Northwestern University and received an M.B.A. from Cornell University.
His father is president of Intramet, a metal trading company in New York.


Wall Street; The Granada Slide Gets Even Steeper
The pain continues for investors in the Houston-based empire of David Eller, chairman of the Granada Corporation.
In late 1989, a blizzard of lawsuits were filed after Mr.
Eller converted some struggling cattle-herd partnerships into two public companies: Granada Foods and Granada Biosciences.
Instead of getting their capital back, the limited partners received stock worth far less than their original investments.
The stock is worth even less today, in the wake of recent negative publicity -- chiefly, a Forbes magazine article that prompted a selling frenzy on Oct. 30.
The American Stock Exchange suspended trading in both stocks from Oct. 31 until last Monday.
In that interval, both companies announced major losses and the resignation of five independent board members.
Biosciences further disclosed that a proposed herd sale had fallen apart.


Spotlight on Justice in Times Square
The idea of a criminal courtroom in an empty Times Square theater stirs the imagination: evening performances might soon become the best free show in midtown.
But there is serious purpose behind the experiment.
Moving lower courts closer to crime-ridden neighborhoods, putting them in position to give lesser crimes more attention, could greatly improve justice and the quality of life.
Setting up a court in the Longacre Theater would reinforce the Police Department's expanding foot patrols.
Suspects arrested in Times Square now are hauled downtown for processing and an overnight wait for arraignment.
In a neighborhood court, they might go before a judge within an hour or two.
The city would save the considerable expense of holding the prisoner; the arresting officer could quickly return to the streets.


Baltics Might Play
Soccer's world governing body may permit the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania to participate in the 1994 World Cup.
FIFA said Friday that its executive committee would consider the applications on Dec. 7, a day before the World Cup draw.


Jackson a Contributor To Book on King Death
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson has written the foreword for a new book in which James Earl Ray asserts that he was an unwitting scapegoat in the assassination of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Mr.
Jackson, who was at the motel in Memphis where Dr.
King was slain on April 4, 1968, has said before that he thinks Mr.
Ray could not have acted alone and that the Federal Government took part in a conspiracy to kill the civil rights leader.
Mr.
Ray, now 63 years old, pleaded guilty in 1969 to first-degree murder and is serving a 99-year sentence at the Tennessee State Penitentiary at Nashville.


Blyth Taylor To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Taylor of Toronto have announced the engagement of their daughter Blyth Denison Taylor to Charles Prior Lord, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles P. Lord of Bethesda, Md.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Taylor, 24 years old, is a freelance television production associate in Washington.
She and her fiance graduated from Yale University.
Her father, formerly the head of the Toronto office of the Morgan Stanley Group, is a managing director of Burns Fry Ltd., an investment banking concern in Toronto.
Mr.
Lord, 26, is a law student at the University of Virginia.
His father is headmaster of the Holton-Arms School in Bethesda.
His mother, Gay P. Lord, teaches art history at the school.
The future bridegroom's grandmother the late Mary P. Lord was a United States delegate to the United Nations Human Rights Commission and an alternate delegate to the United Nations General Assembly from 1953 to 1960.
Her husband, the late Oswald Lord, was a vice president of the Gaeley &amp; Lord textiles company in New York.


New Small-Town Place Has Big-City Look
THE latest beachhead of the tidal wave of Italian restaurants is Prezzo (the name means prize in Italian), a smart-looking place with a big-city look, in little New Canaan.
Along one pale-pink entrance wall is a row of black sconces, reminiscent of the torches illuminating a castle wall.
Greeting your eyes is the room's major decorative object, an upended black Ducati motorcycle (shades of the Hard Rock Cafe), along with handsome pinpoint lights over each table.
Almost everything else has a shiny black patent-leather look -- chairs, beveled-edge tables and a black-and-white tile floor.
A dark glass wall separates the dining area from a small, similarly decorated bar.
The hard-edged look is matched by a hard-edged noise level.
While Prezzo's look promises sophisticated dining, the reality is more casual.
The menu and long business hours invite grazing with many rewarding choices, including a number of pizza combinations.
This may explain why the place is hopping with families and young people.


More Troops Patrol Ulster as Killings Mount
Responding to a spate of sectarian killings in Northern Ireland, Britain put 1,400 extra reserve troops on active-duty police patrols there today and ordered hundreds of police officers to work 12-hour shifts in trouble spots.
The Government acted on Friday night after seven people had been killed in two days in the province, bringing the total number slain in terrorist incidents this year to 84.


Women Deflate Some Adland Images
When Rochelle Lazarus, then a junior executive at Ogilvy &amp; Mather, would go to meetings not so very long ago to formulate advertising strategies she would invariably be the only woman in a room filled with senior men.
"For a long time most people considered Madison Avenue to be a boys' club," said the 42-year-old Ms.
Lazarus.
"I knew it was going to take a long time for women to get the top jobs."
The waiting is over.
In May, Ms.
Lazarus became president and chief operating officer of the New York office of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, one of the country's largest agencies.
She now runs the office, which has about $700 million in billings from clients including General Foods and Lever Brothers.


Once a Rich Farm, Now a Soviet Casualty
Now that memories are allowed again, people in this village tell how the old drunk Prokhor Fomichev took the church apart after the war, and how before that, in the 1930's, the Bolsheviks took away the horses and tools and sent their fathers into exile, and how even before that, before the revolution, they would stop to listen to the magical tones of the great "silver bell" and gossip about the bows and smocks of the young mistresses.
They tell, too, how not so many years ago the village shop still had goods on its shelves and the one phone still worked, and nobody worried much about the future.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Credit Cards: Vote on an amendment to a banking bill that would place a limit on the interest rate banks charge credit card holders.
Approved 74 to 19, Nov. 13.
2.
Unemployment Benefits: Vote on passage of a $5.3 billion compromise measure that would provide extended unemployment benefits to people out of work at least half a year.
Approved 91 to 2, Nov.15.
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Y
Y
Lieberman (D)
Y
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
A
Y
Lautenberg (D)
Y
Y
New York
D'Amato (R)
Y
Y
Moynihan (D)
Y
Y
House
1.
Family Leave: Vote on passage of a bill that would guarantee many workers up to 90 days of unpaid leave for family emergencies.
Approved 253 to 177, Nov.13.
2.
Banking: Vote on passage of a bill that would have replenished the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and permitted banks to expand across state lines.
Rejected 227 to 191, Nov. 14.
3.
Unemployment Benefits: Vote on a $5.3 billion compromise bill that would provide extended unemployment benefits to people out of work at least half a year.
Approved 396 to 30, Nov. 14.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Y
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D)
Y
N
Y
3. DeLauro (D)
Y
Y
Y
4. Shays (R)
Y
Y
Y
5. Franks (R)
N
Y
Y
6. Johnson (R)
Y
Y
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Y
N
Y
2. Hughes (D)
Y
N
Y
3. Pallone (D)
Y
N
Y
4. Smith (R)
Y
Y
Y
5. Roukema (R)
Y
N
Y
6. Dwyer (D)
Y
Y
Y
7. Rinaldo (R)
Y
Y
Y
8. Roe (D)
Y
N
Y
9. Torricelli (D)
Y
N
Y
10. Payne (D)
Y
N
Y
11. Gallo (R)
N
Y
Y
12. Zimmer (R)
Y
N
Y
13. Saxton (R)
N
Y
Y
14. Guarini (D)
Y
N
Y
New York
1. Hoch'ner(D)
Y
N
Y
2. Downey (D)
Y
N
Y
3. Mrazek (D)
Y
N
Y
4. Lent (R)
N
Y
Y
5. McGrath (R)
Y
Y
Y
6. Flake (D)
Y
N
Y
7. Ackerman (D)
Y
N
Y
8. Scheuer (D)
Y
N
Y
9. Manton (D)
Y
N
Y
10. Schumer (D)
Y
N
Y
11. Towns (D)
Y
N
Y
12. Owens (D)
Y
N
Y
13. Solarz (D)
Y
N
Y
14. Molinari (R)
Y
A
Y
15. Green (R)
Y
N
Y
16. Rangel (D)
Y
N
Y
17. Weiss (D)
Y
N
Y
18. Serrano (D)
Y
N
Y
19. Engel (D)
Y
N
Y
20. Lowey (D)
Y
N
Y
21. Fish (R)
Y
Y
Y
22. Gilman (R)
Y
Y
Y
23. McNulty (D)
Y
N
Y
24. Solomon (R)
Y
Y
Y
25. Boehlert (R)
Y
Y
Y
26. Martin (R)
Y
Y
Y
27. Walsh (R)
N
Y
Y
28. McHugh (D)
Y
N
Y
29. Horton (R)
Y
N
Y
30. Slaughter (D)
Y
N
Y
31. Paxon (R)
N
A
A
32. LaFalce (D)
Y
N
Y
33. Nowak (D)
Y
N
Y
34. Houghton (R)
N
N
Y
KEY Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Amy L. Donner Has Wedding
Amy Lynn Donner, a staff assistant in the development office of the Woods Hole (Mass.) Oceanographic Institution, and David Allen Mann, a Ph.D. candidate in marine biology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, were married last evening in Haverstraw, N.Y.
Rabbi David Kudan officiated at the Terrace on the Hudson.
Ms.
Donner, 25 years old, is keeping her name.
She and her husband, 24, are 1988 graduates of Cornell University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Donner of Pearl River, N.Y.
Her father is the facilities development director for The New York Times in Edison, N.J.
Her mother, Barbara Donner, teaches English as a second language in the Teaneck, N.J., public school system.
The bridegroom is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ronald L. Mann of Jamesville, N.Y.
His mother, Barbara Mann, is a preschool teacher in Jamesville.
His father is the manager of mechanical analysis and materials engineering at General Electric in Syracuse.


February Bridal For Ms. Urdang
The engagement of Alexandra Stefanie Urdang to Irwin Wayne Messer has been announced by her parents, Irena Urdang de Tour of Deep River, Conn., and Laurence Urdang of Old Lyme, Conn., and Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, England.
Mr.
Messer is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Solomon Messer of Mendham, N.J.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Urdang, 35 years old, is the vice president for new markets at Warner Books in New York.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut.
Her father, a lexicographer, is the publisher of Verbatim: The Language Quarterly.
Her mother is an art dealer.
Mr.
Messer, 36, is a vice president and a director of Tricon Advisory Services, a futures brokerage in Somerset, N.J.
He graduated from American University and received an M.B.A. from Rutgers University.
His father is the president of Oradell Construction in Totowa, N.J.


Sihanouk Backs Trials In Khmer Rouge Terror
Prince Norodom Sihanouk said today that he would support holding genocide trials for Pol Pot and other Khmer Rouge leaders responsible for the deaths of more than a million Cambodians in the 1970's.
The announcement by the Prince, the country's former head of state and now chairman of a transitional council to lead the country to elections, was made the eve of the return to Phnom Penh by political associates of the Khmer Rouge.
According to terms of the Cambodian peace treaty signed last month in Paris, the Khmer Rouge are to take part in a new coalition government.


Sports of The Times; A New Kid Has Joined Baseball's Old Goats
IT'S been three weeks now since his goat horns sprouted.
Lonnie Smith is home in Atlanta, trying to look ahead to the 1992 season, trying to forget his baserunning blunder in the World Series that might have cost the Braves the decisive seventh game against the Minnesota Twins.
It won't be easy to forget.
Whenever he's on first base next season, fans will remind him.


Weird Addams Family at It Again
MORTICIA, Gomez and their gruesome relatives are being resurrected from the graveyard of the 1960's television program"The Addams Family."
In a new film with that name, the cheerfully morbid family, as eccentric and larger than life as ever, lives on in that Gothic mansion that enshrines the macabre.


Charles S. Fleet, Oil and Financial Executive, 60
Charles S. Fleet, a former executive on Wall Street and in the oil industry, died Tuesday in Metairie, La.
He was 60 years old and lived in New Orleans.
Friends said he had been suffering from a serious ailment, and the Jefferson Parish coroner's office is investigating his death as an apparent suicide.


A Full Concert Week, Chamber to Orchestral
THE pre-Thanksgiving rush is on, and with so many concerts on the agenda, it is simplest to take them day by day.
Today: Laura Gilbert, Mary Hammann and Barbara Allen -- the Aureole Trio of flute, viola and harp -- play works of Ravel, Vaughan Williams and Nielsen, plus "Garden of Joys and Sorrows," written for them by the Soviet composer Sofia Gubaidulina, at a free recital at 3 P.M. in the Greenwich Library (637-3041).
At 7 P.M.
Concorde opens its fourth season as the resident chamber group at the Westport Arts Center, its program listing a Beethoven Trio for Flute, Bassoon and Piano; Prokofiev's "Overture on Hebrew Themes"; a Ravel song cycle, and the Mozart Clarinet Quintet (661-4667).


Jeanne Shapiro Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Shapiro of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jeanne Shapiro, to Robert Lewis Savitt, the son of Mrs.
Henry A. Grunwald and Richard Savitt, both of New York.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Shapiro, 24 years old, is a promotion coordinator at Clinique Laboratories in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father, a former co-chairman of Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, is president of RFS &amp; Associates, an investment advisory concern in New York.
Mr.
Savitt, 28, is the vice president of the Adler Group, a real-estate company in New York.
He graduated from the College of Wooster.
His father is a stockbroker with Wertheim Schroder.


Patricia Brown Has Wedding
Patricia Reilly Brown, a daughter of Mrs.
G.
Barnes Stevenson of Upper Montclair, N.J., and the late William T. Brown Jr., was married yesterday in Bay Head, N.J., to Robert James Feighery 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Feighery Jr. of Medford, N.J.
The Rev.
Edward Gammons officiated at All Saints' Episcopal Church.
The bride, 35 years old, is a ballet teacher.
She was formerly the ballet mistress of the Pennsylvania Ballet and a soloist with the Joffrey Ballet Company.
Her mother was the owner and teacher of the Gerrie Brown School of Ballet in Upper Montclair.
Mr.
Feighery, 29, is a graduate of the State University of New York at Buffalo.
He is an administrator for Roy F. Weston Inc., an environmental management and consulting firm in West Chester, Pa.
His mother, Carol Feighery, is the office manager at A.L.P.
Lighting and Ceiling Products in Pennsauken, N.J.
His father is a field manager in marketing and services for I.B.M. in Cherry Hill, N.J.


When Liabilities Outweigh the Assets
THE Old Inlet Inn in Bellport has an impressive pedigree.
The last time it was reviewed, on Feb. 7, 1988, it received a rating of excellent.
That reputation, combined with experienced new owners, Joyce Roe and David Bernatzky, sounds like a winning team.
Mr.
Bernatzky was well known a few years ago as the owner/chef of J-Dave's, a popular Cajun restaurant in Patchogue.


Ms. Wolf Weds M. K. Janofsky
Mary Ann Wolf, a daughter of Elayne S. Wolf of Philadelphia and the late Alvin E. Wolf Jr., was married in Philadelphia last evening to Michael K. Janofsky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carroll Janofsky of Baltimore.
Rabbi David Wice officiated at the Ritz-Carlton hotel.
Ms.
Wolf, who is 38 years old and is keeping her name, is a producer for NBC News in Washington.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father was president of the Stein-Henry Food Company, a supplier of food to restaurants and institutions in Philadelphia.
Mr.
Janofsky, 44, is a sports reporter for The New York Times.
He graduated from the University of Maryland.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.
His father is a publisher of theater programs in Baltimore.


Q and A
New Year's Eve in Quebec
Q.
We enjoy dressing formally on New Year's Eve, and will be in Quebec City this year.
Are there any special events we might attend? -- Charles Carcano, Northport, L.I.
A. The New Year's Eve action in Quebec City is in its hotels.
In the castlelike Chateau Frontenac, 1 Rue des Carrieres, Quebec G1R 4P5, Canada, (418) 692-3861, a special dinner will be served place at the Champlain restaurant, for $136 (prices in United States dollars at $1.05 to one Canadian dollar), black-tie dress required.
There will be dancing to an orchestra.
Reservations go quickly, and tend to fill by early December.
There will also be a dinner dance, with big band, in the ballroom, for $81; formal dress is not required, but some participants do dress formally, the hotel says.
A 10-minute walk from the old city is the Loews Le Concorde Hotel, 1225 Place Montcalm, Quebec G1R 4W6, Canada; (418) 647-2222.
In l'Astral, the revolving rooftop restaurant, a six-course meal will be served, and there will be dancing; the cost is $81.
In the ballroom will be a buffet and dance, $63.
Just west of the old city walls is the Quebec Hilton, 3 Place Quebec, (418) 647-2411, where a dinner dance, $86, takes place in the Croquembroche restaurant; formal dress is not required.
There is also a dance in the Salle de Bal for $32 a person.
There are also hotels in Ste.-Foy, about a 15 minute drive southwest of Quebec City, where the celebrations are dressy, though formal ware is not required.
Among the parties are these: The Hotel des Gouveneurs, 3030 Boulevard Rourier, Ste.-Foy G1V 2M5, Quebec, Canada, (418) 651-3036, offers a special menu in its restaurant for $60, with dancing in the bar.
There will be a disco party with disk jockey in the ballroom, for $11.
At Chateau Bonne Entente, 3400 Chemin Ste.-Foy, Ste.-Foy, Quebec G1X 1S6, Canada, (800) 463-4390 or (418) 653-5221, a special dinner is $45; a buffet in the ballroom is $32; both include music.
Holiday Inn Ste.-Foy, 3125 Hochelaga Steet, Ste.-Foy, Quebec G1V 4AB, Canada, (418) 653-4901, offers a six-course dinner for $27, followed by a dance, for $9.
By Freighter to Italy
Q.
My wife is unable to fly and has never been back to the country of her birth, Italy.
Are there ways to sail there that are alternatives to luxury liners? -- John A. Condon, Long Beach, L.I.
A.
Lykes Brothers Steamship Company takes passengers from the port of Elizabeth, N.J., to Leghorn (more commonly known as Livorno), Italy.
The voyage takes about 10 days, and there are two or three sailings a month.
The fare to Leghorn is $1,025 a person.
The ships go on to Alexandria, Egypt; Haifa, Israel; Izmir, Turkey, and then stop at Leghorn again before sailing back to New Jersey.
For the full itinerary, round-trip fare is $3,425 a person, but passengers can book a return one-way passage from the second stop in Leghorn, also for $1,025.
More information, Lyke Brothers Steamship Company, 300 Poydras Street, New Orleans, La. 70130, (800) 535-1861 or (504) 523-6611.
There is another option, the Yugoslav Great Lakes Line, out of Montreal, which sails across the Atlantic to Koer, Yugoslavia; Trieste, Italy; Bar, Yugoslavia; Salerno, Leghorn and Genoa, Italy; Valencia, Spain, then Lisbon and back to Montreal, with the full round-trip costing $3,200.
The line's representative, Freighter World Cruises, 180 South Lake Avenue, Pasadena, Calif. 91101, (818) 449-3106, says it is advising against these trips in light of the State Department's advice that citizens avoid travel to Yugoslavia, though the ships have experienced to disruptions.
Villas in Puerto Vallarta
Q.
We want to rent a three-bedroom villa in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, this winter.
Do you know of sources? -- Nancy Collins, Tulsa, Okla.
A.
For the most part, villas rented in Puerto Vallarta come with staff and pool.
Villas are mainly in the Gold Coast area just south of town, or in Mismaloya, about five miles from town.
They may be high on the hills above the Pacific, which have good views but require a hike to and from the water, or on the beach, which are generally more expensive.
Here are some American companies that handle villa rentals in Puerto Vallarta, with winter rates, which are higher around Christmas and lower in the off-season.
The prices do not include 15 percent tax.
Countries at Home Abroad, Sutton Town House, 405 East 56th Street, Suite 6H, New York, N.Y. 10022; (212) 421-9165.
Three-bedroom villas are $400 to $600 a night.
Creative Leisure International, Post Office Box 75019, Petaluma, Calif. 94975; (707) 778-1800.
Three-bedroom villas are $200 to $430 a night.
Three-bedroom condominiums are $125 or $360 a night.
Prestige Villas, Post Office Box 1046, Southport, Conn. 06490; (800) 336 0080 or (203) 254-1302.
Villas are $400 to $800 a night; add $50 a day for a car.
Rent a Home International, 7200 34th Avenue N.W., Seattle, Wash. 98117; (206) 789-9377.
Villas are $350 to $625 a night.
Vacation Home Rentals Worldwide, 235 Kensington Avenue, Norwood, N.J. 07648; (201) 767-9393.
Villas are $400 to $580 a night.
Villa Holidays, 13100 Wayzata Boulevard, Suite 150, Minneapolis, Minn. 55344; (800) 328-6262.
Three-bedroom villas are $400 to $500 a night.
Villas International, 605 Market Street, Suite 510, San Francisco, Calif.  94105; (800) 221-2260.
Villas are $2,000 to $3,000 a week.
Three-bedroom apartments by the beach are $1,850 to $2,250 a week.
Villa Leisure, Post Office Box 30188, Palm Beach, Fla. 33420.; (407) 624-9000.
Villas are $425 to $850 a night.
The top accommodations on the beach are about $1,200 a night.
The Four Corners
Q.
I have come across references to the Four Corners in the Southwest.
Just where is this area and what are the locations there? -- Edwin Drewitz, Manhasset, L.I.
A.
The Four Corners is the region around the place where the state lines of Utah, Colorado, New Mexico and Arizona intersect.
At its western edge is the Glen Canyon National Recreation area with Lake Powell, popular for houseboats.
In Utah are natural arches and buttes and redstone canyons.
Two notable examples are Natural Bridges National Monument and Monument Valley, which straddles Utah and Arizona.
The Four Corners region is rich in ruins of the cliff and canyon dwellings of the prehistoric Ansazi people, among them Canyon de Chelly National Monument in Arizona, Mesa Verde National Park in Colorado, Hovenweep National Monument in Utah and Chaco Canyon in New Mexico.
And there are living Indian cultures, with a large Navajo reservation that covers several states and, on three mesas in Arizona, Hopi reservations.


At County Restaurants, Empty Tables and Smaller Checks
WANT to know how the economy is doing in Westchester?
Go out for dinner.
But wait for the weekend if you don't want to eat amid a sea of empty tables.
Despite specially priced entrees, early-bird specials, discount coupons, low-cost wines and eager waiters, most consumers are staying home.
"You don't hear anyone bragging about their raises and promotions anymore," said Neil Novich, one of the owners of John Richards, a popular restaurant and pub in Dobbs Ferry, where business has declined for the first time in six years.


Noted With Pleasure
The Eternal Signature
Contemplating the ancient monuments of Egypt, Alain Borer muses on the impulse that has led generations of travelers to scribble their names on worn columns and walls.
This is from "Rimbaud in Abyssinia" (Morrow).


SEDUCING THESE MEN
I have owned three Subarus, my husband has one and I've referred many friends to the local Subaru dealer.
Why?
It's a great car.
Subaru could have saved a lot of advertising money by listening to one of its own.
Christopher B. Wackman, vice president of marketing at Subaru, had, for my taste, the best line: "Our problem is we have great cars that not enough people know about." KATHLEEN WILDAUER
Lancaster, Pa.


Beyond the Pie: Giving Pumpkin a Second Chance
THANKSGIVING is almost here, so it is time for the annual pumpkin pie.
And because pie is the only form in which many Americans eat pumpkin at all, the seasonings traditionally used for pumpkin pie have become permanently linked to the vegetable itself.
Whether pumpkin is used to prepare a pie or some other baked item, it is inevitably flavored primarily with ground ginger and also with a good dose of nutmeg, mace and cinnamon.
These are the spices the English and the New England colonists used with pumpkin, spices that were essential in everyday cooking at that time.
They could successfully disguise off flavors in food that was not refrigerated and may have been less than fit to eat.
The quest for spices was a major factor in bringing European settlers to the shores of this continent in the first place.


Expressway Widening Faces Hurdles
LIKE the chicken and the egg, it is hard to know which came first, traffic or roads.
Since it was built in the 50's under the leadership of Robert Moses, the Long Island Expressway has been synonymous with traffic backups and delays.
An engineer who designed parts of the original expressway, Harry Wartur, recalled:


POSTINGS: Cornice to Come; Redone Rowhouse
Raymond J. Beech knew that 1449 Lexington Avenue, where Beech Associates had an office, was unsightly.
A 1955 renovation left it a stark slab of blue and white tile at the end of a row of brownstones at 94th Street.
But Mr.
Beech didn't know the building was in trouble until the Federal Bankruptcy Court directed him to stop paying rent to his landlord.
Rather than walking away, Mr.
Beech bought the property in 1989.
One goal was to use the building as a showcase for his design and contracting firm, which specializes in co-op and brownstone renovations.
He covered the tile with a stucco-like material that has been scored to resemble limestone.
He rebuilt the rear garden.
He recreated a two-story window bay, using mahogany.
He added lintels and mullioned windows.
A new cornice is yet to come but the project has already won the neighbors' approval.


Deals and Discounts
USAIR will have round-trip fares from Philadelphia to Paris as low as $318 when it begins flights on that route in January.
The fares, which are nonrefundable, are offered for trips originating Jan. 7 through Feb. 29.
They are $318 Monday through Thursday and $368 Friday through Sunday.
From the western United States (Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico and Washington) the airline's fares to Paris are $458 and $508 respectively; for those traveling from other points in the United States, the fares are $358 and $408.
You must buy tickets before Jan. 7, and within 24 hours of making a reservation, and stay a minimum of five days and a maximum of 30 days.
Call USAir at 800-428-4322.


The Politics Of Sharps And Flats
When the American Musicological Society held its annual meeting in Chicago last weekend, it was mostly business as usual.
There were papers on music history ("A Fresh Look at the Liturgical Settings in MS. Ivrea, Bibl. Cap. 115"), theory ("The Concept of Ausweichung in Music Theory, Circa 1770-1830"), performance ("Ad Lecturinum or In Podiolum: Performance Practice, Cori Spezzati and Musical Style") and cultural history ("Music and Spirituality in Federigo Borromeo's Milan").
But scattered throughout the four days of lectures and meetings were subjects that would have seemed alien 10 years ago -- topics like "Gendering Modern Music" or "Abstractions of Desire in Scriabin's Fifth Sonata" or "The Idiom of Simon and Image of Dylan: When Do Stars Cast Shadows?" These are signs of a gradual transformation of the discipline of musicology.


VOTER POLL SHOWS BIG EDWARDS LEAD IN LOUISIANA RACE
Voters surveyed as they left polling places in Louisiana said today that they had chosen former Gov.
Edwin W. Edwards as their next governor over David Duke by almost two to one.
The actual margin for Mr.
Edwards, a Democrat, could be narrower because supporters of Mr.
Duke, a former leader of the Ku Klux Klan running as a Republican, have consistently been reluctant to state their preferences to poll takers.


Harnoncourt Gives Beethoven a Mild Jolt
We may be awash in Mozart just now, but the symphonies of Beethoven remain the prime example of overplayed, overrecorded repertory in Western classical music.
The current Schwann catalogue lists 23 complete sets available in the United States.
But the number of versions that have been deemed worthy of preservation since Felix Weingart ner's pioneering cycle in the 1920's and 30's must be well over 100.
The notion of picking a single preferred set becomes downright quixotic.
Still, the windmill looks pretty tempting, so let's charge: at least within the realm of recently recorded Beethoven symphony cycles in the most up-to-date digital sound, the new version with Nikolaus Harnoncourt conducting the Chamber Orchestra of Europe (Teldec 2292-46452; five CD's) seems the best recommendation.
This fascinating set offers solid pleasures for the neophyte and deeper delights for the connoisseur.


Heroin Users in Shift
Frightened at the prospect of getting AIDS, many heroin users are abandoning needles in favor of inhaling the powdered drug, many experts and addicts say.
Page 34.


The Lost Art of Selling Chickens, Squawk and All
After surveying cage upon cage of incessantly squawking chickens, ducks, pigeons and other fowl, Jim Fashion picked his birds and watched as they were weighed, their legs efficiently tied with a snippet of rope.
While he was completing his transaction -- $40 for 20 chickens -- the birds were taken to a back room where they were quickly slaughtered and cleaned.
In a society where most consumers encounter poultry only as neatly wrapped packages of meat, Mr.
Fashion says that he finds supermarket "frozen chickens are too soft and chemicalized" compared with the fresh poultry he ate while growing up in Nigeria.
Mr.
Fashion, who emigrated from Nigeria to New York four years ago, is a regular customer at Pitkin's Live Chicken Market in the East New York section of Brooklyn.
He often finds himself shopping along side Moslems and Jews who observe halal and kosher dietary laws.


Sam Waterston Goes South
In the fall of Sam Waterston's senior year at Groton, the Connecticut prep school, the distant world of racial turmoil grazed the edges of his life.
It was September 1957, and President Dwight D. Eisenhower had just dispatched Federal troops to enforce the integration of Central High School in Little Rock, Ark.
One afternoon, in a classmate's study, Mr.
Waterston joined a conversation about the events.
Long after he had forgotten what anybody else said, Mr.
Waterston remembered the words of a student named Tom, from North Carolina.
He favored equal rights and integration, he told the others, but if those soldiers had entered his town, he would have risen in protest.


STILL SAILING THE LEMONADE SEA
Why is it that every time a socialist regime fails (and by fails, I mean exterminates human beings in the name of the workers), the knee-jerk reaction of leftists is to say, "Oh, that's not socialism." There has been a truckload of "workers' paradises" since the Russian Revolution and all of them have turned into murderous tyrannies.
TIMOTHY VISLOCKY
Brooklyn


Commercial Property: B. Altman's; A Metamorphosis For 880,000 Sq. Ft.
TWO years ago, as B. Altman held its final sale, the crush was so great that management turned off the escalators to control traffic.
Today, on the rare occasions when the escalators are turned on, their gentle rumbling is the loudest sound to be heard through the vast selling floors, each a two-acre forest of 22-foot-high columns.
What can be done with such an expanse, with floors that fill the block from Fifth to Madison Avenue, 34th to 35th Street?


Ms. Perry Wed To John Crotty
Nancy Ann Perry, a daughter of Beverly Perry of New York and the late Jay H. Perry, and John Gerard Crotty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas M. Crotty of Merrick, L.I., were married last night at the Whitehall Club in New York.
The Rev.
James Gardiner, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated, with Rabbi Charles Lippman giving the blessings.
The bride, 29 years old, is an executive vice president of the Billy Smithline Foundation in New York, which aids leukemia research.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father was head of the equity trading desk at Salomon Brothers.
Mr.
Crotty, 29, is a vice president at the First Boston Corporation in New York and a graduate of St.
Joseph's University in Philadelphia.
His father is an executive vice president and the treasurer of Sudler &amp; Hennessey, a New York advertising agency.


Corrections
An article on page 29 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the band U2 misidentifies the instruments played by two musicians.
Larry Mullen Jr. plays drums and Adam Clayton bass.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE FINAL ADDICTION
By Richard Condon.  St. Martin's, $19.95.


Insider Trading
In the 1980's, many renters made money in New York City real estate by waiting until their buildings were converted to co-ops and buying their own apartments way below market price.
Profiting too were lawyers who represented investors buying the renters' insider rights.
Last week Mel Miller, the Speaker of the New York State Assembly, and a top aide, Jay Adolf, went on trial charged with taking more than their fair share.
In one case, according to a Federal indictment, Mr.
Miller and Mr.
Adolf's law firm bought 120 apartments for clients in a building in Brooklyn but secretly diverted eight of the apartments to themselves.
A third partner, a businessman and nonpracticing rabbi named Avi Cohen, is now the prosecution's chief witness.
Mr.
Miller and Mr.
Adolf "lined their own pockets at the expense of their own clients," a Federal prosecutor said.
A lawyer for the defense said Mr.
Cohen did all the wrongdoing and that "the so-called victims made millions."


Trips and Tours Stress Sobriety
IN the last five years, travel agents and independent entrepreneurs, some of them participants in addiction recovery programs, have begun to design and offer trips and tours for people recovering from substance abuse.
The programs, which welcome family and friends, range from a weekend at a nearby inn to a week at a Club Med village or on a cruise, though trips to China and the Soviet Union have also been organized.
The hallmark of these offerings is daily group meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous and other 12-step organizations.
Some provide 24-hour hospitality rooms with coffee, soft drinks and a counselor available.


Curmudgeons Are Triumphing By a Whisker
It is, apparently, the season to be curmudgeonly.
At Circle in the Square, George C. Scott is playing a flinty old coot who chases death up a tree and keeps him there in "On Borrowed Time." At the Roundabout Theater Company, which has just moved into the Criterion Center, Roy Dotrice is an utterly disreputable paterfamilias in "The Homecoming." Meanwhile, Jason Robards is carrying on as the holy terror of Gloucester, Mass., in "Park Your Car in Harvard Yard" over at the Music Box.


U.N. Weapons Inspectors Renew Hunt in Iraq
A team of United Nations inspectors, acting on information obtained from intelligence agencies and on previous visits, will start hunting for a secret Iraqi biological weapons plant next week.
Rolf Ekeus, the Swedish head of the Special Commission overseeing the destruction of Iraq's nuclear, chemical and biological weapons as well as its ballistic missiles, said on Wednesday that the team would arrive in Baghdad on Sunday and immediately inspect several undisclosed sites where the intelligence agencies believe Iraq may be concealing undeclared manufacturing plants as well as stocks of banned biological agents.


Baedeker
To the Editor: Though my collection of old Baedekers (a 1903 edition of Baedeker's guide to Switzerland) hardly compares to Karl E. Meyer's holdings, I share his admiration for these antique volumes.
My single Baedeker, for example, contains irreplaceable advice to invalids ("In the case of
Nervous Patients,
with irritable conditions of their organs, the climate is not the sole factor to be considered in the choice of a health-resort.
The general social conditions also demand careful attention.
Neur
asthenics
may be driven frantic by brass bands . . . or by other noisy amusements; and the effect of the grandest Alpine air may in this manner by frustrated."
Or consider the following advice to mountaineers: "Glacier-water should not be drunk except in small quantities, mixed with wine or cognac."


Focus: Charleston, S.C.; For a Mansion, T.L.C. With No Plan to Sell
IN this city's historic Battery District, where century-old mansions grace picturesque streets at river's edge, the din of hammering and sawing has become as much a part of life as gawking tourists in horse-drawn carriages.
But for Edward L. Henning, the sounds soon will cease.
After four years, the restoration of his Italianate mansion at 21 King Street, a block from Charleston Harbor, is now only two rooms shy of completion.


Wright Houses
To the Editor: In a response to a question about Frank Lloyd Wright houses, the remarkable residential group in Buffalo was omitted entirely.
As in Oak Park, Ill., the half-dozen or so outstanding Wright houses in Buffalo are within walking distance of one another, or nearly so, around Delaware Park and the Albright-Knox Museum, and most are in excellent shape.
Information is readily obtainable locally.
There are numerous distinguished structures downtown of his friends and partners, including Louis Sullivan.


Waxing Historic


Magic Honored in Italy
Italy's All-Star team beat a team of foreign All-Stars, 136-122, yesterday in a game in which the loudest cheers were for MAGIC JOHNSON, who wasn't even in the country.
The name of Johnson, who retired from the N.B.A. last week after announcing he was infected with the AIDS virus, hung from a dozen banners that festooned the Paleur arena in Rome.


Living Dangerously
The new Michael Jackson music video arrived last week, longer awaited, it seemed, than anything without theological implications.
The 11-minute production, intended to give a big sendoff to "Dangerous," Mr.
Jackson's first album in four years, due out on Nov. 26, reportedly cost $4 million and was seen by 500 million people in 27 countries.
And in state-of-the-art special effects, the producers got what they paid for.
But the song, "Black or White," an appeal for racial harmony, and the accompanying scenes, disappointed the critics.
The Associated Press said it was "excessive, pretentious and vague." And that was just the first half.
The rest was just plain video, with Mr.
Jackson dancing a capella -- and repeatedly clutching his crotch -- for an endless five minutes.
Critics took it as his way of announcing, No More Mr.
Nice Person.
But after scores of parental complaints to TV stations, he issued an apology and vowed to excise the offending segments.


Manchester Journal; Democratic Candidates Leap Into a Battle for Some Laughs
On the many-runged ladder of national politics, there are few spaces lower than the one occupied by Representative Dick Swett.
The gangly Mr.
Swett looks as if he just recently graduated from high school.
He is a freshman Democrat who never held elective office before this year.
His odds of surviving another term in this state's fiercely Republican Second District are considered even at best.


Ms. Lemaire to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Jean-Charles Lemaire of Drummondville, Quebec, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pascale Lemaire, to Timothy Robinson Murdoch, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Murdoch Jr. of Princeton, N.J.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lemaire, 27 years old, is a candidate for a master's degree in psychology at the University of Montreal and a graduate of McGill University.
Her father is a surgeon at Ste.-Croix Hospital in Drummondville.
Mr.
Murdoch, 29, is a trainee at the Intertalent Agency in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He graduated from Princeton University and has an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
His father is a real-estate adviser and investor in Princeton.


Susannah Kimball, a Lawyer, Weds
Susannah Wetherbee Kimball, a daughter of William M. Kimball and Dorothy Fisher Kimball, both of New York, was married yesterday to Ernest Francis Rosato Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Rosato of Philadelphia.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesly performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Mrs.
Rosato, 30 years old, is an associate in the New York office of the London law firm of Watson, Farley &amp; Williams.
She graduated from the College of William and Mary and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Mr.
Rosato, 29, is a principal of Operations Software Management, a computer software company in Wayne, Pa.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
His father is a professor of surgery at Penn and the chief of gastrointestinal surgery at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.


Doctor-Investors And the Law
Some of the information given in "What the Law Requires," the sidebar to the article "Doctor-Investors Are Worried by New Law" (Oct. 20), was misleading.
The new law, and the 1989 financial disclosure law it partly supersedes, does not require doctors who provide diagnostic or treatment services as an integral part of their own practices to give their patients the opportunity to go elsewhere for such services.


Read Lindros's Lips
The Quebec Nordiques seem to be having trouble reading ERIC LINDROS's lips.
The junior hockey sensation from Toronto has said repeatedly that he will never sign with the Nordiques, the team that made him the No. 1 selection in the 1991 draft.
They apparently translate "never" as "not until you offer me enough money." How else explain why the team reportedly offered Lindros a $50 million contract?
According to The Toronto Star, citing an "impeccable" National Hockey League source, the Nordiques did in fact offer Lindros a 10-year deal with a nominal value of $50 million, but with a far lesser present value since half the money would be deferred.


Scholar Looks at Quaint Stone Walls And Sees Pioneers' Garbage Heaps
The product of stubborn people plowing rocky ground, New England's stone walls have long been considered an almost perfect union of form and function.
Fencing the boundaries of a backbreaking farm era long past, they function today as telling ornaments of Yankee thrift, hard work and pious persistence.
But what if most of New England's stone walls were never meant as walls at all?
What if they are merely "linear landfills," in the words of a University of Connecticut geologist, long piles of refuse that are a direct result of the first man-made upheaval in America's environment, the deforestation of New England in the 18th and early 19th centuries?


Elias's Running Helps Princeton Down Yale
Keith Elias, Princeton's talented sophomore tailback, had fumbled the ball away twice and then injured a wrist in a fourth-period pileup.
But his coach, Steve Tosches, wanted his best runner back in the game against Yale this afternoon and so back went Elias to carry the ball on six of nine plays in a winning touchdown drive.
He scored the decisive points on a 4-yard burst over his left tackle, his second touchdown run of the game, and Princeton defeated its old rival, 22-16, to remain in contention for the Ivy League.
The victory was achieved before the largest Ivy League crowd of the season, 30,820 spectators at Palmer Stadium.
Tense Final Period
One more victory, against Dartmouth next Saturday at Hanover, N.H., will give Princeton the Ivy title outright for the first time since 1964.
The Tigers' record is now 5-1 in league games to Dartmouth's 5-0-1 but Princeton has defeated only one team with a winning record, Yale.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
FREDERICK BILLINGS  A Life. By Robin W. Winks. Oxford University, $27.95.


Facts Of Life; More Than Inspiration Is Needed to Fight AIDS
IN the 10 days since Magic Johnson announced that he is infected with the virus that causes AIDS, he has been courted by hundreds of health groups, invited by the President to serve on a commission and even asked to lend his name to a brand of condoms.
Perfectly cast as an AIDS educator for the 1990's, he can hardly fail to do good.
Yet those working frantically against the epidemic say it will take more than Magic to curb the insidious spread of HIV.
As AIDS becomes more deeply entrenched in the culture of poverty, inspiration alone can only help so much.
Already, those answering Johnson's call to get tested for the virus may face months of waiting.
Those who test positive and lack health insurance may find themselves in a three-month line just to see a doctor, let alone gain access to costly life-prolonging therapy.


Interest Is High As U.S. Revises Rule on Tankers
In a crowded conference room at the Coast Guard's headquarters on Thursday, Lieut.
Drew Wojtanik huddled around a table with a group of experts in oil transportation.
He was in his shirt sleeves, and up to his elbows in regulatory minutiae.
All day long participants in a workshop, broken into 10 discussion groups like one the lieutenant was leading, had been debating how the Coast Guard should regulate the operation of vessels to insure that they are prepared to respond quickly to catastrophic oil spills, as called for by a new law.


The Story TV Can't Resist
As the ordeal of Kimberly Bergalis has been turned into a political weapon on behalf of mandatory testing for the AIDS virus, it has also become a challenge to television's ability to cut through clouds of emotion and clarify public issues.
It may be too early to tell how the campaign for the Kimberly Bergalis Patient and Health Provider Protection Act of 1991 and similar legislation is doing, but television has not been doing very well.
The nation was stunned this month when Magic Johnson, the basketball star, revealed he had tested positive for the AIDS virus.
The story took up big chunks of news programs; on-the-street interviews confirmed the impact.
So far, Mr.
Johnson has been using his celebrity to warn young people about the virtues of safe sex.
Whatever one's views on that, the power of a figure like Mr.
Johnson or Ms.
Bergalis to command the tube and influence public attitudes is not altogether reassuring.


Rough Outing for Knight And It's Just Beginning
When you are the coach of the second-ranked college basketball team in the nation, according to The Associated Press preseason poll, and your team is beaten in its first game of the season, that's one thing.
When your team is soundly beaten by the 11th-ranked team, U.C.L.A., 87-72, in the Basketball Hall of Fame Tip-Off Classic at the Civic Center here, that's another thing.


Hilary C. Power Wed in Boston
Hilary Christine Power, a sales representative, and David Michael Steinberg, a securities analyst, were married last evening by Rabbi Allan Press at the Omni Parker House Hotel in Boston.
Mrs.
Steinberg, 30 years old, graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She is a representative of Erbst, Wicklam &amp; Wilson, a furniture sales concern in New York.
She is a daughter of Elizabeth and Daniel E. Power of Boston.
Her father retired as a partner at Deloitte &amp; Touche, an accounting firm.
Her mother is a copy editor at Little, Brown &amp; Company in Boston.
Mr.
Steinberg, 30, graduated cum laude from Colby College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
He is a senior analyst at Mehta &amp; Isaly, a private investment firm in New York.
He is the son of Adele and Prof.
Melvin S. Steinberg of Northampton, Mass.
His mother is a librarian at Smith College, where his father is a professor of physics.


Making a Difference; Looking for a Happy Ending
As an executive vice president at the New York Life Insurance Company, where boring conservatism is considered a financial virtue, Kenneth R. O'Brien watched from afar with something approaching horror as the Executive Life Insurance Company grew rapidly during the last decade by loading its portfolio with risky junk bonds.
Now Mr.
O'Brien has been named interim chief executive of Executive Life by a French consortium that last week won a bidding war for the failed insurer, which is based here.
In that job, he will try to give the company a second life as a staid, conservative insurer that even his former colleagues at New York Life could be proud of.


Nicole Miller Marries Peter Gould
Nicole Fern Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul S. Miller of Livingston, N.J., and Peter Allen Gould, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
S.
Stephen Gould of Livingston, were married last evening.
Rabbi Robert Fierstien officiated at the Hilton at Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Gould, 27 years old, is a senior account executive with the Washington office of Burson-Marsteller, a New York-based public relations firm.
She is a magna cum laude graduate of Tufts University and has an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is a vice president and a general counsel of Pfizer Inc. in New York.
Her mother, Carol Miller, is a partner in Designers 2, a Livingston interior design company.
Mr.
Gould, also 27, is an associate at the Washington law firm of Verner, Liipfert, Bernhard, McPherson &amp; Hand.
He is a magna cum laude graduate of Boston University and received a law degree from American University.
His father is the president of Pajama Craft Inc., a New York manufacturer.


The Newest Fashion Statement
"I'M not exactly Elton John," Gerri Nolan of East Northport said.
"But if you have to wear glasses, you might as well flaunt them."
Ms.
Nolan fessed up to owning 28 pairs of glasses.
Of course that was before she entered Lenscrafters in Huntington Station.


Corrections
An "All About" article on Nov. 3 discussing sales of biotechnology products referred incorrectly to a drug meant to treat septic shock.
Centocor Inc. produces a drug that has been endorsed by an advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration, but it has not received approval from the F.D.A. itself.


Jankovich Likes Picking Up Pieces for Patriots
It took Sam Jankovich close to a month at the end of last year to decide whether he wanted to leave his job as athletic director at the University of Miami to become the chief executive officer of the New England Patriots.
There was a lot to think over.
New England was a franchise in trouble.
The team was coming off a 1-15 season.
The team and three players had been fined for their role in the sexual harassment of a female reporter in the team's locker room.


Disk of Death
The world used to be a pretty secure place.
We grew up taking things like the ozone layer and the record album for granted, and assumed that like our parents before us, the tanner we were and the more records we bought, the better off we'd be.
But the unthinkable happened.
A nasty hole appeared in the atmosphere.
The cassette came along.
Then the final straw: the imperialistic compact disk, bent on nothing less than world domination.
Encased in anti-nostalgic, don't-touch-me-unless-you-mean-business plastic, the CD pays lip service to cover art, liner notes and lyrics by reproducing them on the head of a pin.
Worst of all, it offers sound so pure it has no place in our fallen world.
As it turns out, a little perfection can be a dangerous thing.


Let's Reward Investments That Aid Economy; Interest-Rate Puzzle
To the Editor:
"Lower interest rates always have been a good way of stimulating the economy," says Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman (front page, Nov. 2).
This fundamental wisdom is offered daily by economists, government officials and television pundits.
As a nonexpert, I don't understand it.


Corrections
A chart with an article last Sunday about the troubles of the public university systems in California misstated the student-to-faculty ratios and the faculty totals at California State University.
For the 1966-67 academic year, the ratio was 16.9 to 1, with 7,779 faculty members; for the 1990-91 year, the ratio was 18.4 to 1, with 15,099 faculty members.
These figures are adjusted by the university to convert part-time faculty members to their full-time equivalents.
The chart also misstated the growth in the student population for that period.
It was 112 percent, not 115 percent.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The center panels on the wood front door of my 22-year-old house have developed hairline cracks that are up to eight inches long and actually large enough to permit daylight to be seen through them.
I have tried filling these cracks with wood filler and paint, but nothing has lasted very long.
What can I do to repair the door, short of replacing it?
A.
There is no way I know to effectively fill in or patch such cracks in a thin panel.
The only way to "repair" these cracks is to cover the panel.
You can do this by gluing a thin panel of new plywood over the old panel, or by covering the panel with reinforced fiberglass cloth (fiberglass and resin).
In each case, it will be necessary to remove all of the old paint first to get the glue or resin to adhere.
Incidentally, if you cover one panel, you may have to cover the others so that all will look the same.


Trapped in the Impoverished Middle Class
Michael Storm, who earns $18.01 an hour making transmission housings at Caterpillar Inc., talks with disillusionment about his purchase last year of a new Chevrolet Cavalier, the family's first new car in years.
His wife, Joanne, had totaled their 1985 Cavalier in an accident, and Mr.
Storm, who likes new things, thought a new car would please her as well.
But the new car has ended up angering them both.
The $237 monthly payment was almost as much as the family's mortgage and property taxes combined.
And the Storms couldn't build equity in the Cavalier because its first-year drop in value was so steep it more than offset each monthly payment.
"My wife is saying that my time away from home working extra hours to support the car payments isn't worth it," Mr.
Storm said.


Margaret Juran and Thomas Mayor Are Wed
Margaret Louise Juran, a daughter of Charles Juran and Josephine Juran, both of Redlands, Calif., was married yesterday in Ridgefield, Conn., to Thomas James Mayor, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Rowland Mayor of Stow, Ohio.
The Rev.
Andrea R. Raynor performed the ceremony at the Jesse Lee Memorial United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Mayor, 27 years old, is a management associate in Cleveland for TRW Inc.
She graduated from the University of Puget Sound and received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.
Mr.
Mayor, also 27, is an associate in Cleveland with Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and also received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth.


When Aged Parents Can't Go Along
THE suitcases were about to be packed at the home of Eleanor and Norman Simons of Union as they eagerly prepared for a two-week Canadian holiday in the Thousand Islands.
In an adjoining bedroom, Mrs.
Simons's 95-year-old mother, Katherine Nenninger, was just as elated as she readied for her own vacation, which she would spend in Elizabeth at the Heritage Home, a residence for older adults.


A Sampras-Courier Final
"The best two sets I probably ever played," is what Pete Sampras said about his victory today over Ivan Lendl.
Jim Courier was more modest about his triumph over Andre Agassi, describing the difference as "a few points here and there."


SENATOR POTHOLE
Why, in an article about Alfonse D'Amato and his "unrepentant politics," isn't the Senator's consistent anti-choice position mentioned?
Distasteful as many of us find his influence-mongering, the Senator's votes against abortion rights are what make us fiercely determined to replace him.
JUDY SIEGEL
New York, N.Y.


Macy's Dresses Up a Men's Wear Department
Despite a dreary retail climate and persistent rumors about its financial stability, R. H. Macy has been going forward with a plan to renovate and revitalize the men's wear departments of its store on Herald Square.
The first step was the opening today of a 30,000-square-foot floor of contemporary men's wear in an area once used for employee lockers and personnel offices between the first and second floors.
The new area, Concepts on 1 1/2, brings together merchandise sold in the basement and on the first floor, like Guess and Marithe and Francois Girbaud, with a more sophisticated presentation of trendy men's designs.


Corrections
A report on the Business Diary page last Sunday about the Coca-Cola Company and Pepsico Inc. misstated the sales ranking of the companies' soft drinks in the United States.
Coca-Cola outsells Pepsi.


Making a Difference; Still Going It Alone
It was a bad week for Walter F. Williams, chairman and chief executive of the Bethlehem Steel Corporation.
A proposed joint venture with British Steel P.L.C. was aborted on Monday, after months of planning, because the companies failed to reach an agreement with the United Steelworkers union.
That means Mr.
Williams's company, based in Bethlehem, Pa., will remain the only major steel producer in the United States without a joint venture with a foreign steel maker.
The deal with British Steel would have provided critically needed cash to modernize Bethlehem's structural steel and rail production operations.


A Grand Design Quietly Emerges In Chicago
A key event in the American museum world of the 1980's was the new installation of French 19th-century art in the Art Institute of Chicago.
For the first time in any major American museum, paintings, drawings and prints were integrated in a single continuous and permanent display.
Whereas the three of them had formerly been segregated in traditional style, the visitor to Chicago could move from one to the other, easily and on the instant, throughout the tour.
Not only did great pleasure result, but the daily audience for the drawings and prints in question was increased many times over.
Something of the same kind has now been attempted at the Art Institute of Chicago in respect of the first half of our own century.
Since 1987, Charles E. Stuckey has been the institute's curator of 20th-century art, and he was given a free hand to integrate paintings, drawings, sculptures, prints, photographs and illustrated books as seemed to him best.


POSTINGS: Tax Sale; Suffolk Properties Going on the Block
At a time when real estate auctions have become common among financially squeezed developers and lending institutions that have taken over homes in foreclosures, the one scheduled for Tuesday by Suffolk County is unusual.
In what can be viewed as another reminder of the dismal Long Island economy, it will offer a wide selection of properties that have been seized for nonpayment of taxes.
It will also offer the last opportunity for investors to participate, at least in the purchase of homes sold at auction by Suffolk County.
That is because of a new county law, which takes effect in January, requiring any home sold by the county in a tax auction to be owner-occupied for at least five years.


HOME CLINIC HDF&gt;hHED,30p,,2; Overcoming Problems Common With Plaster
PLASTER is harder, smoother and resists wear better than wallboard, but cracking and loosening are common problems, especially in older buildings.
Minor and some moderate damages are usually easy to repair; most major damage usually is best left to professional plasterers.
If you suspect moisture as a cause of damage (crumbling and discoloration are signs), cure the condition before making repairs; otherwise, deterioration will likely continue.


Laughs and Learning Optional: A Revised Letter of Intent
ADMITTEDLY, the Lipsyte Jocks-Only College Contract Supplement (L-JOCCS) is not for everyone.
But for those of you willing to be as tough at the negotiating table as on the playing field, these amendments to a varsity deal can make the difference between a typically exploited and insecure career in the college-based minor leagues and a career in which the athlete-scholar can relax, clock his minutes, maybe even snag some laughs and learning.
While L-JOCCS is being made available free to all, it is specifically directed at those high school youngsters who this month will be writing the letters of intent that will bind them to the so-called revenue-producing sport of men's basketball at the name-brand colleges which don't pay taxes on most of their athletic department profits.


Panel Says Breast Implants Are Safe Enough for Now
TECHNICALLY speaking, they are mammary glands.
But few people speak of a woman's breasts in such a clinical way.
And so it was when the Food and Drug Administration held hearings last week on whether to continue to allow breasts to be replaced or enhanced with silicone implants, a process that has been used with, and for, varying effects for 30 years.


Stamps
Undercover in War
Postal historians often have to be amateur detectives.
One area in which there is still a lot of sleuthing to be done concerns how mail was moved between countries at war from 1939 to 1945.


The Executive Life; A Little Light Magic Gets the Word Out
Relocating offices is never easy and a slumping economy makes it even worse.
That's why, when a big insurance company decided to relocate 300 executives from New York to Hartford earlier this year, it hired Bill Herz to help.
Mr.
Herz didn't provide psychological counseling for executives afraid of the transition or professional guidance for their spouses.
No.
He did tricks.
Magic tricks.
And now the company does not even want him to mention its name because if shareholders were to find out, they might consider it frivolous in light of further bad news it plans to announce soon.
But magic, according to Mr.
Herz, serves a purpose.
Although it may not make executives want to move, he said, "it cushions the blow."


Corrections
A chart last Sunday with an article about the poinsettia whitefly described its arrival in California incompletely.
The whitefly has been in the state since the late 1920's or early 1930's; the poinsettia strain arrived in the mid-1980's and became a problem for agriculture about a year ago.


Let's Reward Investments That Aid Economy; To Boost Spending
To the Editor:
The most recent increase in the unemployment rate to 6.8 percent is, almost literally, the tip of the iceberg.
Our economy is cold and threatens to get colder.
The chilling fact is that layoffs continue, even by strong, profitable companies and states and municipalities that must balance their budgets.
Add to this the hundreds of thousands of Persian Gulf war veterans who will displace their substitute workers or be added directly to the ranks of the unemployed.


CAMPUS LIFE: Dartmouth; These Athletes Get Up on Tiptoes Before the Games
For intercollegiate athletes, grace and balance on the playing field do not always come naturally.
Members of Dartmouth College's sports teams say they may have found a good way of improving their skills in the most unlikely of places -- the ballet studio.
"Dance for Team Athletes" has quickly become the most popular class among student athletes on campus.


Jets' Essensa Too Tough For Devils
The Winnipeg Jets had won only once in eight tries in the State of New Jersey before today, but they doubled their total with a 1-0 triumph over the Devils at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Devils played well enough to deserve a better fate, but they were repeatedly thwarted by Bob Essensa, who faced 40 shots on goal to keep his record against the Devils unblemished in four career decisions.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The center panels on the wood front door of my 22-year-old house have developed hairline cracks that are up to eight inches long and actually large enough to permit daylight to be seen through them.
I have tried filling these cracks with wood filler and paint, but nothing has lasted very long.
What can I do to repair the door, short of replacing it?
A.
There is no way I know to effectively fill in or patch such cracks in a thin panel.
The only way to "repair" these cracks is to cover the panel.
You can do this by gluing a thin panel of new plywood over the old panel, or by covering the panel with reinforced fiberglass cloth (fiberglass and resin).
In each case, it will be necessary to remove all of the old paint first to get the glue or resin to adhere.
Incidentally, if you cover one panel, you may have to cover the others so that all will look the same.


Duke Items Are Found
Several stolen items of memorabilia from Duke's 1991 N.C.A.A. basketball championship were recovered today on the campus of North Carolina, Duke's archrival.
The trophies and memorabilia were found aligned around the Old Well, a central landmark on the North Carolina campus, early this morning, Duke's public safety office said.
They were taken from a trophy case at Cameron Indoor Stadium early Friday.


Giants and Cowboys Set to Pull Out Fanciest Defenses
The Dallas Cowboys have the weapons to roll up good yardage when they meet the Giants on Sunday in Giants Stadium.
The Giants know they have the weapons to do the same.
So the game may go to the team that creates big plays on defense.
Seven weeks ago, when the Cowboys scored a 21-16 victory over the Giants in Texas Stadium, three turnovers wrecked the Giants.


On the Road


SALVADORAN ARMY MOVES INSIDE ZONE
The army continued large troop movements in guerrilla-dominated zones of El Salvador today as a rebel-decreed truce went into effect, but no fighting or other significant contact was reported.
About 40 soldiers from the elite Atlacatl Battalion were seen marching out of the area on the north side of Guazapa volcano, a traditional rebel zone, this morning, and farmers along the road said at least 600 soldiers had moved into Guazapa since Wednesday.
They said supplies had been brought in for the troops on Friday and that most had then begun to make their way into the low, overgrown foothills around the volcano.


Action On and Off the Slopes
SKI resorts around the country have become more enterprising than ever, improving their areas and services and offering deals in the face of recession and a dip in the number of skiers.
According to a survey done for the United Ski Industries Association, there were 46.7 million skier visits last winter compared with more than 50 million in 1989-90 and 53.3 million in 1988-89.
Ski classes are becoming more scientific with a new crop of names.
Sunday River, Me., for example, offers instruction called the Perfect Turn; Steamboat, Colo., has the Billy Kidd Center for Performance Skiing; and in Vermont, Mount Snow beckons with EXCL, standing for express customized learning, while Bolton Valley teaches the Effortless Turning Concept.


STILL SAILING THE LEMONADE SEA
If the United States is "wonderfully compatible" with socialism, as Paul Berman asserts in his article "Still Sailing the Lemonade Sea" (Oct. 27), then we had better think of another alternative, and fast.
Berman touts the American public-university system as a "fine example of socialized wealth if there ever was one" at a time when this system increasingly bows to the demands of capitalism.
As a graduate student in one of those public universities, I am faced with the prospect of a 100 percent increase in my tuition next year.
All across the nation, public universities that were once free have begun to raise tuitions.
Education is no longer, if it ever was, "open to almost everybody who can qualify." ELLIOTT YOUNG
Austin, Tex.


Data Update
INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Oct.
Sept.
Oct. 90
Rents
171.8
-0.2
+5.1
Homeowner's costs
171.9
-0.2
+3.4
Fuel and utilities
103.6
-2.0
-1.2
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson,
*4*Middlesex, Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.92
8.97
10.32
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.58
6.69
8.22
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.81
8.84
10.13
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.51
6.56
7.95
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.81
8.85
10.20
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.48
6.61
8.11
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.05
9.17
10.52
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.07
7.15
8.47
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
5.00
5.15
7.35
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.93
8.93
9.70
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Nina Marache Weds David King Jr.
Nancie Nina Marache and David Griffith King Jr., real-estate executives in New York, were married yesterday in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
John W. Bishop officiated at Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
King, who is 34 years old and is known as Nina, is a vice president of the Mitsubishi Trust and Banking Corporation.
She graduated from Yale University and has an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert W. Marache Jr. of Greenwich.
Her father is a first vice president of Janney Montgomery Scott Inc., a New York stockbrokerage.


Beyond the Pie: Giving Pumpkin a Second Chance
THANKSGIVING is almost here, so it is time for the annual pumpkin pie.
And because pie is the only form in which many Americans eat pumpkin at all, the seasonings traditionally used for pumpkin pie have become permanently linked to the vegetable itself.
Whether pumpkin is used to prepare a pie or some other baked item, it is inevitably flavored primarily with ground ginger and also with a good dose of nutmeg, mace and cinnamon.
These are the spices the English and the New England colonists used with pumpkin, spices that were essential in everyday cooking at that time.
They could successfully disguise off flavors in food that was not refrigerated and may have been less than fit to eat.
The quest for spices was a major factor in bringing European settlers to the shores of this continent in the first place.


Technologists Sniffing for Food Trends
ON a recent morning in Mineola, inside the Comax Flavor Laboratory, David Straus and his assistant, Paul Calabretta, dressed in white laboratory coats, mixed a few grams of vanilla extract, a trace of St.
John's bread, several grams of fenugreek and oak chips to make a 100-gram sample of "natural" vanilla flavor.
They sniffed each of the ingredients before adding them to the flask, and then sniffed the mixture.
And sniffed it again.


Volunteers Join in Neighborhood Cleanup


Selling Museums, Without Stunts
To the Editor:
In "The Art of P.R., and Vice Versa"  [ Oct. 27 ] , Paul Taylor wrote that major public relations firms, including Ruder Finn, are now undertaking public relations programs for individual artists.
Our company has a policy of not representing individual artists or dealers.
Ruder Finn's subsidiary, Arts and Communications Counselors, which was founded more than 30 years ago, works with cultural institutions on marketing and with corporations on their sponsorship of the arts.


Jesuits vs. Indians, With No Villains
"Black Robe" might be called, without a hint of disrespect, a priest-and-Indians movie.
Bruce Beresford's film, about a French Jesuit missionary in 17th-century Canada, is filled with the kind of action and intensity found in old westerns.
As a young priest named Laforgue makes his way from Quebec to a distant Huron Indian mission, he is aided by friendly Algonquins, abducted and tortured by Iroquois, mocked by a dwarf shaman with bright yellow paint on his face and lost in a visually magnificent and deadly cold forest.
But because this is a 1990's film, the Frenchman comes to question the righteousness of his own culture, and that is where the true, unusual power of "Black Robe" lies.
Adapted by Brian Moore from his novel, the film evenhandedly depicts the integrity of the Indians and the sincerity of the Jesuits.
In an era of Columbus bashing, it criticizes cultural imperialism without creating villains; it is as politically correct as "Dances With Wolves," but its hero does not experience a simple-minded conversion to Indian ways, as if he had been bumped on the head.
There is much wrongheaded behavior in "Black Robe," but no evil intentions, which makes the cultural tug of war it depicts sadder and more lucid than it usually is on screen.


Short in the Saddle


W.T.A.'s Tour Plan Sparks a Family Feud
Women's tennis likes to portray itself as a cozy family of loyal players, promoters and sponsors, but on the eve of the year-ending $3 million Virginia Slims Championships, a family feud is escalating.
It has been a week since Gerry Smith, the head of the Women's Tennis Association, disclosed the W.T.A.'s interest in changing its relationship with the establishment that has run women's tennis for the last two decades in order to upgrade the tour's image and marketing by 1993.
Opponents say this so-called coup seems on the verge of self-destruction.


Jill Strassner Weds H. I. Verschleiser
Jill Ilene Strassner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Strassner of New York, was married yesterday evening to Harold Seth Verschleiser, a son of Elaine Strum of New York and the late Jack Verschleiser.
Rabbi Shlomo Riskin officiated at the Marriott Financial Center in New York.
Mrs.
Verschleiser, 25 years old, is the director of the Greater New York Region for the American Friends of Tel Aviv University in New York.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is the executive vice president and director of development for Rose Associates, a real-estate concern in New York.


Flawed Novel, Flawed Film
To the Editor:
Caryn James's essay on the lifeless turkey "Billy Bathgate"  [ "A Hole in the Heart of 'Bathgate,' " Nov. 3 ]  was thoughtful and illuminating.
But in lauding E. L. Doctorow's eloquent and atmospheric novel, she fails to mention, as almost all critics have failed to mention, the essential flaw of the novel itself.


The Boss: Underworked and Overpaid?
IN SEARCH OF EXCESS
The Overcompensation of American Executives.
By Graef S. Crystal. 272 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


O'Rourke Says He Will Not Resign Before Summer
A BEACON cut through Westchester's hazy political atmosphere last week when County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke provided the long-awaited announcement that President Bush had nominated him to be a Federal judge.
Mr.
O'Rourke had waited nearly a year for that news.
For a brief moment the outline of Mr.
O'Rourke's tenure, and the control of county government, was clear.
He said that it would probably be May before the Senate concluded its confirmation proceedings and that if he were confirmed, it would be another two months before he retired to take up his new job.


SEDUCING THESE MEN
I wish that I could have been included among the advertising agencies wooing the Subaru account.
Perhaps Subaru would have awarded me the prize in its "quest for a single defining idea": "Subaru. A classic collectible car that you wished you had bought in 1992." DORATHY LEWIS BREGER
North Myrtle Beach, S.C.


Why Democrats Won In Supervisor Races
IN a county traditionally dominated by Republicans, this month's local elections have left the Democrats celebrating.
The returns represented the first time in Westchester's political history that Democratic candidates captured more elected offices than their opponents.
Excluding a few races that were still in dispute last week, Democratic leaders counted 69 victories and 43 losses in county races -- from a seat on a town board to positions on the County Board of Legislators.


9 Are Arrested in Drug Ring That Had Youths as Couriers
Nine people have been arrested as part of a drug ring that used children as young as 8 years old to transport cocaine and heroin from New York City to Plainfield, the authorities said today.
Among those arrested late Friday night was a caseworker at the Union County Board of Social Services and a woman who the authorities said was the leader and who employed her five children in the drug enterprise.
They said eight children used in the ring ranged from 8 to 12 years old.


SEDUCING THESE MEN
We at the Weightman Group were very pleased to see, pictured with the Subaru executives on the cover of your magazine, our model of the 1992 Subaru SVX.
This model was, in fact, created by us.
The convertible top opened up to reveal the videotape and booklet used in our presentation, as one of the original 35 agencies contacted by Subaru.


A Thanksgiving Day Parade Preview


Camels (and Thrown Pies) Help to Fill Opera Houses
THE general director of Connecticut Opera, George D. Osborne, will do just about anything to sell tickets.
In September he rode a camel through supermarket parking lots in the Hartford area to plug "Aida." Last year he arranged a real on-stage marriage for "The Marriage of Figaro."
And now, in advance of the performances of Rossini's "Barber of Seville," Thursday through Saturday at the Bushnell in Hartford, Mr.
Osborne has devised a marketing ploy that may send even avowed opera haters running to the box office: a pie hurled at the face of Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. during the first two performances.


L. O. Graham to Marry Ms. Thomas
February wedding plans have been announced for Pamela Alexis Thomas, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Thomas of Detroit, and Lawrence Otis Graham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Graham of White Plains.
Ms.
Thomas, 28 years old, is an associate at McKinsey &amp; Company, the management consulting concern, in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and cum laude from Harvard's law school.
She also has an M.B.A. from Harvard.
Mr.
Graham, 29, is an associate at the New York law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges.
He graduated from Princeton University and received a law degree from Harvard.
He is the author of 11 books, including "A Better Shade of Black: Inside America's Black Upper Class," to be published by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.


Jill Brodsky Has Wedding
Jill Brodsky, an account executive at the Dobbin/Bolgla Associates public relations firm in New York, was married yesterday to Sidney Holt, the managing editor of Rolling Stone magazine.
The Rev.
N.
Clark Holt, father of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at Christ Church in New York.
Mrs.
Holt, 26 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Brodsky of New York.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Her father is a photographer.
Mr.
Holt is 36.
His parents live in St.
Charles, Ill., where his father is the senior minister of Baker Memorial United Methodist Church.


Old Money, New Needs
ONLY A FEW MONTHS AGO, Brooke Astor's cheerful expression would tighten when she was asked about her age.
Now, she boasts, she knows just how she wants to mark her 90th birthday next spring.
The nation's mayors have planned a demonstration in Washington, "and I'm planning to march to protest Federal budget cuts to New York," she says.
Mrs.
Astor also knows what she does not want to do.
City officials had proposed selling tickets to a birthday party at Grand Central Terminal.
"Though the proceeds would be spent on renovating this magnificent structure," she says, "I just can't imagine celebrating my 90th birthday in a place that recently ejected the homeless."


NORIEGA IS LINKED TO DRUG FLIGHTS
In testimony that for the first time directly links Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega to the export of drugs to the United States, a Panamanian diplomat and airline owner said this week that he and the ousted military strongman of Panama shipped tons of cocaine to Florida as part of a lucrative business arrangement with the Medellin cartel.
The diplomat, Ricardo Bilonick, an American-educated lawyer who in August surrendered to Federal authorities and pleaded guilty to drug trafficking charges, said he and leaders of the Colombian ring jointly bought a small airline called Inair, which was used to fly cocaine shipments of 1,000 pounds or more from an airport in the Panamanian capital to Florida.


He Hides China's Future Behind His Own Mask
FOR many of China's leaders, every day is theater.
They are masters of a political dance in which they adorn themselves with masks -- sometimes layers of them -- to conform to the fashions prevailing among the handful of octogenarians who hold ultimate power in China.
Jiang Zemin, a rotund engineer with owlish spectacles who has been designated to be the third paramount leader of Communist China -- after Mao Zedong and the current leader, Deng Xiaoping -- has proven himself one of the greatest masters of the mask dance in modern Chinese history.
Two and a half years ago, he was appointed Communist Party General Secretary, following the Tiananmen Square crackdown of June 1989; but it still is unclear what his true opinions are, or even if he has any.


Fearing AIDS, Users of Heroin Shift to Inhaling Drug
Finally responding to the terror of AIDS, thousands of people who use heroin are turning away from the old practice of injecting the drug with a hypodermic needle and are simply inhaling the crystalline powder the way many people take cocaine.
In New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, the region in which about half of the nation's heroin addicts live, at least one of three addicts entering drug rehabilitation for heroin use report that they have been snorting, or sniffing, the drug to avoid contracting the disease, experts say.
These experts add that in some clinics as many as 80 percent of the addicts report that they have been shunning needles.
The shift is also taking place in several other states, including California, researchers and drug experts say.


TV M.D.'s; 'And Now, a Word From Our Doctor'
To the Editor:
Your article on TV doctors  [ "Doctor, Doctor, Give Us the News," Oct. 27 ]  missed one point.
Dr.
Dean Edell, Dr.
Red Duke and the network reporters are, I am confident, on the level.
But at many local TV stations, so-called health reporters are merely shills for medical advertisers.


Sunquam Parents Still Awaiting Explanation
The result of such unchecked power of all school boards and their ability touse a "cookies and cake" organization such as the P.T.A. can have devastating consequences on both children and parents in any community.
As a result of the arbitrary nature of their decisions, the Half Hollow Hills School District has already divided the community of Dix Hills against the Melville-Farmingdale community.


Bridge
For many years the memory of two great New York players, Harold A. Ogust and Howard Schenken, was kept alive by an annual event at the Cavendish Club.
The Cavendish is no more, but the Ogust-Schenken contest continues: it was staged eight days ago by the League Card Association at 4 East 80th Street in Manhattan, and the event was computer-scored by multiple imp comparisons.
The winners were Jim Sampson of Manhattan, a computer programmer who won the 1990 Goldman Pairs, and Gene Saxe of Old Greenwich, Conn., a personnel consultant.
They led after the first session and held on in the second, thanks largely to the diagramed deal.
Saxe announced that his victory was in honor of the 88th birthday of his grandmother Nita Little of Islip, L.I., an experienced life master now seldom able to play.


Sunquam Parents Still Awaiting Explanation
The result of such unchecked power of all school boards and their ability touse a "cookies and cake" organization such as the P.T.A. can have devastating consequences on both children and parents in any community.
As a result of the arbitrary nature of their decisions, the Half Hollow Hills School District has already divided the community of Dix Hills against the Melville-Farmingdale community.


March Bridal For Lisa Fallick
March wedding plans have been announced for Lisa Adrienne Fallick, a banking officer at Lloyds Bank in New York, and James Simon Hirsch, a reporter in Pittsburgh for The Wall Street Journal.
Ms.
Fallick, 27 years old, is the daughter of Dr.
Martin L. Fallick of Sunnyvale, Calif., a chiropractor there, and Marilyn Freitag of Vienna, Va., a supervisor for Mobil Oil's Mobil Sales and Supply Corporation in Fairfax, Va.
The prospective bride's stepfather was the late John M. Freitag.
Her stepmother is Judith R. Fallick.
Mr.
Hirsch, 29, is a son of Gloria and Edward Hirsch of St.
Louis, owners of Hirsch Communications, a public relations and marketing concern there.


Editorial Notebook; Berlin's Denkmal War
Paint it purple.
Let vines grow on it.
Put it in quarantine by storing it in a museum.
Or tilt it sideways, thus mocking its purpose.
These were among the imaginative ideas advanced in the great German debate about the 60-foot statue of Lenin in eastern Berlin, an argument now settled by a court decision ordering its removal.
Unresolved is a harder question for Berliners: What other reminders of their past should be kept, or thrown away?


Puzzlements and Arcana (Part II)
THE flood continues to trickle in, a letter here, a letter there.
They are replies to the column two weeks ago that chortled at my friend, an unmechanical but otherwise savvy psychologist, who thought his car was driven by only one of its four wheels.
The column offered a glossary of fairly common automotive stuff that tends to be misunderstood.
It came complete with a caveat about its general incompleteness, and it suggested that puzzlements or comments would be welcomed here at 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Design; Trimming the Table
IT'S TIME TO START POLISHING THE SILVER, counting the good napkins and taking stock of the serving pieces.
As the holidays approach, so does the urge to have a well-set table.
"People are more display-oriented than ever," says Stephen Werther, owner of Portico, a SoHo home-furnishings shop.
"We seem to sell more individual serving pieces than entire sets of china." While standard silver plate is still in demand, pieces with distressed finishes are being sought after, too.
In fact, it's become popular to mix dull finishes, like copper or bronze, with brighter finishes, like gold leaf and silver.
William Meyer, co-owner of William-Wayne &amp; Company, another Manhattan shop, notes the growing interest in heirloom-quality pieces, whether they're old or not.
"If it looks like it's been in the family for a long time," Meyer says, "it sells."


Being Female and Jewish
To the Editor:
In her review of "Deborah, Golda and Me: Being Female and Jewish in America" by Letty Cottin Pogrebin (Oct. 20), Lore Dickstein writes that in Orthodox Judaism "men have 613 religious obligations; women, only 3."


Rutgers Beats Temple for a Winning Season
Tom Tarver threw for a career-high 311 yards and 3 touchdowns today to lead Rutgers to a 41-0 victory over Temple and give the Scarlet Knights their first winning season in four years.
The victory snapped a four-game losing streak and enabled the Scarlet Knights to finish with a 6-5 record, their first winning season since going 6-5 in 1987.
Temple lost its third consecutive game and fell to 2-8.


Yugoslav Army Hoists Flag at Croatian City
Federal forces hoisted Yugoslav flags today over a key part of the defense around the besieged city of Vukovar, dealing a stinging blow to the Croatian republic as the latest cease-fire deadline passed.
The fall of Borovo Naselje, a village just north of Vukovar on the Danube River, and the fighting in Vukovar appeared to doom the truce agreement.
A dozen previous cease-fire accords have also failed.


SEDUCING THESE MEN
Now that Randall Rothenberg has given Subaru all that free press, let me say that Subaru's sales problems don't stem from lack of profile, but from lack of performance.
Our Subarus (we had a used one and a new one) both collapsed at about 80,000 miles.
During hours spent waiting at dealerships around the country, I discovered that our experience was not unique.
Subaru will need more than clever ads if it wants folks to think of it as the "Levi's jeans of the automobile market." Because if Levi's fell apart the way our Subarus did, no marketing or advertising could keep them where they are today.
JILL BRODY
Providence, R.I.


Exploring New Dimensions in Realm of the Coin
IT's not the money itself that we care about, it's what the money buys, right?
Surely our national primal urge is the ever greater accumulation and expenditure of cold cash, not the actual currency, the transaction tools, the symbols?
Maybe, but an exhibition at Hofstra University's Emily Lowe Gallery in Hempstead of the work of 25 artists discloses dimensions of legal tender that, while sometimes predictable, provoke new slants on a familiar subject.
"The Realm of the Coin: Money in Contemporary Art," which runs through Dec. 13, proves once again that, to truly know a culture, one has to examine its art and see what its visionary painters and sculptors, in whatever medium, are saying.
In these recessionary times, some of the works at Hofstra appear to be telling us things about ourselves and our values that are less than exemplary.
A number of them have turned eerily prophetic.


A la Carte: Preparing For a New Restaurant
THE North Street Grill in Great Neckis scheduled to open this month.
Remodeling of the building at 661 Northern Boulevard, previously occupied by another restaurant, Maude Craig's, is apparent from the street, but opening a major restaurant on Long Island is a huge undertaking that involves much more than workers and contractors.
The North Street Grill is a perfect example of such behind-the-scenes activity.
The project has included trips to Italy and the California wine country, the hiring of a New York chef for the Coyote Grill in Island Park and some significant menu changes there.


AMC, Where the Movie Never Ends
Whatever winter may have up its overcoat sleeve for Adrian Bryan-Brown, it's unlikely that his life will be changed as much as it was during the last three seasons.
In the spring he got married.
In the summer he got AMC.
In the fall he got hooked on the early films of Yvonne De Carlo.
Things, an elated Mr.
Bryan-Brown was saying the other day, have never been the same.
AMC -- American Movie Classics -- came to Manhattan, part of the island anyway, last July.
To hear Manhattan's die-hard movie fans tell it, life may never be the same for them, either.


Abby Zuckerman to Marry in April
Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Zuckerman of Cedarhurst, L.I., have announced April wedding plans for their daughter, Abby Sue Zuckerman, and Dr.
Steven Gregg Wallach, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald Wallach of Merrick, L.I.
Miss Zuckerman, 25 years old, is the senior special-events publicity agent at Showtime Networks, and Dr.
Wallach, 27, is a resident in general surgery at the Albert Einstein Medical Center, both in New York.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin at Madison.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania magna cum laude, and received his M.D. degree from New York University.


Should Women Really Be Timid Victims?
I read with great the article on Stephen Scaring, the defense attorney for the three St.
John's students accused of sodomizing a female classmate. ("About Long Island," Sept. 22).
I was particularly struck with his comment that when he questioned the alleged vicitm, he knew that he had won the case because she was so aggressive and "lashed out."
It is a sad commentary on the "blame the victim" mentality that aggressiveness is not to be desired women.
Evidently in our culture, a female victim need always be humble, keep her eyes downcast, be quiet, timid, and never never act angry at the violation done to her body.
If the victim had been a man, anger and aggressiveness would be considered an appropriate and valued response.
Judith M. McEvoy Melville


Cuttings; Indoor Compost Supplied by Pet Worms
The perfect urban pet is not the dog or the cat, but the lowly worm.
Dogs grow fat and gloomy if not walked; housebound cats use inelegant litter boxes.
But the common red worm, which gets its only exercise eating your kitchen scraps, is perfectly suited to city life.
Worms are quiet creatures that don't go off their feed, staring mournfully at the food dish, hinting for premium canned goodies.
All they ask is a regular supply of lettuce and carrot tops and such and a little dark box in which to live.
Best of all, they turn kitchen waste, anything from potato skins to crushed eggshells, into rich soil.


Finally, Snow At Tahoe Resorts
An abrupt but welcome early storm at Lake Tahoe region of California late last month brought 36 inches of snow in some areas and caused several resorts, including Boreal Ridge, Mammoth, Kirkwood and Squaw Valley to open the earliest they have in a decade.
The snow came after a five-year drought that vastly reduced the natural snow pack for the ski resorts.
Peter Bansen, the director of communications for Squaw Valley USA, said that because there was no snowfall last January or February, a condition that occurs only about every 75 years, "northern California skiing really bottomed out." Squaw Valley had enough snow to open the upper part of the mountain on Nov. 2.


Angola Reuniting Families Sundered by War
Isabel Cassindo never dreamed that she would see any of her family again.
But recently, the unimaginable became a reality.
"I could not believe it was him," she said when reunited with her cousin, Luiz Alfredo, separated from her for 12 years during the civil war.
"After all these years, I thought he was dead."


Corrections
A picture caption on Oct. 27 about the Custer Battlefield National Monument in Montana referred incompletely to a grave marker bearing the name of Gen.
George A. Custer.
Custer was buried at the battlefield, but his body was later reinterred at West Point, N.Y.


James Caan Rises From the Ashes of His Career
James Caan glances around the dimly lit living room of the big rustic home in Bel Air that he has just sold.
The actor built the house years ago at the peak of his career; it is a movie star's home, richly paneled and filled with leather furniture and cluttered with Western-style paintings and reproductions of Remington statues.
One of the actor's former wives said something unprintable about the masculine nature of this place.
"It's the one funny thing she ever said," Mr.
Caan remarks with a laugh.
Giving up the house and its often vivid, painful memories and trying again to accommodate his new family is, for Mr.
Caan, a metaphor for renewing himself.
At 51, he is at an age when most movie actors find it virtually impossible to revive their careers.
But Mr.
Caan, whose personal and professional life crumbled in the 1980's, who virtually disappeared from the screen, has suddenly returned to the Hollywood mainstream, held in the same regard as his actor friends Al Pacino and Dustin Hoffman and Robert Duvall.


Tech Notes; The Latchkey Cats
Cats are known for their unpredictable hours, and the owner of a headstrong feline might find it desirable to install a separate pet entrance.
The problem, however, is that a pet door also opens a home to other furry guests, from inquisitive racoons to passing strays.
The solution? Give kitty a key.


Corrections
The Travel Watch listing of air fares on page 21 of the Travel section today includes an outdated reference to Midway Airlines and its Atlanta-Chicago route.
After the section went to press, Midway Airlines announced that it had ceased operations.


Kelly Howard and T. A. Keyes Wed
Kelley Sue Howard, a graphic designer, and Theodore Arnold Keyes, a lawyer, were married last night by Rabbi Shira Stern at the Hotel Westbury in New York.
Mrs.
Keyes, 25 years old, works in marketing at Life magazine in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University, as did her husband.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Howard of New York.
Her father is the president and chief executive of HTC Commodity Inc., an importer of nuts and dried fruit in Cranford, N.J.
Her mother, Enid S. Howard, is a member of the domestic assembly of the UJA-Federation of New York.


Outlook for Campaign Reform: Continued Cloudy
THOUGH largely symbolic, steps have been taken on Capitol Hill recently to silence the public outcry over an imperial Congress.
Lawmakers doubled the price of haircuts at the House Barber Shop to $10.
They shut down the House bank after disclosures that it was covering members' bounced checks.
They scuttled, at least for now, plans for a $71 million Capitol visitors center, saying it was too extravagant.
And last week a package of long dormant campaign-finance reform proposals began moving toward enactment.
House Democratic leaders are rallying behind a proposal, scheduled to be considered by the full House before Thanksgiving, that would set a voluntary limit of $600,000 on each House candidate's spending for primary and general elections.
Candidates who abided by the limits would be eligible for up to $200,000 in subsidies from public funds.


Streetscapes: The IRT Generating Plant on 59th Street; The Power of Design Vs. Con Ed Power
TO some, it's a question of preserving the power of architecture.
But to Consolidated Edison, which owns the IRT power plant at 59th Street and 11th Avenue, it's a question of preserving power itself.
For the second time, the Landmarks Preservation Commission has proposed designating the subway-power generating station, built in 1904, and for the second time Con Edison has objected.


Agents Group Warns of Scams On '900' Calls
Consumers should be wary of postcards with 900 numbers offering free travel, according to the American Society of Travel Agents.
Typically, a consumer will receive a postcard saying that he or she has won a free trip and should call a 900 number to claim it.
When travelers call, they are told that the free travel offered on the postcard is in fact complimentary hotel lodging.
To take advantage of it, the caller must purchase a round-trip plane ticket at full coach fare.
Callers can find themselves spending as much as $30 in phone charges on expensive 900 numbers in exchange for a brochure or a travel voucher.
The travel agents group advises the public to look for the following telltale signs: the travel operator refuses to give the caller a hotel confirmation number or the name of the hotel; the caller is told to pay upfront and allow 60 to 90 days for processing.


Rypien Shies From Spotlight of a Golden Opportunity
Mark Rypien brought plenty of Spokane, Wash., with him to the nation's capital, especially that middle-class, do-good, bite-your-tounge, shy-from-the-limelight style that he says colors his every function in quarterbacking the Washington Redskins.
The rap on Rypien is that he drives the bus but insists on doing so from the very last seat.


Making a Difference; Argentina's Mr. Fix-It
Last week, the President of Argentina, Carlos Saul Menem, arrived in the United States for a whirlwind tour to drum up much needed investments and loans.
But as he made the rounds in Houston, Washington, New York and Miami, many business people were carefully studying another member of the entourage: Economy Minister Domingo F. Cavallo, the architect of Argentina's stabilization program, which is fast becoming the envy of other Latin governments.
Mr.
Cavallo's formula is little more than orthodox economics: prohibit the central bank from printing money unless it is backed by dollar or gold reserves; force Argentines to pay taxes; require a balanced budget monthly; lower tariffs; lay off Government workers; sell off bankrupt Government companies and eliminate almost all Government control of business.


'Unserviced Zones'
To the Editor:
A new concept called "unserviced zone" must be created to accommodate the justifiable demands of condominium unit owners who are victims of discrimination in being deprived of customary municipal services.
"Unserviced zones" delineates those areas that do not receive such accepted municipal services as street maintenance, street lighting, snow removal and trash removal.
"Unserviced zones" are comparable to "free-trade zones" where desirable businesses are accommodated with lowered assessments and taxes and other municipal benefits.


AROUND THE NATION
Worth Noting WISCONSIN (4-6, 1-6) defeated MINNESOTA (2-8, 1-6), 19-16, at Minneapolis: Whew!
The Badgers had been doing it the hard way in the Big Ten for 19 consecutive games, losing all of them.
The Gophers proved an antidote but Wisconsin did it the hard way.
Rich Thompson won it on a field goal in the fourth, but just before that he missed a 47-yarder.
A Gopher ran into him, however, and Thompson, after a penalty, made his second -- a 42-yarder.
Minnesota's only consolation: By scoring 16 points, the Gophers bettered their season average of 9.6.


Nancy H. Citrin, A Banker, Wed
Nancy Hope Citrin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold L. Citrin of Kings Point, L.I., and Kenneth Gary Lane, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Lane of New York, were married last evening at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York by Rabbi Jerome Davidson.
Mrs.
Lane, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and was until recently a second vice president of Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
Her father is a managing director of Bear Stearns &amp; Company in New York.


Style Makers; Jill Stein, Pillow Designer
It's one thing to have color-coordinated throw pillows, but it isn't too often that they echo the sense of the room.
Jill Stein started the Pillow Patch four years ago to do just that.
Her company is based on the concept that decorative pillows should be used as an artistic complement to the decor, rather than only as an accentuating block of color or a coordinating pattern accent.


Beyond the Pie: Giving Pumpkin a Second Chance
THANKSGIVING is almost here, so it is time for the annual pumpkin pie.
And because pie is the only form in which many Americans eat pumpkin at all, the seasonings traditionally used for pumpkin pie have become permanently linked to the vegetable itself.
Whether pumpkin is used to prepare a pie or some other baked item, it is inevitably flavored primarily with ground ginger and also with a good dose of nutmeg, mace and cinnamon.
These are the spices the English and the New England colonists used with pumpkin, spices that were essential in everyday cooking at that time.
They could successfully disguise off flavors in food that was not refrigerated and may have been less than fit to eat.
The quest for spices was a major factor in bringing European settlers to the shores of this continent in the first place.


Are the Mets Waving $28 Million at Bonilla?
The Mets let Darryl Strawberry escape from New York last November, perhaps intentionally, but they have every intention of trying to lure Bobby Bonilla home.
They may be so determined to achieve their goal that they will offer Bonilla $28 million for five years.
It isn't known if the Mets will make that offer to baseball's No. 1 free agent in their meeting scheduled for today.
But word that has emerged from a circle of baseball people close to the Mets is that General Manager Al Harazin has decided to try to secure Bonilla's services with the staggering offer of $5.6 million a year.


Evenings of Song and Dance
THURSDAY -- Margaret Thatcher was the guest of honor at a benefit dinner for United Cerebral Palsy of New York City at the New York Hilton and received the group's Humanitarian Award.
WEDNESDAY -- The Advertising Council celebrated its 50th anniversary at the Waldorf-Astoria and presented its 38th Public Service Award to Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, publisher of The New York Times.
The council creates public-service messages, one of its first, in World War II, being "Loose Lips Sink Ships."


Out of Africa: New Chic
Stephen DiGeronimo, a former design assistant at Michael Kors, Perry Ellis and Calvin Klein, showed his first spring collection last week in a small loft on Greene Street.
Mr.
DiGeronimo's inspiration was Africa, particularly the Masai tribe of Kenya, which has steadfastly resisted the trappings of Western culture.
The program notes for his show quoted from "Out of Africa" by Isak Dinesen: the Masai "have, to the utmost extent, that particular form of intelligence which we call chic; daring and wildly fantastical as they seem, they are still unswervingly true to their own nature."


World Markets; Finland Startles Its Investors
The Government of Finland suddenly let its currency float for one day last week.
It was a jarring move that cost high-yield investors millions of dollars and provided a live reminder of the risk in betting that currencies will remain stable, even in the European Monetary System.
Mutual funds investing in short-term debt securities in Finland, which is not in the European Monetary System but had promised currency stability similar to that mandated by the E.M.S., were hurt by the surprise move that let the Finnish currency, the markka, plunge by about 12 percent.


Was the World Made Out of Cheese?
CARLO GINZBURG'S BOOK-LINED apartment overlooks the medieval towers of Bologna and the fortress-thick walls of its university, the oldest in Europe.
Florence lies only an hour away by train, and Venice isn't much farther.
It's hard to imagine a more orthodox setting for a man acclaimed as one of the world's premier historians, with strong expertise in the Italian Renaissance and late Middle Ages.
But ambiance aside, there is nothing conventional about Ginzburg's career or scholarship.
His work ignores the powerful Venetian doges and Florentine princes, as well as the other great patrons responsible for the cultural treasures that draw millions of visitors eager to witness the grandeur of Italy's golden age.
Instead, Ginzburg has fashioned his lofty reputation by pursuing topics that at first glance might seem arcane, occultist, eccentric.
He himself labels his subjects "peripheral phenomena," though he's quick to assert they are as relevant to the course of Western civilization as a biography of Machiavelli or an analysis of Luther's rebellion against the Vatican.


CORRECTION
An article on Nov. 3 about the Fleetwood section of Mount Vernon, N.Y., misidentified the organization that founded Mount Vernon.
It was the Industrial Home Association, No. 1.


Sports of The Times; Title Hopes Hook Wide For Walk-On
SMALLER schools were offering scholarships to Gerry Thomas when he graduated from Niceville High School, but he turned them all down.
He wanted to kick footballs for Florida State because "they have a great program, and I wanted to contribute."
The best way to contribute would be to kick a field goal that would beat the dreaded Hurricanes of Miami, to keep Florida State the first team in the state, the first team in the nation.
That would be the ultimate way to contribute.


Making Government More Accessible
I read with great interest your excellent article "United Way Offers Phone Referrals" (Oct. 13).
I have taken advantage of the services of the United Way Helpline and have found their information services to be very useful.
Now that United Way has established this service -- county government should consider eliminating the county Information Office -- which provides similar services.
It makes no sense for government and the private sector to be providing the same services.


Carol Fogarty Is Wed on L.I.
Carol Elizabeth Fogarty, a corporate planning consultant at Chase Manhattan Bank, and John Scott Roscoe, a financial analyst at Pfizer Inc., both in New York, were married yesterday in Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
John J. Tutone officiated at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Roscoe, 28 years old, graduated from Cornell University and has an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick J. Fogarty of Garden City.
Her father is the senior partner of the law firm of Fogarty &amp; Fogarty in Mineola, L.I.
Her mother, Dorothy Fogarty, is a registered nurse.
Mr.
Roscoe, 28, graduated from Cornell, from which he also received an M.B.A.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis F. Roscoe of Ithaca, N.Y.
His mother, Ann Roscoe, is the executive assistant to the senior vice president of Cornell, wherehis father is the director of campus planning.


POSTINGS: Perth Amboy Renovation; 30 Older Poor Get a Safe Haven
Thirty older poor people are moving into the newly renovated Old Sailors Home in Perth Amboy, N.J., thanks to an unusual public-private partnership.
The residents, who must be at least 55 years old, not medically dependent and earn under $10,000 a year, have incomes too low to qualify for housing created by the state's Mount Laurel decision, which requires municipalities to provide a "fair share" of low- and moderate-income housing.


Suns Release Tucker
Did the Knicks get the better of the Suns in the preseason deal that brought XAVIER MCDANIEL to New York and sent TRENT TUCKER and JERROD MUSTAF to Phoenix with a couple of second-round draft choices?
There is reason to believe the Suns may be beginning to think so.
On Friday they released Tucker, the 31-year-old guard who had played nine mostly productive seasons in New York.
Tucker, who was placed on waivers, had missed the first eight games of the season with a deep thigh bruise and has not played a minute with the Suns.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Merchandise trade, in billions
$-6.8
$-5.8
Wednesday
Housing starts, in millions
1.03
1.03
Thursday
Initial jobless claims, in thousands
454
435
Friday
Budget deficit, in billions
$-6.8
$-6.8
Monday: Senate Banking Committee hearing on renomination of Alan Greenspan Tuesday: Two- and five-year Treasury bond announcement  Wednesday: Bundesbank Council meeting  Thursday: Congress scheduled to adjourn until January  Friday: Report on commercial loan activity  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


BAKER FAILS TO WIN ANY COMMITMENTS IN TALKS IN BEIJING
Two days of talks between Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and China's top leaders have yielded none of the gestures on human rights, arms control and trade sought by Washington as requirements for improved relations with Beijing, a senior American official said today.
Mr.
Baker, making the first public high-level visit to China by an American official since Beijing's violent crackdown on democracy advocates in 1989, has one more scheduled meeting with the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, on Sunday.
The American official said Mr.
Baker hoped that at this session the Chinese would be more forthcoming than they had been up to now.
A Last-Ditch Appeal
This evening's briefing by the State Department official seemed at times like a desperate, last-ditch appeal to the Chinese to respond before Mr.
Baker departs with the kind of specific concessions he had anticipated in making the visit, which has already bestowed some much-sought legitimacy on the Chinese leadership.
If Mr.
Baker goes home empty-handed, the Bush Administration is likely to face growing domestic criticism of its China policy and greatly increased pressure in Congress for sanctions against Beijing.


Fiber Optics at Home: Wrong Number?
WHEN the Federal Communications Commission voted last month to encourage telephone companies to carry television programming over their wires, the phone industry was understandably heartened and the cable-television industry, which enjoys a virtual monopoly, was predictably outraged.
The phone companies painted a bright picture of the wonders of fiber optics and the Information Age -- the latest movies available at the flick of a remote control, the Library of Congress via a personal computer and picture phones out of "2001: A Space Odyssey."


Miami Defeats Florida State, 17-16


Carol Schults Wed in Tenafly
Carol Anne Schults, an associate portfolio manager with the Oppenheimer Management Corporation, and Andrew John Mikesh, a senior quality consultant with I.B.M., both in New York, were married yesterday by the Rev.
John P. Croneberger at the Episcopal Church of the Atonement in Tenafly, N.J.
Ms.
Schults, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from American University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John E. Schults of Tenafly.
Her father is an internist in Englewood, N.J.
Mr.
Mikesh, 35, graduated from Cornell University and has a master's degree in computer science from Pace University.
He is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
John A. Mikes of Madison, N.J.
His father recently retired as a senior research fellow with Ciba-Geigy, a pharmaceuticals concern in Summit, N.J.


Haiti's Exiled Chief Seeks to Punish Coup Plotters
Six weeks after a violent army coup ousted his Government, Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, has called for national reconciliation, but says it must begin with the punishment of the officers who overthrew him.
Father Aristide's comments in an interview on Thursday came a day after a mission of the Organization of American States left Haiti with an agreement from legislators to continue efforts to restore constitutional order in the country.


2 Men Held in Bias Attack
Two men were arrested here today after they fired a bullet through a door this morning and shouted racial epithets at a Sayville man, said Suffolk County Detective Sgt.
Robert Edwards.
The men, both white, tried to crash through the front door of a black man's house in Sayville at 6:10 A.M., the police said.
Robert Bogen, 27 years old, of Ronkonkoma, L.I., and Louis Guglielmo, 41, of Sayville, were charged with second-degree attempted murder, first-degree burglary and violation of the civil rights law.
A third man was being sought, Sergeant Edwards said.


Oh, for an Everyday Mother
EXTRAORDINARY PEOPLE
By Paul Gervais. 210 pp. New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $20.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Meadow 170,000
1442 Hemlock Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 40-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $4,600.
Farmingdale 124,000
118 Atlantic Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 5-year-old condominium apartment; dining room, c/a; taxes $3,900, monthly charges $110.
Kings Park 195,000
99 Twin Oak Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $5,100.
Levittown 146,000  48 Swan Lane  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, 1-car garage; taxes $4,600.
Ridge 95,000
106 Gull Dip Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 20-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, patio; taxes $2,500.
Smithtown 166,800
43 Woodland Drive  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, attic, 2-car garage; taxes $4,500.
OTHER AREAS Armonk, N.Y. 420,000
14 Long Pond Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; family room, brick fireplace, eat-in kitchen, deck, 1.6 acres; taxes $6,455.
Middletown, Conn. 119,500
30 Laurel Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old colonial; dining room, fenced-in yard, sun room, 53- by 103-foot lot;taxes $1,403.
Waldwick, N.J. 180,000
16 Mary Lane
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old colonial; sunroom off eat-in-kitchen, fireplace; taxes $3,354.


Despite All the Talk of Tax Cuts, People Can Expect to Pay More
With the economy mired in recession and incumbents running scared, tax cut fever is once again loose on the land.
But recent history offers little reason to believe this latest rush to placate voters will yield enduring tax relief.
A decade after property tax revolts in a dozen states and the across-the- board tax cuts of the Reagan era, the percentage of income that Americans pay in taxes is back to a postwar peak.
Only the very richest, and perhaps the poorest, have remained a step ahead of the tax collector.


INSIDE
Cambodian Genocide Trials?
With the imminent return of Khmer Rouge figures to Cambodia, Prince Norodom Sihanouk said he would support holding genocide trials for Pol Pot and others responsible for more than a million deaths.
Page 18. 13th TB Death in Prison
Another New York inmate died of drug-resistant tuberculosis, and Federal tests confirmed that a single new strain of the disease has spread widely in the prison system.
Page 39.
Dinkins Aides See a Victory
Under fire for their labor policy, city officials hailed an arbitrator's award that gave the police union less than it wanted -- and requires concessions from the union.
Page 38.


On the Trail Again
As the Democrats' Vice Presidential nominee back in 1984, Geraldine A. Ferraro found out quickly just how muddy the campaign trail can be.
It seemed that no sooner had the New York Congresswoman accepted the nomination than investigators began looking into her financial records as a House member and circling around her husband's real estate business (he eventually pleaded guilty to one misdemeanor count of falsifying a document).
Still, Ms.
Ferraro said afterwards that she and her husband would do it all over again.
Last week, Ms.
Ferraro was back in politics, seeking the Democratic nomination to run against Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
Ms.
Ferraro said she was sure that this time around the voters likely to have a lot more on their minds than her husband's past.
"What they're interested in is not my family," she said.
"They're interested in whether their families can make ends meet, whether their families can have health care, whether their children can have an education."


Claire Treves Weds
Claire Ines Treves, a marketing manager in the establishment services division of American Express Travel Related Services Company, and Dr.
Ted Brezel, a dermatologist, both in New York, were married last evening in New York.
Rabbi Irving Block officiated at Brotherhood Synagogue.
The bride, 32 years old, is a graduate of Brown University and has an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gino R. Treves of Princeton, N.J.
Dr.
Brezel, 33, graduated from the University of Rochester and the Downstate Medical Center of the State University of New York.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Brezel of Jericho, L.I.


Foreign Affairs; Infamy Is Still Infamy
As Dec. 7 and the 50th anniversary of the day of infamy approach, Japanese are embracing an infamous explanation to excuse their guilt for World War II.
Japan, so the story goes, did not really launch a sneak attack against Pearl Harbor.
It is an elaborate tale about a diplomatic message so badly mishandled by Japan's Embassy in Washington that the warning of war it contained did not get through until after Japanese aircraft had already loosed their bombs and torpedoes.


Alison Leigh, a Prosecutor, to Wed
Bobbie and Jonathan Leigh of New York and Saltaire, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alison Leigh to Dr.
Michael Stephen Katz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerson Katz of Johannesburg.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Leigh, 33 years old, graduated from Emory University and received a law degree from Syracuse University.
She is an assistant district attorney in Philadelphia.
Her father is a retired president of the Trans World Display Corporation in New York.
Her mother is a freelance magazine writer.
Dr.
Katz, 28, is a fellow in nephrology at the University of Pennsylvania.
He graduated from the University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg and its medical school.
His mother, Beatrice Katz, is a retired pharmacist and his father is a cardio-thoracic surgeon in Johannesberg.


Dana Wallace Is Wed on L.I.
Dana Jill Wallace, the daughter of Mrs.
Stephen Salup of North Hills, L.I., and Fort Lauderdale, Fla., was married last evening to Dr.
Steven Kaplan, the son of Lee and Carolyn Kaplan of Port Washington, L.I.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Great Neck, L.I.
Mrs.
Kaplan teaches history and coaches tennis at Syosset (L.I.) High School.
She graduated from the University of South Florida and received a master's degree in history from Hofstra University.
Her stepfather is a vice president and the general counsel of the Starrett Housing Corporation in New York.
Her grandfather Herb Scharfman of Fort Lauderdale is a Pulitzer Prize-winning photographer.
Dr.
Kaplan is a psychologist in Bay Shore, L.I.
He graduated from Boston University and received a doctorate from Hofstra.
His father is a pharmacist in Great Neck.
His mother, Carolyn Kaplan, is a human resources specialist with her own company in New York.


Mixing Up a Good, Rich Potting -Soil
THIS is about recipes: Not cold-weather sorts for soups and stews but those for soil mixtures.
Time was when the old-fashioned soil recipe -- one-one-one, that is equal parts of loam, sand and leaf mold -- was highly recommended for just about every kind of indoor plant that was grown in a pot.
If cactuses or succulents were to be potted, then the amount of gritty sand was increased a bit.
Or if humus-needing plants, like ferns or African violets, were to be potted, then another portion of humus (leaf mold) was added.
But these ingredients are hard to find now, and gardeners make do with the commercially packaged mixtures, the peat-like soilless mixtures developed by many of the agricultural colleges and favored by many growers.
These mixtures without soil have their pluses: They are lightweight, easy to use and suitable for a wide range of plants.
Most of them contain peat moss as a source of humus and perlite or vermiculite, inert ingredients made of expanded mica that retain moisture and provide some drainage.
Most of these soilless mixtures do not contain any fertilizers, but some do.


CAMPUS LIFE: Hampshire; Students Focus On AIDS Data At 'Sex Event'
More than 300 Hampshire College students packed the school's 250-seat auditorium last week for a four-hour marathon information session about sex, sexuality and sexual activity in the age of AIDS.
Safer sex, sadomasochism, anal sex, date rape, strategies for talking with parents about sex and instructions on the proper use of a condom were just a few of the topics covered in the rapidly moving series of 22 10-minute presentations.
"The Sex Event," as it was billed, was created out of frustration with the limited success of AIDS information programming at Hampshire, said Jill Lewis, associate professor of literature and feminist studies, who coordinates a monthly series of guest lectures and video showings on the AIDS crisis.


Catherine Dana and John Pouschine, Senior Vice Presidents, Are Married
Catherine Dana, a senior vice president of Lehman Brothers in New York, was married yesterday to John Laurence Pouschine, a senior vice president in the New York office of Electra Inc., an investment concern with headquarters in London.
The Rev.
Charles Amstein performed the ceremony at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church.
The couple, both 34 years old, graduated from Princeton University and received M.B.A.'s from Harvard University.
Mrs.
Pouschine is a daughter of Mrs.
Arthur P. Darling of Corning, N.Y., and William H. Dana of Atherton, Calif.
Her father is the general counsel of the Lam Research Corporation, an electronics research company in Fremont, Calif.
Her stepfather, Dr.
Darling, is a retired surgeon.
Mr.
Pouschine, who is the treasurer of the Russian Children's Welfare Society in New York, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ivan Pouschine of Orinda, Calif.
His father is an engineer at Brown &amp; Caldwell in Pleasant Hill, Calif.
The bridegroom's previous marriage ended in divorce.


How Helping Handicapped Helps All
"Parents View With Schools Over Helping Handicapped" (Oct. 6) speaks to an important issue, the real cost of providing as dignified, independent and productive life as possible for our chronically ill citizens.
Applauds and awards have gone for generations to our scientists for introducing new and improved technologies to save and prolong life.
Right-to-life proponents spend millions lobbying their beliefs, but there still exists no comprehensive birth-to-death plan for children who are born or become totally physically or mentally compromised.


Ms. Heller Wed To David Dye
Karen Leah Heller, a reporter and columnist for The Philadelphia Inquirer, was married yesterday to David Record Dye, the program director of WXPN, the radio station of the University of Pennsylvania.
Judge Richard M. Klein of the Philadelphia Court of Common Pleas performed the ceremony at the Wharton Sinkler Estate in Philadelphia.
Ms.
Heller, who is 34 years old and keeping her name, is a daughter of James H. and Barbara S. Heller of Washington.
She graduated from the University of Chicago.
Her father is a partner in the Washington law firm of Kator Scott &amp; Heller.
The bridegroom, 41, is the son of Donald L. and Mary Willa Dye of New Ipswich, N.H.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.
His father retired as director of product standards for the Scott Paper Company in Philadelphia.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 17, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $6.99.) An ice-age trek across Europe.
2
4
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The coming of age of Irish women.
3
10
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
4
3
THE EAGLE HAS FLOWN, by Jack Higgins. (Pocket, $5.99.) A German attempt to rescue a paratrooper who tried to assassinate Churchill.
5
3
HOCUS POCUS, by Kurt Vonnegut. (Berkley, $5.99.) Life in the near future, as noted by a college professor and prison administrator.
6
12
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Tales of late-night horror.
7
3
THE RIFT, by Peter David. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" novel.
8
17
THE MUMMY, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Ramses the Great and Cleopatra return to life.
9
1
SNARE OF SERPENTS, by Victoria Holt. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A Victorian-age Scottish woman flees to Africa to escape a suspicion of murder.
10
21
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
11
5
RENDEZVOUS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $4.99.) A freethinking British woman engaged to an earl has some second thoughts.
12
1
UNIFICATION, by Jeri Taylor. (Pocket, $4.99.) In this "Star Trek" story, the Enterprise crew tries to discover why Spock has made a forbidden trip.
13
1
PALINDROME, by Stuart Woods. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) A battered woman seeks solitude on an island off the coast of Georgia.
14 *
1
ONCE IN A LIFETIME, by Constance O'Day-Flannery. (Zebra, $4.99.) Deserted by her husband of 19 years, a woman is saved by the return of her sweetheart who died 20 years earlier.
15
1
GOING HOME, by Danielle Steel. (Pocket, $5.99.) The difficult love life of a woman in San Francisco and New York; a reprint of a 1973 novel.
16 *
2
POSSESSION, by A. S. Byatt. (Vintage, $12.) A pair of British academics pursue the relationship between two Victorian poets.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
26
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
2
18
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
3
2
A LIFE ON THE ROAD, by Charles Kuralt. (Ivy, $5.99.) The memoirs of the television newscaster.
4
104
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
5 *
419
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
6
19
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
7 *
4
SEXUAL PERSONAE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $15.) Art seen as a pagan battleground between male and female, form and chaos.
8 *
3
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, feel, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
9
34
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspiration.
10
19
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women.
11 *
7
GET TO THE HEART, by Barbara Mandrell with George Vecsey. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of the country-music singer.
12 *
27
WHEN RABBIT HOWLS, by the Troops for Truddi Chase. (Jove, $4.95.) A woman voices the 92 personalities that live within her.
13 *
2
FRIDAY NIGHT LIGHTS, by H. G. Bissinger. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Football in Odessa, Tex.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
7
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
3
UNNATURAL SELECTIONS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Far Side" cartoons.
3
14
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
68
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
5
48
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Market Plunge Is Warning Sign, Cuomo Tells Business Executives
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo told an audience of leading corporate executives today that the stock market plunge on Friday should wake Washington up to the country's deep economic problems.
Speaking to the Fortune 500 Forum, an annual meeting of top executives from the country's largest companies, the Governor added another proposal to a package of economic-growth initiatives he has long endorsed.
In order to provide banks with capital and liquidity, Mr.
Cuomo suggested, the Federal Reserve Bank should invest $20 billion to $25 billion in bank stocks.


Singer on the Sand
"They said all kinds of things about Miami Beach, but if people are vulgar and crazy, I like to know about it," Isaac Bashevis Singer writes in his delightful introduction to MY LOVE AFFAIR WITH MIAMI BEACH (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30), a book of Richard Nagler's evocative color photographs of elderly Jewish residents of the city's South Beach district.
Segments of conversations conducted beginning in 1986 between the photographer and the author, who died this year, serve as a commentary on the photographs.
Singer finds Florida cafeterias that remind him of the Yiddish Writer's Club in Warsaw and hotels that recall different villages in Poland.
He discourses on God, the Bible and the Yiddish language.
Some of Mr.
Nagler's photographs display a similar sense of irony and humor: elderly swimmers gawk at a young topless woman invading their ocean; a woman with different-colored rollers in her hair has eye shadow applied by a makeup artist at the Hollywood Beauty Salon; men in suits carry prayer books across white sand to their temple.
"Photography is important because it takes a minute and makes it an eternity," Singer comments.
"And so goes art, if it's right." This buoyant blend of words and images captures both the idiosyncratic spirit and the deep sadness of these South Beach survivors.
"I met many saints and sinners," Singer says, "and sometimes they were the same person."


Bullets Are Hurting, but Nets Feel Pain
Michael Adams and his Washington Bullet teammates just don't seem to understand.
With six of their top eight players sidelined, the Bullets should be chopped meat for the rest of the National Basketball Association.
Instead, they've dug in and are still playing with the intensity associated with Wes Unseld-coached teams.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
THE TITANIC


Reporter's Notebook; For Dinkins, an Evolving Opinion on South Africa
For Mayor David N. Dinkins, who weighs his every word, finding the right ones to describe his revulsion at the pervasive racial inequities here has been a challenge.
For years, in speeches in New York, he has referred to apartheid as "the only form of legalized slavery in the world." That drew derisive commentary in the white South African press before his arrival because the country has moved to dismantle many of the legal underpinnings of apartheid, although blacks still cannot vote.


In Poland, Hope and Need Confront the Realities of Time
To the Editor:
Re "Why Poland Can't Flinch" (editorial, Oct. 26):


Conference Lauds Anita Hill, Exultantly
In her most extensive public comments since her Senate testimony against Judge Clarence Thomas riveted the nation, Prof.
Anita F. Hill told a cheering, exultant crowd of women here on Friday night that sexual harassment was "a form of violence against women" and "a form of economic coercion" that "will not go away."
Addressing several hundred female state legislators from around the nation, who twirled hundreds of pink napkins and pounded tables for minutes after she entered the room, Professor Hill issued a ringing call to arms against inappropriate sexual behavior in the workplace.


Peacekeeping Force Takes Hold in Liberia
Thousands of Liberians poured into the capital from the countryside today as a West African peacekeeping force began taking control of territory held by a rebel leader.
Under an agreement signed by all factions in the 20-month civil war, all Liberian fighters are to be disarmed within two months.
More than 13,000 people are believed to have died in the war, and hundreds of thousands have fled to neighboring countries.


How Master Lost His Concubine
CELIA: A SLAVE
By Melton A. McLaurin.  148 pp. Athens, Ga.: University of Georgia Press. $19.95.


The Big Picture
To the Sports Editor:
Several things disturbed me about your Nov. 10 coverage of the Magic Johnson story.
The players of the N.B.A. are but a small fraction of the young black men at risk of contracting the AIDS virus through heterosexual contact.
Young black males denied opportunities in this racist society often equate self-esteem with sexual prowess.
Despite fame, money and adoration, many N.B.A. players share this attitude.


Pictures From a Life
A LIFE IN PHOTOGRAPHY
By Rollie McKenna. Illustrated. 279 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $50.


Beyond the Pie: Giving Pumpkin a Second Chance
THANKSGIVING is almost here, so it is time for the annual pumpkin pie.
And because pie is the only form in which many Americans eat pumpkin at all, the seasonings traditionally used for pumpkin pie have become permanently linked to the vegetable itself.
Whether pumpkin is used to prepare a pie or some other baked item, it is inevitably flavored primarily with ground ginger and also with a good dose of nutmeg, mace and cinnamon.
These are the spices the English and the New England colonists used with pumpkin, spices that were essential in everyday cooking at that time.
They could successfully disguise off flavors in food that was not refrigerated and may have been less than fit to eat.
The quest for spices was a major factor in bringing European settlers to the shores of this continent in the first place.


POSTINGS: For Home Repairs; Emergency Loans
Winter can be tough on budget-conscious homeowners trying to keep their properties in good shape.
But this winter low- and moderate- income households have a helping hand in Neighborhood Housing Services of New York.
The private, nonprofit organization is offering low-interest loans of up to $5,500 for emergency repairs, like new furnaces or roofs, to qualified homeowners.
N.H.S. has made loans of this kind before to owners in specific neighborhoods, like Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Now, for the first time, the organization, a consortium of banks, government agencies, community organizations and foundations, is extending the loans to homeowners throughout the city.


Peace-ese
THOUGH I WAS NOT present, and cannot get a definite, on-the-record confirmation from a source inside the room, I am told that at one point in the negotiations leading up to the Madrid conference, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said to a member of the Israeli team about a procedural matter: "This shouldn't cause any
tsoris
."
This epochal understanding of Yiddish angst by a starchy diplomat from Texas augured well for the opening of the face-to-face meetings between Israelis and Arabs.
The word
tsoris
, roughly rhyming with "Boris," is derived from the Hebrew
tsarah
and means "trouble, woe"; it can also mean "worries" or "minor suffering." Emphasis can be provided by adding
gehokteh
, meaning "chopped," as in "chopped liver";
gehokteh tsoris
is "deep trouble," enough to derail talks (and to diplomats, that ain't chopped liver).


Dance Co-op Offers Economic Support as Well as Lessons
THE black- and pink-clad figures stretched and leapt and pointed their toes.
The ballet students worked at the barre and let Sherree Roller, their teacher, position their chins.
In another room, a veteran performer and teacher, Peter Humphrey, led a group of youngsters in jazz dancing.
On this rainy fall afternoon, the studio vibrated with music and movement.
Ms.
Roller and Mr.
Humphrey belong to the Tappan Zee Dance Group, a nonprofit cooperative housed in the United Methodist Church of the Tarrytowns here.
The four-year-old organization serves not only as a dance school but also as a practice space and center of support for its eight teaching members.
By sharing costs, the dancers say, they can keep their art alive in difficult times.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
TEN TALL SOLDIERS.
By Nancy Robison.
Illustrated by Hilary Knight.
Holt. $13.95. (Ages 3 to 8) What has frightened the little roly-poly king is a monstrous image that a clever reader knows immediately is actually his shadow.
The blustery monarch calls for his personal guard, 10 tall soldiers and little Peter, who solves the modest mystery.
Wonderfully whimsical illustrations.


Miami Wins, 17-16, to Capture All the Oranges
At the cruelest moment of Florida State's football year, the Seminoles raised their arms in a premature celebration of the field goal that never was.
The 34-yard attempt of sophomore Gerry Thomas, which would have beaten the Miami Hurricanes, sailed wide of the right upright by the length of the ball with 25 seconds to play today.
Any realistic hope for Florida State's first unofficial national championship sailed with it.
Miami had somehow survived for a 17-16 victory in a game that for most of a perfect, bright afternoon, seemed certain to become a defeat.


A Wary Step Toward Regional Cooperation
A GROUP of countries that together control nearly half the world's economic life met last week, and the world hardly noticed.
But that was partly by design; while the fragmented lands of the Asia-Pacific region organized the meeting to demonstrate a growing new unity of purpose, they also showed how wary they are about bonding themselves together too tightly.
The site was Seoul, where the 15 nations that make up Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation met to add momentum, very carefully, to the two-year-old body.
For the first time, the members -- Japan, China and other East Asian countries, the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand -- agreed to create a permanent secretariat and a budget for 10 modest projects that would promote regional cooperation and growth.


Perspectives: The Benenson Approach; A Sometime Builder at Work in 2 Cities
THE word that Charles B. Benenson gives to current conditions in the real-estate business is "peculiar." By that he means it is difficult to get financing.
He finds it peculiar that development projects he considers sound should have that problem.
"How can we get out of a recession if builders can't build?" he asks.


One for All and All for Freud
THE SECRET RING
Freud's Inner Circle and the Politics of Psychoanalysis.
By Phyllis Grosskurth.
Illustrated. 245 pp.
New York: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $22.95.


Making a Difference; The Birkelund Strategy
When John P. Birkelund joined Dillon, Read &amp; Company in 1981, he found a firm whose star was waning.
After two decades of tumult in the financial world, the old-line investment house had faded from Wall Street's top ranks.
Working with the firm's chairman, Nicholas F. Brady, now the Treasury Secretary, and then as chairman himself, Mr.
Birkelund led a revival of Dillon, Read through the 1980's.
The blunt and forceful investment banker focused on such high-margin businesses as corporate advisory services and venture capital to restore the luster to the Dillon name.


Accommodating Disabled Workers
The Connecticut Q&amp;A article that appeared on Nov. 3 did a grave injustice to America's people with disabilities as well as to the process of enacting and enforcing civil rights..
The implications of the interview with Robert B. Mitchell, a Bridgeport lawyer, would lead one to believe that the Americans With Disabilities Act is a piece of bleeding-heart social programming that threatens to swamp America's employers with burdensome legal and business expenses.
This perspective is as erroneous as are many of the facts Mr.
Mitchell offers to support it.


Robinson Against Ewing A Showcase Matchup
David Robinson plans to get married sometime within the next year.
Don't ask when, or where.
Robinson's wedding plans rank among the biggest secrets in San Antonio.
"Yes, I'm getting married and the wedding is soon," said Robinson, who has been engaged to Valerie Hoggart since the summer.
"It's very exciting. Actually it's going to be pretty small, so we're not that hard-pressed about letting everyone know where it is, and what time it is."


CORRECTION
A report in the Postings column on Nov. 3 about rebuilding Greenwich Locksmiths in the Greenwich Village Historic District described the Landmarks Preservation Commission's vote of approval incorrectly.
It was 6 to 2, with one abstention.


SENATOR POTHOLE
Now that your readers know the reasons Elizabeth Kolbert is not likely to be a supporter of Alfonse D'Amato, let me tell you why I voted, and will vote again, for the Senator.
While Kolbert seems to admire senators who set agendas (which may not coincide with those of voters) and have grand visions that they describe eloquently while collecting solid salaries, I prefer a representative who is not too senatorial to notice that the library needs help or that streets need fixing.


Period Piece


Labor; Where the Contract Negotiations Stand
In his five-year financial plan announced recently, Mayor David N. Dinkins pledged to offer no raises through mid-1994, except to unions that agree to improve productivity.
But the Mayor and his aides are revising that plan to satisfy the objections of the Municipal Assistance Corporation and other fiscal monitors.
A crucial question is whether deeper cuts in the work force are necessary.
The Mayor hopes to persuade the corporation to provide $1 billion in aid to the city.
He is also seeking unspecified union concessions on work rules to reduce the impact on city services that would result from cutting thousands of additional jobs.


The Bleu-Plate Special
THE French do not necessarily eat better than Americans -- the difference lies in that they eat with deep conviction.
In France, food is handled with the care usually reserved for that which is sacred, and meals are conducted like religious rituals -- thoughtfully, respectfully, but especially slowly.
Even at lunch, a sort of culinary pit stop for most Americans, several courses are ceremoniously served, often concluding with both cheese and dessert.
Coffee arrives long after the last dishes are cleared away.
Inevitably, especially on an extended trip, the real American longs, in spite of higher principles, to get a meal over with quickly.
On the road, one begins to wish for the sort of place so common at home, where an entire meal arrives on one plate and coffee is poured even before ordering.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Winter Aconite
Q.
While a student in Michigan, I used to marvel at golden flowers blooming with the winter's first thaw.
They were called winter aconite.
Where might these plants be purchased? -- Fred Rogosch, Rochester
A.
These spring bloomers are truly a marvel.
Unfortunately, some are among the endangered species.
Botanically, their name is Eranthis, Greek for spring flower.
They are tiny members of the buttercup family and one of the earliest flowers to herald winter's end.


Dinkins Gets Boost From Ruling on Police Raises
Dinkins administration officials, under fire for months for their faltering labor policy, said yesterday that they believe a binding arbitration settlement with the police union has put the Mayor in a better position to demand concessions from other municipal unions.
The three-member arbitration panel ruled on Friday that the cost of any wage increase above what the city has set aside in its budget should come from work-rule concessions from the union, the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association.
Such a tradeoff has become the crux of the city's position in stalled contract talks with other unions.


Olivia L. Barton Wed in Virginia
Olivia Lee Barton, the press secretary to Representative Tom Bevill, Democrat of Alabama, was married yesterday in Alexandria, Va., to John Patrick Ferriter, an editor at the Inter-American Development Bank in Washington.
The Rev.
Thomas Farmer performed the ceremony at the Old Presbyterian Meeting House.
Mrs.
Ferriter, 40 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Barton of Birmingham, Ala.
She graduated from the University of Colorado.
Her father is a senior partner in the Birmingham law firm of Johnson, Barton, Proctor, Swedlaw &amp; Naff.
Mr.
Ferriter, 35, is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Ferriter of Charlestown, R.I.
A graduate of Harvard University, he received a master's degree in Latin American studies from the University of Texas.
His father, who is retired, was an investment analyst for ACLI and the Havenfield Corporations, both in New York.


Mount Vernon Foundry Is a Santa's Workshop for Grown-Ups
CHRISTMAS gift catalogues are coming thick and fast now and some of the choicest selections in the catalogues are being produced behind the nondescript door of a small foundry and studio in Mount Vernon's heavy-industrial area.
Inside the foundry of Barrett Bronze is a veritable Santa's workshop for grown-ups.
Such artifacts as antique bronze figures, old ivory scrimshaws and hand-carved wooden birds that belong to museum collections are reproduced so faithfully that they seem to be clones of the original.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
EXPERIMENTAL THEATER
Theater Grottesco, founded in Paris in 1983 but now based in Detroit, will take its production of "Grottesco Shorts" to the Schoolhouse Theater in Croton Falls Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 4 P.M.


A Bust of Socrates As Lethal Weapon
THE essence of what constitutes ethics is the core of a college philosophy class taught by Prof.
Henry Lowenthal.
It is also the theme of "Cliffhanger," a suspense play by James Yoffe in which the professor's ivory tower experiences a few earthquakes.
"Cliffhanger," now at the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst, starts off with a murder committed in the heat of intellectual passion.
An obnoxious academic, who happens to be the chairwoman of the philosophy department, is struck on the head by the distinguished professor, who wields a bust of Socrates like an avenging sword.


Pine Bluff Takes the Remsen, But Arazi Need Not Worry
If Arazi was watching the Remsen Stakes on television yesterday while mending his surgical knees on the farm in Kentucky, he saw nothing to create any more pain for the present or anxiety for the future.
Eight of the spear carriers of the 2-year-old division gave it one last shot in the $200,000 Remsen Stakes, one last shot at showing at least some of the class that Arazi showed two weeks ago when he blitzed the field in the Breeders' Cup Juvenile.
But nobody proved much of anything, except that there were no warriors on the track at Aqueduct as Pine Bluff outran Offbeat and won the final significant test of the year for juvenile colts.


Mixing Up a Good, Rich Potting -Soil
THIS is about recipes: Not cold-weather sorts for soups and stews but those for soil mixtures.
Time was when the old-fashioned soil recipe -- one-one-one, that is equal parts of loam, sand and leaf mold -- was highly recommended for just about every kind of indoor plant that was grown in a pot.
If cactuses or succulents were to be potted, then the amount of gritty sand was increased a bit.
Or if humus-needing plants, like ferns or African violets, were to be potted, then another portion of humus (leaf mold) was added.
But these ingredients are hard to find now, and gardeners make do with the commercially packaged mixtures, the peat-like soilless mixtures developed by many of the agricultural colleges and favored by many growers.
These mixtures without soil have their pluses: They are lightweight, easy to use and suitable for a wide range of plants.
Most of them contain peat moss as a source of humus and perlite or vermiculite, inert ingredients made of expanded mica that retain moisture and provide some drainage.
Most of these soilless mixtures do not contain any fertilizers, but some do.


Speaking of Gotti
Facing Federal charges that could get him 50 years in prison, Salvatore (Sammy the Bull) Gravano has apparently cut a deal that will give him time off for good testimony.
Law enforcement officials in New York said last week that Mr.
Gravano, the No. 2 man in America's No. 1 Mafia family, had entered the Federal Witness Protection Program after agreeing to cooperate in the prosecution of his boss, John Gotti, in return for a lighter sentence.
Mr.
Gotti and Mr.
Gravano were indicted last year on racketeering charges carrying sentences of up to half a century, and both had been in prison without bail until Mr.
Gravano was spirited away last week.
The authorities said it was the highest level Mafia defection ever and would significantly strengthen their case against Mr.
Gotti.
Provided, of course, that both Mr.
Gravano and his memory show up at the trial.
Forgetfulness, at least, has often plagued witnesses against Mr.
Gotti, who has been acquitted in three trials in the last five years.


Penguin Rep Presents A Tribute to Swados
FOR almost 20 years, reviewers have come up with classifications for the musicals of Elizabeth Swados.
They have been called song pieces, musical concerts, tapestries, mosaics, oratorios, collages and cycles.
The title for one, "Nightclub Cantanta," provided the designation, juxtaposing the composer's pop and classical sides.
And how to describe the music of Ms.
Swados?
Under influences ranging from Far Eastern to country and western, the composer has embraced the sounds of the jungle, of the streets and of the synagogue.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 3 about Grenada misstated the elevation on the neighboring island of Carriacou.
The highest point is High North, at 955 feet, not 8,000 feet.


Arts Festival In Hong Kong
Performers from many parts of the world will take part in the Hong Kong Arts Festival, which will be celebrating its 20th anniversary when it begins Jan. 11.
The Glyndebourne Festival Opera from England is presenting its production of "Tosca," and the Shanghai Kunji Opera Troupe will be performing two full-length Chinese operas.
The Berlin Symphony Orchestra and the Hong Kong Philharmonic Orchestra are participating, along with chamber and vocal ensembles.
The soprano Montserrat Caballe will be heard and the pianist Vladimir Feltsman is giving a recital.
Drama from the Katona Jozsef Theater of Hungary and the Theatre de Complicite from Britain, and "Africa Oye!" -- a revue of dance and song from eight African music societies -- are among other programs scheduled during the three-week festival at the Hong Kong Cultural Center and other venues.
Reservation forms may be obtained from the Hong Kong Tourist Association, 590 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10036; (212) 869-5008.


Mournful Tribute to Guardsman Who Was Swallowed by the Sea
Having given up its search for a flier lost in stormy seas two and a half weeks ago during a rescue mission, the Air National Guard said goodbye to him yesterday.
More than a thousand guardsmen, members of air rescue groups and family and friends gathered at the Air National Guard base at Suffolk County Airport for a memorial service to honor the downed flier, Tech.
Sgt.
Arden R. Smith of Shirley, L.I.
Sergeant Smith, 32 years old, was a member of the 106th Air Rescue Group stationed in Westhampton.


Toxic Release
To the Editor:
"The Nation's Polluters - Who Emits What, and Where" (Oct. 13) did not address one of the most serious limitations in the Federal toxic chemical reporting program.
The program covers only releases or emissions of toxics and fails to require reporting on the toxics used and produced by companies.
As a result, companies can reduce their toxic emissions by shifting toxics into their products or their hazardous waste stream or by switching to a chemical not on the reporting list.
The public cannot track these shifts.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
An insurance investigator from San Francisco is sent to the Philippines to look into the possible death of a man.
His widow wants to collect the insurance, but there are peculiar circumstances that call for a thorough check.
Jack Hart, the investigator, goes to the barrio where the death is said to have taken place.
He finds corruption, poverty, revolutionaries and rich landowners whose word is law.
He finds dignity and resourcefulness among the peons.
His investigation touches on some shady operations that nearly cost him his life.
He also finds romance.
All of this is in SUGARLAND by Phillip Finch (St. Martin's, $18.95).
Mr.
Finch, who spent a long time in the Philippines researching his book, admits that a good deal of it is autobiographical, including the romance.
The writing is altogether expert.
Mr.
Finch has a terse style that goes back to Hammett, but there is never a feeling of imitation or cliche.
Characters are believable; the author understands and feels for them.
A good deal of honest sentiment is present, but never sentimentality.
Mr.
Finch, an accurate reporter, is especially successful in getting at the essentials of a Philippine barrio.


SEDUCING THESE MEN
I have no problem with the ad men.
There will always be hucksters.
Harder to take are the Subaru executives.
Are we to understand that people like Charles F. Worrell, Mark Dunn, George T. Muller and the other Subaru of America brass are truly the force behind the Subaru SVX?
The women and men out here in the real America recognize them for what they are -- highly compensated front men.
Don't misunderstand me.
Americans should be grateful to the Japanese; without their competitive challenge, our own design values and workmanship would have continued to rot.
But to reverse our decline we need to revere those who actually create, invent, build, engineer, design, test -- not those who are remarkable only for their ability to spend happy money and to gift-wrap the products of another nation in red, white and blue.
JIM GUIDE
Paramus, N.J.


Sunquam Parents Still Await Explanations
As the plaintiff in the suit before State Supreme Court against Half Hollow Hills School District, I would like to add some additional comments to "Finances Cited in School Closing but Critics See Other Motives" (Oct. 6).
First, regarding the suit, I would like to say that the people of the Sunquam community are generally disappointed that Judge Luciano did not deem it necessary to grant us a stay to keep Sunquam open until a decision was made.
He noted that his decision would be made in plenty of time before the opening of the school year.
Well, my children and the children of this community have been divided between two schools, bused several miles across major dangerous intersections, and packed into overcrowded schools while the esteemed judge has yet to make a decision.


This Week
Rake leaves and pull up any annuals killed by frost. Add them to the compost pile.
After the first killing frost, dig up dahlia roots, shake off the soil, and dry them in the sun for a few hours.
Divide clumps, making sure each root has a bud.
Cover with sand, ashes or vermiculite to prevent shrinkage.
Store in a cellar or other cool area at 35 to 50 degrees.


How Helping Handicapped Helps All
"Parents View With Schools Over Helping Handicapped" (Oct. 6) speaks to an important issue, the real cost of providing as dignified, independent and productive life as possible for our chronically ill citizens.
Applauds and awards have gone for generations to our scientists for introducing new and improved technologies to save and prolong life.
Right-to-life proponents spend millions lobbying their beliefs, but there still exists no comprehensive birth-to-death plan for children who are born or become totally physically or mentally compromised.


Dorothy Danforth, Student, to Marry
February wedding plans for Dorothy Duncan Danforth and Johannes Per Burlin have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Senator and Mrs.
John C. Danforth.
The prospective bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nils Henning Burlin of Stockholm and Luxembourg.
Miss Danforth, 24 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and is studying law at Georgetown University, as is Mr.
Burlin.
Her father, a Republican, is the senior Senator from Missouri.
She is a granddaughter of Mrs.
Duncan Dobson of Vero Beach, Fla., and the late Mr.
Dobson, a chief executive of the Ludlow Saylor Wire Cloth Company in St.
Louis.
Her grandfather the late Donald Danforth was a chief executive of Ralston-Purina in St.
Louis.


Making a Difference; McDonnell Charts a Course for a Deal in Asia
Robert H. Hood Jr. has led the McDonnell Douglas Corporation's Douglas Aircraft subsidiary through two tumultuous years of layoffs and cost-cutting.
And now, having made Douglas profitable after two decades of losses, Mr.
Hood is preparing to lead the subsidiary into another period of upheaval that could have profound consequences not just for Douglas, the nation's No. 2 commercial aircraft builder behind the Boeing Company, but for the entire aerospace industry.
McDonnell Douglas said last week that it is negotiating to sell a 40 percent stake in Douglas's commercial aircraft business for $2 billion.
The company has been seeking a major investment in Douglas for months as a way to raise money for the launch of a new jumbo jet, the MD-12.


From Death to Birth
TIME'S ARROW
Or, The Nature of the Offense. By Martin Amis. 168 pp. New York: Harmony Books. $18.


Fiddling With History in a Cause That Seemed Just
In this year of Columbus, white Americans have not yet figured out how they should think about Indians, nor are Indians united on how they wish to be regarded.
While curators debate whether ancient skeletons dug up by zealous anthropologists should be returned to sacred burial grounds, while collectors drive up the prices of baskets and blankets made by cultures that had no "fine art" category, some Indians are demanding that the Atlanta Braves change their name and make their fans stop doing the "tomahawk chop" in the stands.
Early in the century, when the Government was trying to eradicate Indian traditions that citizens thought were quaint, Edward S. Curtis made an extensive photographic document of native American cultures.
A wide selection of the 1,500 images he published between 1907 and 1930 is on view in an exhibition titled "Edward S. Curtis: The Photographer as American Hero," at Cathers &amp; Dembrosky, through Nov. 30.
The gallery (1000 Madison Avenue, near 78th Street) is a most appropriate setting; it specializes in American decorative arts, and exhibits these pictures among the Stickly and Mission furniture and George Ohr pottery that belonged to Curtis's original audience.


The Executive Computer; Why Compaq Is Getting Down in the Trenches
Perhaps more than any other company, the Compaq Computer Corporation was a symbol of the breathtaking growth of the personal computer industry in the 1980's.
Starting with a dream and a sketch on a placemat in a House of Pies coffee shop, Compaq's founders notched $111 million in sales in 1983, their first year.
Sales reached $1.2 billion in 1987, $3.6 billion in 1990.
Now Compaq stands as a symbol of the personal computer industry in the 1990's, a struggling giant in an industry that punishes slow reflexes and rigid rules.
Domestic sales are sputtering, market share is plummeting, and the founders are gone, including Joseph (Rod) Canion, who was dismissed as chief executive last month, a day after Compaq reported its first quarterly loss, of $70 million in the period ended Sept. 30.


Playoff Slot for Glassboro St.
Glassboro State, behind sophomore quarterback Ed Hesson, clinched a spot in the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III playoffs for the first time by rallying for a 21-16 victory over Montclair State yesterday afternoon at John Page Field in Glassboro, N.J.
The victory gave Glassboro State the New Jersey State Athletic Conference title.


Sorry, New York Isn't Crime Capital of U.S.
To the Editor:
I would like to know on what Roger Stone bases his insinuations that New York is the crime capital of the United States in "The Mario Myth" (Op-Ed, Nov. 6).
Certainly, it cannot be on statistics from the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday showing votes by members of Congress from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut misstated the vote by Representative Bill Green, Republican of Manhattan, on a spending bill that included a provision to block the Bush Administration from enforcing a ban on abortion counseling at family planning clinics receiving Federal funds.
He voted for the measure.


HOME CLINIC HDF&gt;hHED,30p,,2; Overcoming Problems Common With Plaster
PLASTER is harder, smoother and resists wear better than wallboard, but cracking and loosening are common problems, especially in older buildings.
Minor and some moderate damages are usually easy to repair; most major damage usually is best left to professional plasterers.
If you suspect moisture as a cause of damage (crumbling and discoloration are signs), cure the condition before making repairs; otherwise, deterioration will likely continue.


Mutual Funds; The Dimensions of a Rally
Recession or not, the stock market has been advancing since October 1990.
On Oct. 31 this year, the current upward phase reached its 385th day, the median length of the 10 most recent periods of advances, according to Lipper Analytical Services in Summit, N.J.
Nevertheless, the advance may be far from finished.
The returns for the Lipper Growth Fund Index, another measure of market rallies, are still lagging.
The median return in a market advance is 68.7 percent; the current advance had returned only 42.5 percent through Nov. 7.
Most of the improvement occurred in the first six months of the advance.
Since March, total return has risen at a rate of only about 1 percentage point monthly.


Sunday Dinner; Family Enjoyment and a Change of Pace, for Two, or Four (or Maybe More?)
Sunday is the day for families, and there are many restaurants that can substitute for grandmother's rambling, comfortable house.
Some offer meals family style on Sundays: platters of food that serve anwhere from two to six or more.
Sunday dinner out can be fun and a change of pace, and you can even have seconds.
Coco Pazzo
23 East 74th Street, (212) 794-0205 -- Opened nearly a year ago, this northern Italian trattoria remains one of the most popular restaurants in town.
Portions are large, on weekends dishes are served family style and prices are affordable.
Better yet, the quality has remained consistent.
This is herb-infused, lusty fare: deep-fried artichokes; panzarella, a thick Tuscan bread soup; exceptional head cheese, pasta with various game sauces and wonderful polenta.


Us vs. Them, And Other Insults
To the Sports Editor:
Magic Johnson needs to be made aware of the delicate politics of the new arena he is entering.
So far, the subtext of what he has to say as "spokesman" for HIV has had an us-vs.-them perspective regarding hetero- and homosexuals.
Unfortunately, this plays right into the prejudices of homophobes the world over.
Magic has the power to draw attention and money to an illness that has cried out to deaf ears for over 10 years.
Sadly, it takes a sports hero to somehow legitimize the fight and garner the President's commitment "to go the extra mile," which in itself is a mortal insult to hundreds of thousands who are dying and have died.
MARC POSNOCK New York


Refugees in Germany, Fearing Mobs, Fight Move
A group of refugees huddled in the Shalom Community Church here has defied a Government order that they move to a hostel in eastern Germany, where they say they fear for their lives.
"For us, west Germany not very good, but good," said one gee, a Kurd who said he was wanted by the police in his native Turkey.
"East Germany no good. Maybe we die there."


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Durham, Conn. 229,900
4 Mica Hill Road. 3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; 2-car attached garage, formal dining room, master bedroom w/whirlpool bath, 1 acre; taxes not yet determined.
Middletown, Conn. 119,500
30 Laurel Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old colonial; dining room, fenced-in yard, sun room; taxes $1,403.
Simsbury, Conn. 430,000
14 Talcott Mountain Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, year-old Tudor; heated sun porch, deck, 3 fireplaces, 2 acres; taxes $6,948.
Armonk, N.Y. 420,000
14 Long Pond Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; family room, brick fireplace, eat-in kitchen, deck, 1.6 acres; taxes $6,455.
Larchmont, N.Y. 330,000
50 Pinebrook Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 64-year-old colonial; fireplace, sun room, playroom, dining room; taxes $7,950.
Millwood, N.Y. 237,500
33 Shingle House Road  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 71-year-old cottage; cathedral ceiling, fireplace, patio, 3 1/2-room apartment over garage, 1 acre; taxes $5,000.
OTHER AREAS Oakland, N.J. 220,000
15 Aspen Way
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 24-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,956.
Rumson, N.J. 438,850
21 Sunrise Drive
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 14-year-old ranch; marble fireplace, pool; taxes $7,203.
Kings Park, L.I. 195,000
99 Twin Oak Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $5,100.


In a Palestinian Leader, Western-Tailored Coolness and a New Pragmatism
Hanan Ashrawi got to eat dinner sitting down in her kitchen.
That she had found time for food was an accomplishment of dizzying dimensions, she said.
But to be able to sit down -- in her own home, to boot -- bordered on the miraculous, and her husband, Emile, did his best to see that she was little disturbed during her first real meal in 30 hours.
It didn't work.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-22  EVIDENCE IN JESUITS' DEATHS
An inquiry by a panel of House Democrats found strong evidence suggesting that senior Salvadoran Army officers -- including the current defense minister -- plotted the 1989 killings of six Jesuit priests, an internal report says.
Page 1  BEIJING FRUSTRATES BAKER
A senior American official said that talks in Beijing between Secretary of State James Baker and China's top leaders yielded none of the gestures on human rights, arms control and trade sought by Washington.  1  APATHY ON A SOVIET FARM
After seven decades of Communism, a Russian village and its collective farm are impoverished and demoralized.
Changes concocted as reforms have never brought anything but grief, the people say.  1  A corner of Russia has had a potent effect on all who have visited.  20  GOURMANDS GET LAST LAUGH
A study suggests that goose fat may be good for you: The foie gras eaters of Gascony, a region of southwestern France, have the country's lowest rate of cardiovascular disease.  1  A VOICE FOR PALESTINIANS
A sharp thinker with dagger-like powers of expression, Hanan Ashrawi has emerged as the symbol of a new Palestinian pragmatism.
Now the Israeli police want to put the spokeswoman on trial.  3  KENYA BREAKS UP PROTEST
Armed riot police in Nairobi fired tear gas and used batons to disperse several thousand demonstrators who were trying to attend an opposition rally banned by the Government of President Daniel arap Moi.  6  Lithuania's President promises to investigate Nazi collaboration.  21  National 23-33  VOTERS PREFER EDWARDS
Edwin W. Edwards, who served three terms as governor of Louisiana, was elected to a fourth term today by a landslide, defeating David Duke, a former grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan.  1  THE BURDEN GETS BIGGER
A decade after property-tax revolts in a dozen states and the across-the- board tax cuts of the Reagan era, the percentage of income that Americans pay in taxes is back to a postwar peak.
And economists and budget analysts maintain that the tax-cut fever now sweeping the land will be dissipated by the immovable realities of government finance.  1  UNFINISHED BUSINESS
Last year Congress passed legislation intended to assure a quick response to oil spills.
Did that end matters?
Hardly.
Now it is up to the Coast Guard to define exactly what Congress meant.
That in turn means dozens of regulations, a task that is already behind schedule.  26  Advisory panel criticized the Energy Department's cleanup efforts.  25  WARM WELCOME FOR PROF.
HILL
In her most extensive public comments since her Senate testimony against Judge Clarence Thomas riveted the nation, Prof.
Anita F. Hill told a cheering, exultant crowd of female state legislators from around the nation that sexual harassment was a form of violence that "will not go away." 28  WE WERE JUST PASSING BY
Manchester Journal: Few people occupy a lower rung on the ladder of national politics than Representative Dick Swett.
But Mr.
Swett happens to be from New Hampshire.
So when he invited the Democratic Presidential candidates to his fund-raiser, five of them showed up.
And hardly anybody was surprised.  26  REFUSE OF AN AGRICULTURAL AGE
What if most of New England's stone walls were never meant as walls at all?
What if they are merely "linear landfills," in the words of a University of Connecticut geologist, long piles of refuse that are a result of the first manmade upheaval in America's environment, the deforestation of New England in the 18th and early 19th centuries?  26  A stringy vine is besieging many Southern lakes.  28  Regional 34-47  ADDICTS ARE SHUNNING NEEDLES
Finally responding to the terror of AIDS, thousands of heroin addicts are turning away from injecting the drug and have begun inhaling the crystalline powder the way many people take cocaine.  1  AN END TO LABOR LOGJAM?
The Dinkins administration was encouraged that the new police contract might strengthen its hand in negotiating concessions from other municipal unions.
Labor leaders said it was too early to tell.  38  Fourth police officer shot in four days in New York City.  37  Jurors will not hear video evidence against Watkins suspect.  35  A 13TH TUBERCULOSIS DEATH
Another state prison inmate suffering from a new strain of drug-resistant tuberculosis died in Syracuse.
Correction officials said the new strain of the disease was responsible for all the deaths.39  Obituaries 44  George C. P. Olsson, led Ocean Spray Cranberries  Arts/Reviews 65  Campus Life 51-55  Life Style 56  Fashion 58-59  Pastimes 66-67  Weddings 60-64


Miss Rinehart, A Banker, Wed
Pamela Ruth Rinehart, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert E. Rinehart of Portland, Ore., and the late Dr.
Rinehart, was married yesterday to Mark Scott Sears, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo A. Sears of Wilmington, Del.
The Rev.
Richard E. Spalding, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Church of the Covenant in Boston.
The bride, 33 years old, is an assistant vice president of Deutsche Bank AG in New York.
She graduated from the University of Washington.
Her father was a rheumatologist and her mother, Nancy Rinehart, is a member of the Marquam Hill Steering Committee of the Oregon Health Sciences University Foundation.
Mr.
Sears, 38, is a real-estate developer with Hines Interests Limited Partnership in Boston.
His father retired as a chemical engineer for E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company in Wilmington.


Congress Does Something, But Mostly Just Stands There
IT may be the national polls, or the Pennsylvania election, or it may just be that hope for adjournment concentrates the Congressional mind, but all at once Congress is dealing with domestic issues, from taxes to health care to the recession.
It is not necessarily solving them, and not always even passing bills to try to solve them.
In an era of persistent divided government, continually soaring Federal deficits and a fear of taxes that conquers all, real legislative solutions seem all but out of reach.


CAMPUS LIFE: Virginia; More Fraternity Trouble, Now Over a Sex Show
Just seven months after Federal authorities startled alumni and students alike with a drug raid on three fraternity houses, the University of Virginia is again being roiled by its historic fraternity system.
The charges this time involve sex; the Phi Kappa Sigma fraternity is accused of hiring two female strippers to perform various sex acts with each other at a rush function on Oct. 3 as a crowd of fraternity members and pledges watched.


Margot Gayle
To the Editor:
The well-deserved tribute to Margot Gayle ("Saving the Past," Oct. 20), fails to indicate the lengthy extent of her elevation and championship of New York City landmarks.
In the early 1960's, Mrs. Gayle
saved
the Jefferson Market Court House, first by saving the clock (with help from Con Edison).
That was the first of her triumphs.


Let's Reward Investments That Aid Economy
To the Editor:
The depressing news about the lack of growth in the economy is again raising discussions about tax relief and heating up the debate over special tax rates for capital gains.
The theory behind capital-gains tax preferences is that they stimulate the economy by rewarding people who invest in creating new capital assets.


Sunday Outing; To the Slopes and Back, in a Day
The winters may seem to be getting milder, but thanks to snow-making machines, the ski seasons are beginning earlier.
This year's is already under way.
Within a two-hour drive of Manhattan, a skier, whether novice or advanced, can get in a full day of skiing without having to spend the night at a resort hotel.


March Wedding For Andrea Fox
Bernard and Beatrice Fox of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter, Andrea Sue Fox, to David Golub, a son of Lewis Golub of Rexford, N.Y., and Sondra Robinson of Schenectady, N.Y.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fox, 29 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Albany.
She is the director of marketing for Regal Art Press, a commercial printing company in Troy, N.Y.
Her father is a music copyist in New York.
Mr.
Golub, 30, graduated from Adelphi University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
He is the private-label brand manager for Price Chopper Supermarkets, a supermarket chain based in Schenectady.
His father is the chairman and chief executive officer of the company.


By Any Name, a Place Where the Past Keeps Resurfacing
As Karovo, Sergiyevskoye or Koltsovo, this corner of central Russia has had a potent effect on all who have been here.
My grandfather, Sergei Ossorguine, recalled it to the end of his days in emigration as a close friend, a worldly paradise.
Young Communist zealots maintained the linden park in the 1920's and years later wrote poems to its beauty.


International Ensembles Drop In on Westchester
AMONG the international touring ensembles making stops in Westchester this week are the Moscow Clavier Trio, Les Grands Ballets Canadiens and pianists from Czechoslovakia and the Philippines.
More exotic still (though, truth to tell, it is based in New York) is the Philippine Dance Company.
The trio, winner of international competitions in Yugoslavia and France and here on its first visit to the United States, plays a benefit recital (for B'nai B'rith Youth Services) at Beth El Synagogue in New Rochelle today at 2 P.M.
The performances by the founding pianist, Alexander Bonduryansky, the violinist, Vladimir Ivanov, and the cellist, Mikhail Utkin, all faculty artists at the Moscow Conservatory, start with Beethoven and proceed to works by major composers of their land and ours, Shostakovich and Copland; 723-7079.


In the Nation; No 'Mo' And No Cuomo
Nothing had been heard around here from Dr.
I.
F.
Attall, the intrepid political prognosticator, since 1988.
Then, his computers whirred out the exclusive information that the next President of the United States would be Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York.
But Dr.
Attall, still occupying the Literary Digest Chair of Current and Near-Term Anthropology at Nostradamus University, called last week, undaunted by 1988.
Wearing a new spin-doctor's hat, he denied his analysis had been faulty; because Governor Cuomo had not run, he asserted, it had not been given a real chance.


Joan Opotzner Is Married to Jayson Brustman
Joan Maxine Opotzner, an assistant vice president and sales manager for Citicorp in Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Jayson Allan Brustman, a lawyer with offices in White Plains and Hackensack, N.J.
Rabbi Solomon Sternstein officiated at B'Nai Jacob Synagogue in Woodbridge, Conn.
Mrs.
Brustman, 30 years old, graduated from the University of Connecticut.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Opotzner of Shelton, Conn.


Carin Young to Marry J. R. Hussey in January
Clare Lyons Young of New York and Robert P. Young of Newtown, Pa., have announced January wedding plans for their daughter, Carin Sasha Young, and ohn Robert Hussey, a son of Susan Rathbun Hussey of Rumson, N.J., and the late F. G. Hussey Jr.
Miss Young, 28 years old, is an advertising account executive for American Lawyer Media in San Francisco and a graduate of Skidmore College.
Mr.
Hussey, 29, is known as J. R. A graduate of Skidmore College, he is the director of estimating for Krueger Construction in San Francisco.


Saying Farewell


Business Diary/November 10-15
COMPANIES The Economic News Was Bad, but the Market Was Worse  Last week, when the Dow Jones industrial average fell 120.31 points to finish the week at 2,943.20, it was the stock market's fifth biggest tumble ever.
Analysts were quick to point to the week's bad news: Retail and auto sales were off and the Producer Price Index rose unexpectedly.
"Concern about the economy is clearly intensifying," said Hugh Johnson, an analyst at First Albany Corporation in Albany, N.Y.
But on reflection, the news last week was not so different from the week before -- or the week before that.
So why did the market drop?
"There's a general pattern that the amount of the movement doesn't necessarily match up with the news," said Lawrence Summers, chief economist at the World Bank in Washington.
"That's a puzzle to people who believe in a perfectly rational market," Mr.
Summers said.
Traders sitting at computers also have tools that make selling easier.
"That exacerbates things when the market goes down," Mr.
Summers said.
Midway Left Out in the Cold  Midway Airlines thought it was being handed a lifeline when Northwest Airlines said it would acquire the bankrupt carrier by taking over its $153 million of debt.
But Midway, based in Chicago, ended up feeling it had been handed a line when Northwest abruptly withdrew from the deal.
Last week Midway, which employs 4,300 people, shut down.
"There's no choice. We don't have any money," said David Hinson, Midway's chairman.
Analysts say the deal unraveled partly because Northwest, a unit of cash-strapped NWA Inc., based in Minneapolis, had received a $740 million loan from the state of Minnesota.
Midway's precarious existence -- it was losing $1 million a day -- made Minnesota officials nervous.
But Northwest said the deal was off because Midway gave it misleading financial information.
Midway disagrees.
Fifty-nine Midway planes remain where they last touched down.
Barbie, Minnie and Dumbo Too  They have been tumbling off the assembly line together since 1987 -- Barbie, G.I.
Joe and Mickey and Minnie Mouse, that is.
Last week, the Walt Disney Company and Mattel Inc., which already reaps $160 million in sales from its Disney-related toy line, agreed to extend their licensing agreement for 10 years.
The new agreement will give Mattel the right to produce more Disney characters.
Pinnochio, Bambi and Dumbo will be added to the list as well as all 101 Dalmations.
DEC Sides With Microsoft  Since summer, the International Business Machines Corporation has entered into more alliances than a delegate at a Presidential convention.
But last week, its rival, the Digital Equipment Corporation, the nation's No. 2 computer maker, made an alliance of its own with I.B.M.'s arch-nemesis, the Microsoft Corporation, the nation's No. 1 software maker. (I.B.M., once cozy with Microsoft, is now betting on software from Apple Computer Inc. instead.) DEC will now be able to integrate Microsoft's programs, including Windows, into its new offerings.
Microsoft gets access to DEC's huge network of six million installed computers.
"Windows is a big wave in the market right now," said Rick Sherlund, of Goldman Sachs &amp; Company.
"I.B.M.'s fighting it, and DEC wants to ride with it."  A Dreary, Dreary Christmas  Even with falling interest rates, consumers are watching their wallets as they wander into the department stores.
According to the Commerce Department, retail sales fell by 0.1 percent in October.
"The outlook for the Christmas season is not really wonderful," said Kathryn L. Kobe an economist at Joel Popkin &amp; Company in Washington.
The French to the Rescue  After months of wrangling, California's insurance regulators selected a French group headed by Altus Finance, the investment arm of Credit Lyonnais, to take over the defunct Executive Life Insurance Company.
They chose the French group because it promised to return more money to Executive Life's 372,000 nervous policyholders.
Ninety-seven percent of them will have no losses, said John Garamendi, California's Insurance Commissioner.
The French group was also chosen because it will transfer Executive's huge portfolio of junk bonds into a separate business.
Selling Off Maxwell's Empire  It did not take long.
Last week Goldman Sachs &amp; Company sold two million shares of Mirror Group Newspapers P.L.C., which was founded by the late Robert Maxwell.
ECONOMY
The Slippery Surge  When the Producer Price Index was released last week by the Commerce Department, even the coolest economist's heart sank.
The index showed a 0.7 percent surge in inflation at the producer level.
Slow growth and inflation reminded some seasoned number-crunchers of the "stagflation" that plagued the economy in the 1970's.
But on closer examination, economists were mollified somewhat.
The inflation figures were skewed by an almost random run-up of prices for a most unlikely assortment of goods.
The problem, said some economists, was that the Commerce Department did not properly correct for seasonal factors.
"I think it's an aberration," said Brian J. Fabbri, chief economist at Midland Montagu Economics in Washington.
Giving the Numbers Meaning  It's not the numbers; it's how you interpret them.
So what is the meaning of the modest 0.1 percent increase in consumer prices in October, the smallest gain in seven months?
"It is encouraging," said Mickey Levy, chief economist at CRT Government Securities.
"But this is the point in the cycle when the Fed typically eases rates too much when it should be patient." That interpretation means when growth comes, so will inflation.
Those Wacky Market Forces  The next candidate for a Presidential veto emerged from the House last week.
It is the plan to put a cap on the interest rates charged by credit card issuers.
The House plan would cap rates at about 14 percent.
Most cards now carry rates of 18 or 19 percent, while the banks that issue them pay 7 percent or even less for their money.
The Administration said it wants lower rates (who doesn't?) but prefers that market forces set them.
Aren't those the forces that pushed rates up?
Will the Market Catch the Wave?
With the market's 120.31 point drop last week, the nervous chatter on the street turned to the "wave" -- not the football wave, the Elliot Wave.
The Elliot Wave measures mass psychology, its adherents say.
Bunkum, detractors say.
But "wavologists" point to the wave's last big high -- the summer of 1987.
After that, the crash.
Now they sense a new top has come and gone.
"The Elliot wave is about patterns. We think everything has peaked -- real estate, collectibles, jobs on Wall Street," said David Allman, research director for the Elliot Wave Theorist, an investor newsletter in Gainsville, Ga.
What's next?
"Sometime in the next three years the stock market will be trading at half what it is now." Congress Fiddles, Bush Burns  President Bush vetoed two bills intended to extend unemployment benefits.
The latest one is being held up by Congress.
The House passed a bill last week that provides up to 20 weeks of additional unemployment insurance benefits to three million Americans who have been out of work for at least half a year.
But the bill treats each state differently: Connecticut gets 20 additional weeks; Alabama gets just six.
Those differences made the Senate balk.
Senate and House leaders are haggling while President Bush is shouting "just approve it." The bill will cost $5.1 billion and is intended to pay for itself.
How?
From an increase in the estimated tax payments of some taxpayers and from a two-tenths of 1 percent surcharge added to the unemployment taxes employers pay.
In Washington, that's the closest anything gets to "paying for itself." The Manufacturing Blues  Just when it seemed as if the manufacturing sector was snapping back to life, a study released by the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment says "beware." The five-year study says American manufacturing has lost its competitive edge and needs the Government's help to regain its luster.
Support is split along party lines: the Democrats for it, Republicans against.
INTERNATIONAL
Hedging a Flyer on the U.S.S.R.
The recent coup in the Soviet Union, or what's left of it, did not do much to attract investors.
So last week, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, a Government agency, said it would provide $100 million of insurance coverage against expropriation, political violence and currency convertibility problems to an American investment group called the Soviet Companies Fund.
The fund, sponsored by Batterymarch Financial Management in Boston and the State Commission on Military Industrial Products in Moscow, plans to invest $250 million, primarily in companies that make products for the military.
OPIC will charge up to 60 cents for each $100 insured.
But OPIC may lose on the deal.
"The Soviet Union is really not a very good credit risk," said Benjamin Weiner, of Probe International, a consulting firm in Stamford, Conn.
British Standoffishness Softens  A single currency for the European Community seems pretty likely now.
Prime Minister John Major of Britain indicated last week that he is prepared to accept a single currency by the end of the century.
But he said he is against closer political ties between countries.
So how will they manage the currency?
Even Japan Is Slowing Down  Last week, the Bank of Japan lowered its discount rate to 5 percent from 5.5 percent.
The Japanese economy is a little out of breath.
"Japan is not headed for recession, but it is slowing," said Carl Weinberg, chief economist at High Frequency Economics.
"This is not the last discount rate cut this cycle."


Sunday Menu; Using Unfamiliar Greens
Greens -- turnip greens, mustard greens, kale, collards, beet greens -- these are not among America's favorite vegetables because of their strong flavor, edge of bitterness and bite.
But little by little, those of us not brought up on them are being encouraged to try them.
The best way is in dishes where their sharpness is mellowed by other ingredients.
This one-dish meal is an effort to convince more people that greens make wonderful eating.


3 Educators Receive Awards for Work to Improve Schools
Three educators have won the 1991 Harold W. McGraw Jr.
Prize in Education, for work that can serve as a model and that has made a difference in the lives of students.
The winners are Dr.
Judith E. Lanier, dean of education at Michigan State University; Dr.
Robert H. McCabe, president of the Miami-Dade Community College District, and Dr.
Theodore R. Sizer, an education professor at Brown University.


Bahr to Be in Giants' Lineup
Coach Ray Handley confirmed today that Matt Bahr would be his kicker Sunday for the Giants' game here against the Dallas Cowboys.
The Giants also activated Joey Smith, a wide receiver and kick returner, from the practice squad.
Bahr was having an excellent season until he strained the adductor muscle in his right thigh.
Raul Allegre, a former Giant kicker, replaced him in the last three games.
Allegre will remain on the 47-man roster for the weekend, but will be inactive for Sunday's game.


Nancy Bernard To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter A. Bernard of Oxford, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Nancy Elizabeth Bernard to Mark Henry Felix, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Felix of Summit, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bernard, 24 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and is studying for a master's degree in historic-preservation planning at Cornell University.
Her father, who is retired, was an executive vice president with Prudential Securities in New York.
Mr.
Felix, 25, graduated cum laude from the University of Rochester.
He is a credit analyst with Manufacturers Hanover Trust in Livingston, N.J.
His father is a vice president with OMR Systems, a software manufacturer and distributor in Princeton, N.J.


Irish Show Little Fight Against Nittany Lions
In the aftermath of Notre Dame's demoralizing loss to Tennessee last week, the question surrounding the Irish's game against Penn State this afternoon was whether the team could summon the necessary emotional intensity to defeat a solid, surging Penn State team at home.
The answer, practically from the opening kickoff, was a resounding no.


BEST SELLERS: November 17, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
6
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
2
5
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
3
5
3
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) A diplomat, returning to his native Gloucestershire, finds that his past life in horse racing may help save others.
4
3
13
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
5
7
3
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $22.50.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide and herself.
6
4
7
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
7
9
4
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $22.) A lawyer returns to her estranged family to attend a funeral and finds new understanding and love.
8
6
10
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate a balloon accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force.
9 *
8
4
ALL THE WEYRS OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $20.) A new volume in the science fiction series "The Dragonriders of Pern."
10
15
2
REUNION, by Michael Jan Friedman. (Pocket, $19.) The U.S.S.
Enterprise crew undertakes to stop a war in outer space; a "Star Trek" novel.
11
1
LILA, by Robert M. Pirsig. (Bantam, $22.50.) On a sailboat cruise down the Hudson with a woman companion, a philosopher reflects on the nature of our society.
12
10
36
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
13
11
5
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Macmillan, $21.95.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.
14
12
8
THE DECEIVER, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $22.50.) Sam McCready recalls his years in the British secret service. (LP)
15
14
86
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
2
2
9
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
3
3
2
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (Zondervan/HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel, with his view of the Iran-contra affair.
4
5
3
THE NEW WORLD ORDER, by Pat Robertson. (Word Publishing, $17.99.) A clergyman discusses the significance of changes around the globe.
5
4
12
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces. (LP)
6
14
2
DANCE WHILE YOU CAN, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress examines her feelings about relationships, aging and the future.
7
13
3
PRAIRYERTH, by William Least Heat-Moon. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A close look at the people and mores of Chase County, Kansas.
8
9
22
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
9 *
8
2
CHILDHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Putnam, $14.95.) The entertainer recalls his boyhood and reflects on the ways of today's kids.
10
7
52
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
11
6
5
CRUEL DOUBT, by Joe McGinniss. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The ordeal of a North Carolina woman whose son was accused of planning the murder of herself and her husband.
12 *
1
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene by the Texas journalist.
13
12
3
SAVAGE INEQUALITIES, by Jonathan Kozol. (Crown, $20.) The current crisis in the nation's inner-city public schools.
14
11
27
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
15
21
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America.
16 *
10
8
J.
EDGAR HOOVER, by Curt Gentry. (Norton, $29.95.) The career of the longtime F.B.I.
Director.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
14
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
5
3
THE CARBOHYDRATE ADDICT'S DIET, by Rachael F. Heller and Richard F. Heller. (Dutton, $19.95.) How to cope with an addiction to carbohydrate-rich food.
3
4
53
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
4
2
94
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
5
3
36
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find Waldo as he travels from ancient Egypt to today.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
CONSCIOUSNESS EXPLAINED, by Daniel C. Dennett. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) Mr.
Dennett, a philosopher steeped in psychology, computer science and neuroscience as well, essays the brain-defying task of accounting, through rigorous but accessible arguments, for the sense that the real "we" is something in us other, and probably nobler, than a mere biological phenomenon.
THE RUNAWAY SOUL, by Harold Brodkey. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $30.) In the writing for close to 30 years, this long, bold and puzzling novel concerns a famous writer's exploration of his own mind and efforts to recapture his deceased adoptive family.
DREADNOUGHT: Britain, Germany, and the Coming of the Great War, by Robert K. Massie. (Random House, $35.) A massive account of the breakdown of the European status quo in the late 19th century and the rivalry that led to the catastrophe of 1914.
FOR THE COLOR OF HIS SKIN: The Murder of Yusuf Hawkins and the Trial of Bensonhurst, by John DeSantis. (Pharos, $18.95.) Mr.
DeSantis, a reporter both relentless and compassionate, spikes many myths in his account of the killing and its aftermath.
ODD JOBS: Essays and Criticism, by John Updike. (Knopf, $35.) Mr.
Updike's fourth volume of higher journalism shows a mind at once crammed and uncluttered, with courage to tackle any subject.
STALIN: Breaker of Nations, by Robert Conquest. (Viking, $25.) A superb portrait for the general reader of the mean-spirited little man who terrorized the Soviet Union for 30 years.
SARAH CANARY, by Karen Joy Fowler. (Holt, $21.95.) An accomplished, if strange, first novel that takes place in a Pacific Northwest dreamscape of the 1870's, organized, sort of, around a Chinese laborer and a mysterious woman in black.


Rare TB Strain Kills 13th Inmate in New York Prisons
Another state prison inmate suffering from a new strain of drug-resistant tuberculosis died at a hospital in Syracuse yesterday, correction officials announced.
They also told of fresh evidence that the new strain had spread to widely separated points in the prison system.
The new death brought to 13 the number of inmates, along with one guard, who have been killed in the prison system this year by a rare strain of the disease that health and correction officials have called the most alarming medical development in the state prisons since AIDS was discovered a decade ago.


High Tech Meets Goo With Blue Man Group
Blue Man makes an abstract painting on stage by pouring paint onto drums, drumming the hell out of it and catching the cascading spatters on canvas.
Then he goes to an art show and deconstructs a fish.
Blue Man is the performance group that opens in "Tubes" at the Astor Place Theater tonight: three men with bald, cobalt-blue heads, outsiders who know just enough about the current culture to make hash of it in a hurry.
The three blue men -- Matt Goldman, Phil Stanton and Chris Wink -- think of themselves on stage as a single entity that happens to have three bodies.
Since Blue Man neither talks nor shows emotion, he expresses himself through art and music, which definitely reveal that something's been pent up a long time and needs to get
out
.


Porsche Talks
To the Editor:
When Eileen Shapiro built her case against self-damaging "corporate truths" ("When 'Truths' Become Traps," Forum, Nov. 3), using the new Porsche 968 as one example, she unwittingly stepped over the line into fiction.


Mixing Up a Good, Rich Potting -Soil
THIS is about recipes: Not cold-weather sorts for soups and stews but those for soil mixtures.
Time was when the old-fashioned soil recipe -- one-one-one, that is equal parts of loam, sand and leaf mold -- was highly recommended for just about every kind of indoor plant that was grown in a pot.
If cactuses or succulents were to be potted, then the amount of gritty sand was increased a bit.
Or if humus-needing plants, like ferns or African violets, were to be potted, then another portion of humus (leaf mold) was added.
But these ingredients are hard to find now, and gardeners make do with the commercially packaged mixtures, the peat-like soilless mixtures developed by many of the agricultural colleges and favored by many growers.
These mixtures without soil have their pluses: They are lightweight, easy to use and suitable for a wide range of plants.
Most of them contain peat moss as a source of humus and perlite or vermiculite, inert ingredients made of expanded mica that retain moisture and provide some drainage.
Most of these soilless mixtures do not contain any fertilizers, but some do.


HOME CLINIC HDF&gt;hHED,30p,,2; Overcoming Problems Common With Plaster
PLASTER is harder, smoother and resists wear better than wallboard, but cracking and loosening are common problems, especially in older buildings.
Minor and some moderate damages are usually easy to repair; most major damage usually is best left to professional plasterers.
If you suspect moisture as a cause of damage (crumbling and discoloration are signs), cure the condition before making repairs; otherwise, deterioration will likely continue.


No Meat, No Fowl
To the Editor:
Mordecai Richler's review of "Little Man: Meyer Lansky and the Gangster Life" by Robert Lacey (Oct. 20) contains a monstrous error.
One sentence reads in part: "Meeting daily with his associates at Ratner's kosher restaurant on Delancey Street, Lansky favored a lunchtime tongue sandwich (middle slice, the fatty cut). . . ." While Lansky's dining preferences may have been meticulously researched by his biographer, kindly note that he was never served a tongue sandwich (middle slice or otherwise) at Ratner's.
Founded by my father in 1905 and now in its third generation, Ratner's is a fish and dairy restaurant exclusively.
No meat or fowl of any kind has ever been served.


Carole Donahue Wed in South
Carole Donahue, a daughter of Rosemary Donahue of Clearwater, Fla., and the late Daniel Donahue, was married yesterday to Robert deForest Small, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Grant D. Small of Charleston, S.C.
The Rev.
Woodleigh H. Volland performed the Episcopal service at St.
Michael's Church in Charleston.
Mrs.
Small, 35 years old, is a media planning supervisor at the Wunderman Worldwide advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Providence College.
Her mother retired as a director of planning and administration for Time Warner's Time Customer Service in Tampa, Fla.
Mr.
Small, 31, is a direct marketing consultant.
He graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
His father, who is retired, was a senior vice president of the Amstar Corporation in New York.


J. K. Ligh Weds Melanie Wilson
Melanie Pamela Wilson, the daughter of Rosemary L. and George W. Wilson Sr. of Toms River, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jonathan Kennard Ligh, a son of Ann and Harry Kuo-Deng Ligh of Honolulu and New York.
The Rev.
Garland Walker, a United Christ of Church minister, officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill, a catering center in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Ligh, 34 years old, is the art director and graphic designer in engineering for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
She graduated from the Rochester Institute of Technology.
Her father retired as the business administrator for Watchung Hills Regional High School in New Jersey.
Her mother is a retired bookkeeper.


New Yorkers, etc.
Superstitious?
Me?
You?
Don't be ridiculous.
Well, maybe just a little.
It depends on how you look at it.
It makes no sense to walk under a ladder, and three on a match, even in the puff-away days, was always a health hazard, an open sesame to singed fingers.
And why be a spoil-sport and break a chain letter, or take a chance on tripping over that black cat?


William B. Heller, 75, Aide to Mayor Lindsay
William Benjamin Heller, an architect, philanthropist and member of the Lindsay administration, died on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 75 years old and a lifetime New Yorker, with residences in Manhattan and Bedford, N.Y.
His death was apparently caused by a heart attack, the family said.


What Brand Of Laughter Do You Use?
Of laughter the types range from the short-lived to the everlasting.
The "thanks for stopping by" laugh is produced by punch lines.
Patient: "Doctor, I think I'm a dog." Doctor: "How long have you thought so?" Patient: "Since I was a puppy." It is often more lovable but less resonant than the "you know it" laugh that rolls dry in the throat in response to a joke about politics.
The corrective laugh is more durable still -- the "yesyesyes" that sputter-chuckles in response to satire.
The "oh, no" laugh, which spills in the mouth in response to pathos, can linger in the mind for years.
But the everlasting laugh is the "I know you" laugh.
It orbits the world propelled by some unseen gravity, and is produced not necessarily by anything funny that was said, but by the person who said it.
The "I know you" laugh is reserved for people like Mark Twain, James Thurber and S. J. Perelman.
Born somewhere in the area of the soul, it rises through the body like a gusher, often to explode in a mere smile, shown mainly in the eyes.


SENATOR POTHOLE
D'Amato's pro-Israel positions, his condemnation of Iraq and Saddam Hussein while Republican Administrations were courting the dictator, his strong stand against terrorism, his trip to Lithuania in support of freedom are all part of his well-reasoned world view.
We need more Al D'Amatos in the Senate.
He's surely earned my vote.
PETER E. GOLDMAN Brooklyn


Labor; Where the Contract Negotiations Stand
In his five-year financial plan announced recently, Mayor David N. Dinkins pledged to offer no raises through mid-1994, except to unions that agree to improve productivity.
But the Mayor and his aides are revising that plan to satisfy the objections of the Municipal Assistance Corporation and other fiscal monitors.
A crucial question is whether deeper cuts in the work force are necessary.
The Mayor hopes to persuade the corporation to provide $1 billion in aid to the city.
He is also seeking unspecified union concessions on work rules to reduce the impact on city services that would result from cutting thousands of additional jobs.


An American Original
YOU WOULDN'T DRINK Chianti on Bastille Day, would you?
Or Scotch on March 17?
So how could you think of drinking some kind of foreign wine on that totally American, Norman Rockwellian festival we call Thanksgiving?
What do you mean, there's no decent all-American wine?
If you've got the turkey, I've got a wine for you: it's called zinfandel.


Talking: Security; Preventing Crimes by Insiders
THEFT, rape and mugging are threats that condominum and co-op residents expect to originate from the outside.
Yet the finest locks, gatehouses, doormen and security guards are not going to deter a crime committed by someone who works inside a building or complex.
Elected officers need to be concerned because the courts are increasingly holding the owners -- sometimes the co-op corporation or the condominum association -- responsible.
"The courts are imposing a greater burden on employers to be more careful about the people they hire," said Ronald Green, a labor lawyer in New York City.
And this means taking reasonable precautions to prevent forseeable risks.


Data Bank/November 17, 1991
Producer Price Index
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
Monthly percent change
0.7
0.1
0.2
Sales at Retail Outlets
Monthly percent change
-0.1
0.6
-0.7
Industrial Production Index
Monthly percent change
0.0
0.2
-0.1
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
79.6
79.8
79.8
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.1
0.4
0.2
Business Inventories
Sept.
Aug.
July
Monthly percent change
0.6
0.0
-0.3
Cash Wheat Price
Nov. 15
Nov. 8
Nov. 1
No.1 K.C., per bushel
$3.73
$3.73
$3.74
30-year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.81
7.87
7.92


Train Platforms And Esthetics
Thank you for drawing attention to the problem of esthetic insensitivity, in the article "Towns Grumble at Stark New Train Platforms" (Nov. 3).
Hopefully the article is not too late to help us stop the defilement that has occurred to these Connecticut communities.
These small towns will soon lose their delightful individuality, like so many other towns have, due to the esthetic insensitivity of bureaucrats.
The pictures with your article of the concrete and steel monstrosities, soon to become train platforms, did not do justice to the defilement that has been done to each of the small train stations in the Danbury area.
The state has attempted to tackle the important job of improving transportation in the area, and in doing so has forced the communities to accept one transportation solution that does not apply to each individual problem.


On the Street; Urban Armor
There is a new fashion fantasy, urban armor with an aggressive but witty look.
Black leather jackets with a keep-off message bear spike-like rubber sleeves, the points soft as the fingers of rubber gloves.
Those designs (above) are from Craig Morrison of London.
Yohji Yamamoto of Tokyo offered felt vests evoking medieval Japanese armor (right).
Jean-Paul Gaultier of Paris built muscles into a foam rubber jacket ( bottom center).
New York's bike messengers now wear masks and knee guards.
The woman in the helmet (far right) is wearing a quilted and shaped black vinyl jacket and lizard-patterned leggings.


Symbols That Spelled Status In the Italian Renaissance
The new Palazzo-scaled gallery of Italian Renaissance treasures at the Metropolitan Museum of Art provides an apt introduction to the arms and armor displays gleaming beyond in the renovated Equestrian Court.
Both areas are filled with 16th-century status symbols that quickened the pulses of dukes and doges -- the bronzes, tapestries, furniture and ceramics that brightened their palaces and the painted shields and tournament armor that were paraded in their courtyards.
Dominating the Italian Renaissance displays is an architectural triumph exhibited for the first time at the museum: a soaring stone fountain carved about 1528 by Simone Mosca of Florence for a palace in Arezzo.
Richly detailed with masks, scrolls, shells and columns, the 16-foot piece reigned over the banquet room, where it was used to wash fruits and glasses.


Why Stars Reach For the Moon
To the Editor:
As one who works in promotion, I found no small coincidence in the juxtaposition of "Now Playing: Real Life, the Movie" and "Stardom, a Glitzy Stepping Stone to Mediocrity"  [ Oct. 20 ] .
In fact, the first article answers the main question asked by the second article -- i.e., why are celebrities "not satisfied with doing what they do well" and instead "want to branch out and try something they do lousy."


Quotation of the Day
"If we can label foie gras health food, ah, the world is then ours." -- JEAN MICHEL JUSTUMUS, French agricultural official.  [ 22:1. ]


'I Won't Dance,' a Tale Of Hostility and Fantasy
WHEN one of the three forlorn characters entrapped in Oliver Hailey's "I Won't Dance" asks, at the top of the second act, "What is the point here, assuming that there is one?," reverberations of the same question could almost be heard throughout the audience, what was left of it, after the intermission at a Saturday night performance.
Giving another chance to an unacknowledged play is an important purpose of regional theater, but choosing this one must be more an act of defiance than boldness on the part of the Rivoli Stage Company in its first season at the William Carlos Williams Center for the Arts.


Benefit Performance
A concert to benefit the Arts and Artists Program at the Church of St.
Paul the Apostle is to take place tonight at 7 o'clock at the church, 415 West 59th Street, in Manhattan.
The soprano Benita Valente will head a bill that inlcudes Christina Fagundes, a soloist with American Ballet Theater; Terrence Wilson, a pianist, and cast members from the Broadway musical "City of Angels." Tickets are $25.
Information: (212) 247-5056.


CAMPUS LIFE: Bryn Mawr; Auto Mechanics: Nuts and Bolts Of Survival Skills
For the first time, a workshop on car maintenance and auto repair is being offered at Bryn Mawr College.
"When we talk about a college education, we talk about becoming fuller people," said Ingrid Johnson, a senior in histiory from Livingston, N.J. who began the workshop.
"But we don't know the things that will help us survive."


Dr. Kavee Wed To S. M. Nadler
Drs.
Ellen Hillary Kavee and Stephen Michael Nadler, graduates of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, were married yesterday at the Vista Hotel in New York by Rabbi Hershel Portnoy.
The bride, 31 years old, graduated from Johns Hopkins University.
She is an attending anesthesiologist at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
She is the daughter of Barbara H. Kavee of New York and the late Dr.
Joel Kavee, a surgeon.
Dr.
Nadler, 30, a magna cum laude graduate of Colgate University, is an attending physician in rehabilitation medicine at Staten Island University Hospital.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Nadler of Syosset, L.I.
His father, a print buyer, was formerly with the New York advertising firm of Young &amp; Rubicam.


Balance Is Needed For Affordable Housing
I am an advocate for fair housing, and I believe we must safeguard our environment yet provide adequate affordable housing to improve the quality of life equally for all.
Most people associate the quality of life in housing with the protection of the environment, but they are not aware of how affordable housing can contribute to this important issue.
Affordable housing consists of middle-, moderate- and low-income housing.
Quite often affordable housing is thought of as only low-income housing, which is not necessarily true.
The price of affordable housing is relative to the price of housing in a region.
For example, a house in Westchester County with a value of $200,000 may be considered affordable middle-income housing.


Carol Mineroff Weds
Carol Mineroff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Saul Mineroff of Valley Stream, L.I., was married last night in Lawrence, L.I., to Dr.
Steven David Kushnick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Kushnick of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi Charles Klein performed the ceremony at Temple Israel.
Mrs.
Kushnick, 26 years old, is a promotional coordinator for Clinique Laboratories in New York.
She graduated from the University of Hartford.
Dr.
Kushnick, 29, is the chief resident in otolaryngology at the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary.
He graduated from Tulane University, from which he also received an M.D.


Courier, Fixing a Tire, Is Robbed of Jewelry
A courier was robbed of $160,000 in jewelry and $15,000 in cash on Friday afternoon by a group of men who jumped out of three cars and surrounded his car after he stopped to change a flat tire on the Belt Parkway in Brooklyn, the police said.
The robbery took place at 3:30 P.M. near the Fourth Avenue exit of the Belt Parkway, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Norris Hollomon.
The courier had left a jewelry store in Ceasar's Bay Bazaar, a shopping mall in the Bensonhurst section, Sergeant Hollomon said, and was driving west when he pulled off the road to change the tire.


Fighting the John Wayne Syndrome
IT has variously been called battle fatigue, shell shock and the Vietnam syndrome.
But more recently psychologists are using the term post-traumatic stress to describe the disorder.
Whatever the term, the symptoms are often the same: flashbacks, nightmares, intrusive memories of a painful event, inability to concentrate, irritability and problems with relationships.


On 1980 Deal With Iran, Read Bush's Lips
To the Editor:
Why are Republicans calling a Senate Foreign Relations Committee investigation into the alleged 1980 election deal between the G.O.P. and Iran's Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini a witchhunt (news article, Oct. 30)?
They should listen to George Bush, and then decide.


8th Birthday Party Unfolds at Beauty Salon
TEN little girls, all third-graders at the Highview School in Hartsdale, celebrated the eighth birthday of Erica Ash this month at the Lemon Tree Salon here.
In place of the magician that entertained at Erica's party last year was a bevy of different magicians named Diana, Donna and Pat, all professional hair stylists and manicurists.
Children's birthday parties in beauty shops?
Donna Gorman, the 33-year-old Lemon Tree franchisee, who also has salons in New Rochelle and Yonkers, said that what had begun as a marketing ploy had become a profit center for her.


Young Fan Can't Blow His Horn for Islanders
Eight years ago, when Lee Sonsky was in kindergarten, his parents took him to an Islanders playoff game, and the experience helped shape a passion.
The Islanders were champions then, and most of the seats were sold for most games at Nassau Coliseum.
The Sonskys sat in the last row that night, but Lee remembers fans cheering and chanting and waving sparklers at the fast and furious action on the ice below.
At a young age, he was hooked on hockey.


Review/Dance; 'Nutcracker' By the Joffrey Gets Season Under Way
The Joffrey Ballet got the holiday season off to a gentle start on Thursday with a production of "The Nutcracker" that stands out for its color and warm intimacy.
The company will perform the ballet through Dec. 1 at City Center (131 West 55th Street).
The Joffrey's version of "The Nutcracker" was staged by George Verdak and Scott Barnard, who modeled it after a 1940 Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo production.
That production was modeled on the 1892 original choreographed by Marius Petipa and Lev Ivanov to Tchaikovsky's music and danced by the Maryinsky Ballet.
Gerald Arpino, director of the Joffrey, created new choreography for the Waltz of the Snowflakes and Waltz of the Flowers scenes.
But most of all, the influence of the late Robert Joffrey is evident throughout.


The Neo-Nazis: How Quickly They Remember
A FEW days ago in the eastern German city of Leipzig, neo-Nazis smashed their way into two homes where Vietnamese refugees live, beat the terrified residents with clubs, destroyed their apartments, and stabbed one of them so seriously that he was near death by the time police arrived.
But most newspapers carried no reports of the attack, because it was so similar to attacks that are being carried out every day in Germany.
It has been just two years since the Berlin wall collapsed, and just one year since German unification.
The world cheered as Germany entered a new and exciting era, seemingly ready for a position of world leadership.


A Dose of Reality
To the Sports Editor:
Perhaps less Magic and more sober reality is what all sports, amateur and professional, need during these plague years.
LAWRENCE DUKORE New York


Should Women Really Be Timid Victims?
I read with great the article on Stephen Scaring, the defense attorney for the three St.
John's students accused of sodomizing a female classmate. ("About Long Island," Sept. 22).
I was particularly struck with his comment that when he questioned the alleged vicitm, he knew that he had won the case because she was so aggressive and "lashed out."
It is a sad commentary on the "blame the victim" mentality that aggressiveness is not to be desired women.
Evidently in our culture, a female victim need always be humble, keep her eyes downcast, be quiet, timid, and never never act angry at the violation done to her body.
If the victim had been a man, anger and aggressiveness would be considered an appropriate and valued response.
Judith M. McEvoy Melville


Is It Health Care Reform? A Test
President Bush, jolted by Harris Wofford's shocking victory in the Pennsylvania Senate race in a campaign calling for health care reform, now seems moved to develop a health care proposal of his own.
It's about time.
With 40 million Americans uninsured, and everyone else socked with double-digit hikes in premiums, the need to provide universal, affordable care is obvious.
Scores of plans are now before Congress.
Some call for a Government insurance program modeled on Canada's.
One proposed by Senate Democratic leaders would require employers to insure their employees or else pay a tax to defray the cost of public insurance.
Another proposed by the Heritage Foundation, a conservative policy organization, would require everyone to buy insurance with the help of tax credits.
And now the White House plans to weigh in.


Sunquam Parents Still Await Explanations
As the plaintiff in the suit before State Supreme Court against Half Hollow Hills School District, I would like to add some additional comments to "Finances Cited in School Closing but Critics See Other Motives" (Oct. 6).
First, regarding the suit, I would like to say that the people of the Sunquam community are generally disappointed that Judge Luciano did not deem it necessary to grant us a stay to keep Sunquam open until a decision was made.
He noted that his decision would be made in plenty of time before the opening of the school year.
Well, my children and the children of this community have been divided between two schools, bused several miles across major dangerous intersections, and packed into overcrowded schools while the esteemed judge has yet to make a decision.


Chess
The score table showed that Gary Kasparov won the Interpolis International Tournament in Tilburg, the Netherlands, with a margin of a point and a half, but the triumph did not come as easily as that might suggest.
Despite his many fine games, the world champion from the Soviet Union also got himself into trouble.
In the first of his two games with his archrival, Anatoly Karpov, he had to struggle for 114 moves to draw.
In the second of his two games with the British grandmaster Nigel Short, he had another close call.


SEDUCING THESE MEN
Recently, while shopping for a new car to replace our old one (a 1986 Subaru), we walked out of a Subaru showroom because of the hardball sales tactics.
"I guess it must work most of the time," I said to my husband.
"They're still in business."
I suggest that the honchos at Cherry Hill consider spending some of their advertising budget on seminars for their salesmen, beginning with a course on how to treat customers with courtesy.
BARBARA KRAMER
Belfast, Me.


SEDUCING THESE MEN
Randall Rothenberg's article on Subaru's account review was excellent ("Seducing These Men," Oct. 20.) Particularly interesting was the fixation with "power copy." What were the Subarus expecting to hear from the ad people?
I admit I have purchased shoes to "just do it" and eaten cereal because "it's the right thing to do," but I've never heard anything quite compelling enough to make me borrow $17,000 for six years to buy "a car that can."


Out of the 'Time Warp'
To the Editor:
I disagree with Sylvia Nasar's statement in "Pressure Grows on Aid-Thirsty Israel to Adopt Reforms" (Oct. 27), that Israel's effort to embrace free markets "seems stuck in a time warp." Israel's privatization program has been moving ahead briskly.
Recently, the government sold the Paz Oil Company and plans have been announced to raise $500 million before yearend by selling all or part of nine other state-owned companies.


STILL SAILING THE LEMONADE SEA
In his article on socialism, Paul Berman has astonishingly ignored the founder of modern socialism, except for a mysterious reference to the "texts by Karl Marx." Berman may be content to sip his socialism in the mild and heavily sugared form of Fourier's or Kautsky's lemonade, but history puts Karl Marx at the molten core of the story.
DAVID FELIX
New York, N.Y.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Slump Hits Connecticut Marinas Hard
EACH summer, thousands of sailboats, stately yachts and zigzagging speedboats create a postcard picture on Connecticut's rivers and Long Island Sound.
But now the recession has virtually beached the recreational boating industry, and in Connecticut some 25,000 marinas and dockominiums representing one of the state's most popular diversions are locked into the Northeastern slump, declining as much as 50 percent in value.


Labor; Where the Contract Negotiations Stand
In his five-year financial plan announced recently, Mayor David N. Dinkins pledged to offer no raises through mid-1994, except to unions that agree to improve productivity.
But the Mayor and his aides are revising that plan to satisfy the objections of the Municipal Assistance Corporation and other fiscal monitors.
A crucial question is whether deeper cuts in the work force are necessary.
The Mayor hopes to persuade the corporation to provide $1 billion in aid to the city.
He is also seeking unspecified union concessions on work rules to reduce the impact on city services that would result from cutting thousands of additional jobs.


Managing; Sabbatical Salve in Hard Times
Like lots of companies these days, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company concedes that, despite several rounds of painful layoffs, its management echelons are still overstaffed, both in terms of payroll costs and bureaucracy.
The obvious solution would be to let more people go.
A.T.&amp; T. is opting for a more humane stopgap instead.
Last March, it offered any manager with five years experience the option of taking between nine months and two years leave, without pay.
Some 1,643 of the 110,000 eligible managers took the offer.
The hope is that by the time they return from leave, attrition and job juggling will have rejiggered the staff enough for the payroll and hierarchy to reabsorb them easily.


Liberty for Whom?
FREEDOM
Volume One: Freedom in the Making of Western Culture.
By Orlando Patterson. 487 pp.
New York: Basic Books.


A 'Homecoming' for the Mayor
AS Mayor David N. Dinkins stood surrounded by thousands of black South Africans singing joyously of struggle in the dusty alleys of their squatter camp on Friday, his trip to this sorrowful land suddenly seemed not so much a journey of discovery as of recovery.
"You are the strongest, most courageous people anywhere, and God is with you!" the Mayor shouted to the crowd of African National Congress supporters in Khayelitsha, a warren of tin-roofed hovels on the barren flatlands outside this graceful seaside city.
Mr.
Dinkins has not had a reception like that in New York City in some time.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 22 comparing tax burdens in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut misstated an estimate given by Arthur Andersen &amp; Company for the property tax on a $300,000 single-family house in New York City.
It was $1,955.
The corrected calculation was supplied only recently by New York City's Finance Department.


Let's Reward Investments That Aid Economy; So Who's Rich?
To the Editor:
I suppose it's because we're on the verge of an election year, but even so, there seems an inordinate number of calls to "tax the rich," as in "Optimism Is Blighted in the Midwest" (Business Day, Nov. 1).
Do me, and other readers, a favor and put in parenthesis, immediately following the word "rich," the actual income level being referred to.
So we can all laugh.
GIDEON FOUNTAIN Riverside, Conn., Nov. 4, 1991


Results Plus
TENNIS Seles Makes the Final Monica Seles reached her 16th straight final this year with a 6-1, 6-2 victory over Arantxa Sanchez Vicario in the Virginia Slims of Philadelphia tournament yesterday.
The top-seeded Seles, ranked No. 1 in the world, needed only 65 minutes to beat the third-seeded Sanchez Vicario.
Seles, who will be 18 on Dec. 2, will play the winner of last night's match between second-seeded Gabriela Sabatini and fourth-seeded Jennifer Capriati in today's championship match.


Old and New


Phils Extend to Bonilla A Very 'Generous Offer'
BOBBY BONILLA met with executives of the Philadelphia Phillies yesterday and received a "substantial, generous" offer, DENNIS GILBERT, the player's agent, said.
Bonilla and Gilbert are scheduled to meet with Mets executives in New York today.
Gilbert would not divulge terms of the offer presented by BILL GILES, the Phillies' president and managing partner, and General Manager LEE THOMAS.
Bonilla has rejected a four-year, $18.5 million offer from the Pittsburgh Pirates, for whom he played the last five and a half years.


California Is Tired Of Hearing the Meaning of It All
CALIFORNIANS have long resented what they perceive as a condescending view of their sunny land in the national press.
But as long as things went well, they could dismiss this as envy on the part of myopic East Coast editors forced to make their livings slogging through the winter slush of Manhattan.
The Californians could tune out, grow rich and get sun tanned.
Now that times have turned tough on the West Coast, those tanned hides have proved thin.
The California economy, which nearly everybody here thought invulnerable to national vicissitudes until recently, is deeply mired in recession and lagging the nation in recovery.
Compounding this have been recent natural insults like the deadly fire that swept the hills above Oakland and Berkeley last month, not to mention the perennial problems of smog, street gangs and traffic congestion.


Baedeker
To the Editor: Your Baedeker article struck home, for I have my own collection going back many years.
As a graduate student in Manhattan and junior instructor at New York University, I used to frequent the booksellers on Fourth Avenue.
Used Baedekers went for anything from 30 cents to $1, which was a fair sum for me in those days.
But I persisted until I acquired about 20.
They are still valuable in their rich, factual detail for the monuments and features that have managed to survive the 20th century; but also they have helped enrich my classes in the history of Euro-American cities for many years.
STANLEY B. WINTERS Montclair, N.J.


Magic No Hero
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson's column "Sorry, but Magic Isn't a Hero" (The Times, Nov. 14) is right on target.
As he writes, sympathize with Johnson as you would with anyone who had contracted the dreaded HIV virus, but don't overlook the fact that in acknowledging so many trysts with so many women in so many cities, he has been about as sexist as his opportunites allowed him to be.
Magic shouldn't be enshrined as a national hero because he has AIDS.


Review/Opera; Henze's Setting of Mishima's 'Sailor'
Before going to see "Das Verratene Meer," which had its American premiere last week at the San Francisco Opera, I read "The Sailor Who Fell from Grace with the Sea," the novel by Yukio Mishima on which the Hans Werner Henze opera is based.
This might have been a mistake.
For the book is so sensuously lyrical yet so ominously distasteful that it seemed an unwelcome challenge to match the effect in music.
Mishima's lyricism is in service to an extraordinarily perverse tale: a young adolescent, Noboru, spies on his mother and her lover, a sailor, through a hole in their bedroom wall.
He shares his revelations with a youthful gang whose members ruthlessly practice honing heroic impulses by smashing a kitten against a board, then dissecting it and immersing themselves in the "warmth of the scattered viscera." It is easy enough to imagine what happens when they turn to the sailor who has abdicated his heroic seafaring role for a bourgeois life.
Suffice it to say that the leader instructs his 14-year-old charges to bring their scalpels and saws.


Let There Be Light
THE FIRST TIME I saw John he was dressed in white, with an impossible tan and the damnedest gold watch I had ever seen.
At the Yale School of Drama, filled with suffering artists dressed in black, he was a bona fide L. A. cliche.
And breathtaking.
It was September 1979, and at the local bank, the line of students stretched out the door.
John and I waited together for almost an hour.
Finally, when the tellers' windows were a few feet away, he got fed up and left.
I was shocked.
I couldn't believe he would just give up.
Spend all that time and walk away.
I discovered that this was a trademark weakness of John's, just as he learned that enduring the line was a typical weakness of mine.
No matter how much of the day was wasted, I wouldn't have budged, because I knew I wasn't supposed to.
Freedom versus discipline.
It was our theme song.


Some Fought for Freedom, Some for Glory
ON THE ALTAR OF FREEDOM
A Black Soldier's Civil War Letters From the Front.
By Corporal James Henry Gooding.
Edited by Virginia Matzke Adams.
Illustrated. 139 pp.
Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. $21.95
FALLEN LEAVES
The Civil War Letters of Major Henry Livermore Abbott.
Edited by Robert Garth Scott.
Illustrated. 266 pp.
Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press. $27.


Karen Stearman Is to Marry in May
May wedding plans for Karen Marie Stearman and Paul Adam Fields have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Stearman of Silver Spring, Md.
Mr.
Fields is a son of the soprano Roberta Peters and her husband, Bertram Fields, of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Ms.
Stearman, 30 years old, is a construction management marketing executive with Himes Associates in Fairfax, Va.
Her father is a manager for Commercial Paper Inc. in Silver Spring.
Her mother is a teacher's assistant in the Montgomery County (Md.) school system.
Mr.
Fields, 34, is president of Windgate Properties, a real-estate consulting concern in Alexandria, Va.
He graduated from Ithaca College and received an M.B.A. from American University.
His father is an investor.


TV M.D.'s; No Such Right
To the Editor:
In the article on TV doctors, a doctor/journalist is quoted saying "as physicians, we can just pluck those medical charts and read them." If the visiting physician is not a participant in the patient's treatment, he/she has no more right to read the chart than to ask the patient to undress for an examination.
HENRY PINSKER, M.D.
New York


Brazil Tries to Curb Crimes Against Women
Her right hand in a plaster cast, Josefa Gomes de Souza nervously recounted to a police chief how her husband, Adao Gomes Silva, threw her in a rage against a wall of their wooden shanty here.
In another room, Mr.
Silva, a steelworker, stared sullenly at the floor and tersely gave a differing version: "She doesn't have a scar on her body. She caught her thumb in the door."


Ilana Hessing Weds
Ilana Golda Hessing, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sigmar Hessing of Berkeley Heights, N.J., was married last evening to Steven Wayne Ginsburg, the son of Norton and Florence Ginsburg of Southampton, Pa.
Rabbi William B. Horn officiated at the Jewish Community Center of Summit, N.J.
Ms.
Hessing, who is 32 years old and is keeping her name, is a lawyer for Cigna in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Rutgers University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
Mr.
Ginsburg, 35, is a supervisor at Alcohol and Mental Health Associates in Philadelphia.
He graduated cum laude and received a master's degree in school psychology from Temple University.
His first marriage ended in divorce.


Leland Bell Memorial
A memorial service for the painter and teacher Leland Bell is to be held on Tuesday at 6 P.M. in the Bernard Mayer Auditorium at the New School for Social Research, 66 West 12th Street.
Speakers are to include the painters Nell Blaine, Mercedes Matter and Robert DeNiro, the father of the actor, and the writers John Hollander and Jed Perl.
Mr.
Bell died of leukemia on Sept. 17 at the age of 69.


A Weed Is Choking Southern Waters
Like some second-rate horror movie playing out across the nation's southern tier, a stringy vine capable of growing an inch a day has invaded hundreds of lakes and streams, clogging the intake valves of power plants and water works and threatening the businesses of people whose livelihoods depend on fishing.
The Asian weed, hydrilla, which entangled and drowned the botanist who first studied it, has found its way into lakes and rivers from Southern California to Washington, D.C., and botanists fear it could go further, hitching rides on boat propellers, undisturbed for lack of any known natural enemies and undeterred by frigid weather.


Lawmakers Ready for Next Act in the Tax Drama
STATE legislators convene in special session this week to amend, or even repeal, the state's three-month-old income tax law, and most lawmakers expect a resumption of last summer's budget turmoil.
But the political calendar is adding a powerful new twist.
Budget experts and legislators on both sides of the tax issue said the timing of the session -- in the middle of the fiscal year, just before the political campaign cycle that begins in January and leads to next fall's midterm elections -- has loaded the process with weighty political and fiscal considerations.


Addams Newly Bound
ALTHOUGH Charles Addams was perhaps best known for the Addams Family drawings, they are not the only characters that he created.
Of 1,300 of his drawings published by The New Yorker over several decades, 67 were about the Addams family.
"The World of Charles Addams" (Knopf, $30), released on Oct. 31, contains 300 drawings selected by his widow, the former Marilyn Matthews Miller, who is known as Tee.


Sanctions Won't Hurt Qaddafi, His Foes Say
The latest confrontation between Western powers and the the Government of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi comes as Libya's ties with African and Arab countries are fraying, its ability to carry out or support international acts of terror severely constrained and its economy beset by mismanagement and huge expenditures on questionable development projects.
Still, Libyan opponents of the Qaddafi leadership say the expected imposition of further economic sanctions, possibly next week, will only complicate the lives of ordinary Libyans without provoking Colonel Qaddafi's fall from power, which has been the desire of Western and some Arab governments.


A Little Magic In All With AIDS
To the Sports Editor:
The authors writing in last Sunday's sports pages (The Times, Nov. 10) appear to have missed the bigger picture regarding the impact of Magic Johnson's report that he has tested HIV positive.
Johnson, known for his irrepressible personality and youthful buoyancy, has the opportunity to have an unprecedented impact on how we see people with AIDS, because of how we feel about him: Many of us love him.
Now when we come into contact with a gay or IV drug-abusing AIDS patient, we see Magic there, and we feel some of that love for that patient, too.
Then we want to act to relieve the injustice of their suffering, and mourn the delay of our understanding.
RICHARD KEEFE New York The writer is assistant professor of psychiatry at Mount Sinai School of Medicine.


In 2d Watkins Trial, Chilling Tapes to Be Gone
One defendant, Emiliano Fernandez, said Yull Gary Morales bragged about how he stabbed Brian Watkins to death on a Manhattan subway platform.
Another, Ricardo Nova, recalled how the 19-year-old Mr.
Morales had said he "had to knock somebody out" and "wiped the blood from his knife" after members of the Watkins family, tourists from Utah, were attacked.
Legal experts agree that the evidence against Mr.
Morales, contained in videotaped and written statements, is strong.
But under the rules of evidence, the jury that will consider the case against him early next year will never see or hear it.


Florida Wins S.E.C. Title By Holding Off Kentucky
Tre Everett, Florida's best receiver, returned to the lineup today after missing three games with a hamstring injury, and caught two touchdown passes to spark a 35-26 victory over Kentucky, which rallied from a 22-point halftime deficit.
Florida, No. 3 in The New York Times computer ranking, clinched a berth in the Sugar Bowl, possibly against Notre Dame, as the Southeastern Conference champion.
The title was the Gators' first officially in 58 years of league play.
Florida (9-1 and 7-0) also finished first in 1984, 1985 and 1990 but was denied titles and bowl berths because of National Collegiate Athletic Association probation.


George C. P. Olsson, 88, Is Dead; Headed Ocean Spray Cooperative
George C. P. Olsson, a former chairman of Ocean Spray Cranberries Inc., a farmers' cooperative that now has more than 800 grower-members and annual sales of almost $1 billion, died Wednesday in Jordan Hospital in Plymouth, Mass.
He was 88 years old and lived in Plymouth.
He died of heart failure after being in declining health for the past year, said his son Philip C. Olsson of Washington.


In Stamford, "The Deal"
JIMMY, a small-time politician, is taking his first bribe.
He's a "virgin crook." Peter, the F.B.I. undercover agent who sets him up by posing as a development corporation's representative who needs a liquor license, has a conscience.
"I'm a sensitive guy," Peter announces.
In "The Deal," which is being produced by Stamford Theater Works, the playwright, Matthew Witten, has contrived a pseudo-morality play about the guile, deceit and treachery that come with the territory of real estate and politics.


Paul Taylor Hears the Andrews Sisters Anew
Paul Taylor's "Company B," subtitled "Songs Sung by the Andrews Sisters," has proved to be a smash hit.
Yet the anatomy of its success is anything but simple.
"Company B" is neither a nostalgia piece nor a pastiche.
The mix of catchy harmonies by the famous trio and Mr.
Taylor's fleeting jitterbug references, coupled with a stream of wartime images, would suggest that "Company B" is about the 1940's.
Actually, it is about us -- humans at large and Americans in particular, whatever the period.
Through the prism of nine recordings (one repeated) by the Andrews Sisters, Mr.
Taylor takes on wider subjects than the songs seemingly allow.
Mortality is his theme, taboos his concern.


Salvadoran Defense Chief Linked To Jesuit Killings by House Panel
An inquiry by a special panel of House Democrats into the 1989 killings of six Jesuit priests in El Salvador has concluded that there is strong circumstantial evidence to suggest that the crime was plotted by senior Salvadoran Army officers, including the current Defense Minister, according to an internal report.
A six-page internal memo concludes that Gen.
Rene Emilio Ponce, now Defense Minister and then army chief of staff, and the other officers planned the attack at a meeting at the Salvadoran military academy the day before the killings, which caused an international outcry and hardened the resistance of El Salvador's leftist guerrillas to negotiations with the Government.


Praise for Catholic Bishops' Statement on Children
A statement by the National Conference of Catholic Bishops calling on the nation to make the needs of children and families its first priority got favorable reviews Friday from both ends of the political spectrum.
The statement combined opposition to abortion and "permissive divorce" with support for "broad-based child care," an increased minimum wage, tax benefits for parents, guaranteed access to health care, affordable housing policies, flexible job hours and parental-leave policies for family and medical needs.
Weaving together themes of moral values with concerns about economic pressures and discrimination, the statement was intended to overcome what it termed "an unfortunate, unnecessary and unreal polarization in discussion of how best to help families."


Mixing Up a Good, Rich Potting -Soil
THIS is about recipes: Not cold-weather sorts for soups and stews but those for soil mixtures.
Time was when the old-fashioned soil recipe -- one-one-one, that is equal parts of loam, sand and leaf mold -- was highly recommended for just about every kind of indoor plant that was grown in a pot.
If cactuses or succulents were to be potted, then the amount of gritty sand was increased a bit.
Or if humus-needing plants, like ferns or African violets, were to be potted, then another portion of humus (leaf mold) was added.
But these ingredients are hard to find now, and gardeners make do with the commercially packaged mixtures, the peat-like soilless mixtures developed by many of the agricultural colleges and favored by many growers.
These mixtures without soil have their pluses: They are lightweight, easy to use and suitable for a wide range of plants.
Most of them contain peat moss as a source of humus and perlite or vermiculite, inert ingredients made of expanded mica that retain moisture and provide some drainage.
Most of these soilless mixtures do not contain any fertilizers, but some do.


The Dangers in Paintball War
To the Editor:
"The Satisfying Silliness of the Paintball Wars" (The Executive Life, Oct. 20) described another of the crazes that sweep the nation from time to time.
On Oct. 5, during a paintball war held in upstate New York as part of a benefit to raise funds to fight breast cancer, my daughter was hit in the eye by a paintball pellet that went through the goggles provided by management.
The retina was shattered.
It will be a long time before the extent of the damage to her eye can be measured.
Paintball is not monitored and until serious litigation forces the government to act, we are at the mercy of the manufacturers and the operators.
JACK ELLIOTT  Beverly Hills, Calif., Oct. 25


Jeffrey Musso to Wed Caroline J. Kaufman
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Kaufman of New York have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Caroline Jaye Kaufman, and Jeffrey Scott Musso, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Musso of Mountainside, N.J.
Ms.
Kaufman, 27 years old, is a senior financial analyst at Sony Music Entertainment in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is also a certified public accountant.


Technology; A Whole New Dimension to Retreads
The discarded tire has been the centerpiece of a number of recycling efforts over the years.
Indeed, used tires have been revived as everything from hockey pucks and sandals to mud flaps, running tracks and fishing nets.
But these efforts have barely made a dent in the nation's pile of three billion discarded tires.
Some engineers here believe, however, that they have come up with a process that will allow tires to be turned into something usable on a large scale.


Similarities to 1987, and Significant Differences; Market's Message: No Recovery Yet
The sudden 120-point drop in the Dow Jones industrial average on Friday ended a week in which new economic data seemed to provide convincing evidence that the current recession is not behaving like other post-World War II recessions -- and that the much-anticipated economic upturn is still weeks or months away.
Many factors, apart from the economy, undoubtedly contributed to the late-afternoon selloff, among them a bill in Congress that would put a cap on credit card interest rates, a ceiling that would hurt bank profits.
But the gloomy economic statistics certainly provided the appropriate backdrop.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:  Aames Financial Corp., 1.45 million shares.
Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
Agricultural Minerals Company, 7.6 million senior preference units.
Lehman Brothers.
America Services Group, 1.1 million shares.
William Blair &amp; Co.
Apple South Inc., 1.3 million shares.
Raymond James &amp; Associates.
Banc One Corp., 7.5 million shares.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Biogen Inc., 2 million shares.
Lehman Brothers.
Burlington Northern Inc., 9 million shares.
Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
Century Cellular Corp., 3 million class A shares.
Lehman Brothers.
Colgate-Palmolive Co., 10 million shares.
Goldman, Sachs.
Cytel Corp., 3 million shares.
Goldman, Sachs.
Diagnostek Inc., 3.5 million shares.
Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Duff &amp; Phelps Utilities Tax-Free Income Inc., 7 million shares.
Prudential Securities.
FPL Group Inc., 5 million shares.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Gencare Health Systems Inc, 3.2 million shares.
A.
G.
Edwards Inc.
General Medical Corp., 7.5 million shares.
Paine Webber.
Hamburger Hamlet Inc., 2.5 million shares.
First Boston.
Hancock Holding Co., 1.35 million shares.
Robinson-Humphrey Co.
Immunogen Inc., 2 million shares.
Paine Webber.
Information America Inc., 2 million shares.
Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.
Jimbo's Jumbos Inc., 2 million common shares.
Ladenburg, Thalmann.
Kimco Realty Corp., 6.75 million shares.
Merrill Lynch.
Liposome Technology Inc., 3 million shares, Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
Magna International Inc., 5.5 million Class A voting shares.
First Boston.
Mexico Growth Fund Inc., 4 million shares.
Paine Webber.
Nutrition Management Services Co., one million Class A units (one share; one warrant).
Stratton Oakmont.
Nuveen N.Y.
Quality Income Municipal Fund, 5 million shares.
Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.
Nuveen California Quality Income Municipal Fund, 5 million shares.
Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.
Physician Computer Network, 4 million shares.
Ladenburg Thalman.
Paramax Inc., 20 million shares.
Lehman Brothers.
Plains Resources Inc., 1.5 million shares.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Seligman Quality Municipal Fund, 10 million shares.
Lehman Brothers.
Stop and Shop Companies, 17 million shares.
Merrill Lynch.
Thorn Apple Valley Inc., 875,000 shares.
Lehman Brothers.
U.S.
Facilities Corp., 1.5 million shares.
Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.
Vitro Sociedad Anonima, 4.2 million American depository receipts (each representing one common share).
First Boston.
Source: MCM CorporateWatch


Man Is Slain In the Bronx As He Waits For Relative
As a matter of safety, Severo Castro had made a habit of walking to the corner in his South Bronx neighborhood on weekend nights to escort his brother-in-law home from the subway after work.
As he waited late Saturday night, talking with his wife from a pay phone in front of 1208 Stratford Avenue, Mr.
Castro was shot and killed by an unidentified gunman, the police said.
Two relatives, including his brother-in-law, Inocente Gonzalez, were also sprayed with shotgun pellets, they said.


Girl, 2, Killed As Fire Strikes Queens Home
A 2-year-old girl was killed Saturday night in a Queens house fire that was started by her 3-year-old brother as he played with a cigarette lighter, the Fire Department said yesterday.
"The little boy came down, saying, 'Fire! Fire! There's a fire,' " Eleanor Ray, the grandmother of the girl, Jessica Tarver, recalled yesterday.
"There was flames coming from the attic."


Keene and the '3 Gigantic Fears' He Overcame at the City Opera
One afternoon recently, Christopher Keene sat in his neatly arranged office in the basement of the New York State Theater and looked back with evident satisfaction at the New York City Opera's 1991 season, which ended with yesterday's matinee performance of "Brigadoon."
On the asset side of his ledger, some 300,000 operagoers attended his company's productions, representing a sale of 82 percent of the company's tickets.
And there were the reviews, too, which this year were also largely positive.


Library Lends Tools to Build Pride
Carl Varner went to the public library here the other day and checked out a hammer.
Then he took it home and used it to replace the ragged paneling in the entrance hallway.
He lives in a plain split-level house with his sister, Janice, and she had been egging him to help tidy up the place.
"Right now I couldn't really afford a hammer," said Mr.
Varner, who works at a plumbing supply company.
"All I can say is I'm a grateful man that I can go to the library and take out a tool that makes life a little better."


Reviews/Music; Philharmonic and Masur Settling In
Though Kurt Masur's tenure at the helm of the New York Philharmonic has just begun, the changes in the orchestra are already palpable.
Mr.
Masur has altered the timbre and tone of the playing, softening its edges, making the sound seem both more expansive and more focused.
The ensemble work has also evolved: there seems to be more mutual attentiveness, more concentration and more musical conversation than I remember from years past.
There may be continued rumblings about unresolved labor negotiations involving the orchestra's contract, but on Friday afternoon in Avery Fisher Hall, the music gave evidence only of welcome changes: a relaxed pleasure taken in diverse styles along with an attempt to build a program around a theme.


Few New Jobs Seen by Panel
The lackluster economic recovery expected next year will create few new jobs, the Conference Board, a business-oriented research group, said in a report released yesterday.
The group's Human Resources Outlook Panel said unemployment was expected to average 6.8 percent of the work force in the first six months of 1992.
The national unemployment rate was 6.8 percent in October, according to the Labor Department.


YELTSIN'S DECREES SEEK FULL CHARGE OF RUSSIAN ASSETS
With a burst of new decrees issued over the weekend, Boris N. Yeltsin has moved to assert the Russian republic's dominance over the foundering Soviet economy, proclaiming control over Russia's dwindling reserves of oil, gold and other precious metals and opening its doors to foreign trade.
The package of new measures, officially announced early today, would lift most controls over imports, exports and foreign-currency transactions on Russian territory and allow the value of the ruble -- now fixed by the Soviet central bank though widely traded on the black market -- to float according to market rates, starting Jan. 1.


Bridge
The highest score in the record books for a single session of duplicate play is 83.3 percent, achieved in New York City in 1974 by Ron Andersen and C. C. Wei.
That record was shattered on Sept. 27 when a husband and wife, Bernard and France Marcoux, scored 87.3 percent in a Unit game in the Ste.-Adele section of Montreal.
This is much more remarkable than breaking the bank at Monte Carlo with 27 winning roulette plays on red.
It "was like a magic spell," reports Marcoux, who knew where he was heading and was growing progressively more nervous.
His wife, he says, "played like a pro."


Sampras Builds More Success on Top of Confidence
It was a fitting climax to a spectacular autumn for Pete Sampras.
He came here to the Association of Tennis Professionals Tour world championship with a 32-5 match record since Aug. 1, and today -- three more victories and one loss later -- he beat Jim Courier, 3-6, 7-6 (7-5), 6-3, 6-4, in the tournament's final.


Wide-Ranging Afghan Talks Urged by Kabul Government
With a cutoff of its Soviet weapons supply only weeks away, the Government called today for wide-ranging peace talks to bring about a political solution to the 12-year civil war.
The appeal came in response to a joint statement issued Saturday in Moscow after talks between Soviet officials and a delegation from the American-backed Afghan rebels.


CHRONICLE
In an unusual gathering of women with much in common, five ballerinas who danced in the 1940's and 1950's met in Oklahoma City yesterday for the dedication of a mural at the state Capitol commemorating their accomplishments.
MARIA TALLCHIEF, her sister, MARJORIE, and ROSELLA HIGHTOWER, YVONNE CHOUTEAU and MOSCELYNE LARKIN are depicted in the work that shows ballerinas in white against a background of tribal ancestors and flying geese symbolizing grace and spirit.
The dancers are all Oklahoma natives and all of American Indian heritage, prompting Ms.
Larkin to speculate the other day that it was no coincidence they had followed the same muse.
"We all saw the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo that toured the country when we were children," she said, referring to the company with which most of them subsequently performed.
"We are all Native Americans who had the experience as children of dancing in powwows. This is a natural expression for Native Americans; nothing could be more natural than for us to dance."


Wolohan Lumber reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Maxwell Case: A Fleet Street Classic
Robert Maxwell once advised the editor of one of his newspapers: Never let others know what you are thinking but always keep people on their toes.
Almost two weeks after his mysterious death, that credo seems to apply to the last hours of his life around the Canary Islands.


With Rights Act Comes Fight To Clarify Congress's Intent
The fight between President Bush and Congress over the Civil Rights Act of 1991 was not just a struggle to write the legislation.
It was also an arcane but important battle to establish the legislative history of the measure, which Mr.
Bush plans to sign into law in a few days.
Judges have traditionally used the legislative history of a bill for guidance in interpreting the law, looking at Congressional committee reports, hearings and statements in the Senate and the House.
The legislative history supposedly shows the intent of Congress.


Zenith Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Saudi King Plans Governmental Reform
King Fahd of Saudi Arabia has announced a series of changes in the Government to take place by January, including the formation of a council of Saudi citizens with whom the royal family is to consult in ruling the country, the introduction of a written body of laws and greater local autonomy for the provinces.
In his announcement last week, King Fahd also pledged to expand the Saudi military into a defensive force "that others will respect." After the Persian Gulf war made clear that Iraq posed a threat to the Saudi kingdom, Saudi and United States officials said plans were under way to more than double the size of the Saudi armed forces to about 200,000 troops.


Mideast Buffer Zones
To the Editor:
The Arab states at Madrid demanded Israeli withdrawal from the disputed or occupied lands.
Israel rejected it on the ground of security.
The tension of this confrontation may be much eased by a standard formula in history: to pull the confronting parties apart by setting up demilitarized zones along the borders under international agreement.


Stock Tumble: What's Next?
Despite some similarities between the stock market at the time of its decline in the fall of 1987 and the market that declined on Friday, there are telling differences.
Among them are lower interest rates, which provide fewer attractive investments; calm er mutual fund investors, who did not stampede out of stock funds over the weekend, and curbs on institutional trading.


Buoniconti Joins Former Dolphins In Special Honor
NICK BUONICONTI will be honored tonight at Joe Robbie Stadium in Miami.
The ceremony for the Dolphins' star linebacker of the 1970's will take place at halftime of the Dolphins-Buffalo Bills game.
Last year, the Dolphins became one of a small number of National Football League teams that honor former players and executives by placing their names or numbers on stadium walls for all to see.


Quotation of the Day
"The main issue in TB control is getting people to take their medicine. This was a curable disease. What we are creating is a disease which is not going to be treatable. We're going back to the Dark Ages." -- DR.
KAREN BRUDNEY, who studied patients at Harlem Hospital.  [ B1:6. ]


Corrections
An listing in some copies yesterday with an obituary about Tony Richardson, the film director, incorrectly attributed a film to him.
"Saturday Night and Sunday Morning" was directed by Karel Reisz, not Mr.
Richardson.
In addition, the obituary incompletely described one of Mr.
Richardson's daughters, Joely.
Like her sister Natasha, she is an actress.
A corrected version of the obituary appears today on page 27.


Joanne Liakos Weds
Joanne Liakos, an account vice president of Paine Webber Inc., and Frederick Warren Hackenburg, a senior investment analyst in the asset management division of Credit Suisse, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Marvin Henk, a Lutheran minister, officiated at the Coveleigh Club in Rye, N.Y.
Ms.
Liakos, 34 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Potsdam and is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dimitrios Liakos of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Mr.
Hackenburg, 47, graduated from Florida State University and received an M.B.A. degree from Baruch College.
He is the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Warren M. Hackenburg.


In the Bronx, a Forest Primeval
Now in November, a primeval piece of the Bronx called the Forest can be seen at its plainest.
Ancient oak, beech and hemlock trees, two and three centuries old, stand massively alone, their trunks more than a dozen feet around.
Huge boulders, pushed over from the Palisades by glaciers, lie alongside outcroppings of bedrock.
A section of the New York Botanical Garden, the Forest is a 40-acre wilderness surrounded by the city -- preserved by its own ability to adapt to the city's pollutions.
In fact, scientists at a recent conference learned, it even gets some benefit from the polluting chemicals.
And it has been given a big assist by a policy of attentive neglect.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about management shifts at Reader's Digest misstated the change in The Family Handyman's advertising pages for the first nine months of this year.
They rose 22 percent.


Julia Dubno Marries
Julia Ruth Dubno, the owner and director of Ballet Academy East, and Dr.
David Ira Wollner, a physician, both in New York, were married yesterday by Rabbi David H. Lincoln at the Park Avenue Synagogue.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Parker Dubno of Maspeth, Queens.
Her father, who is retired, was a makeup man in the composing room of The New York Times.
Dr.
Wollner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Wollner of Paterson, N.J., is an assistant professor of medicine at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine and an attending physician in medicine and oncology at the Montefiore Medical Center and Calvary Hospital.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


Essay; Ukraine Marches Out
"Unprincipled" is the word used to describe President Bush by Mykhailo Horyn, a former political prisoner and founder of Rukh, the Ukrainian independence movement.
"We prefer Thomas Jefferson."
Fighters for a Ukraine free of Russian imperial rule are still smarting at Mr.
Bush's speech in Kiev this summer blasting "suicidal nationalism" and touting the Gorbachev center.


Mets Take Bonilla to Dinner, but What's the Bill?
In their opening pitch for the services of Bobby Bonilla, the Mets met with the season's elite free agent for nearly three hours yesterday in a session the club described as "a feeling-out procedure."
Bonilla and his agent, Dennis Gilbert, were taken to dinner in Manhattan by Al Harazin, the general manager of the Mets, and Frank Cashen, the club's chief operating officer.


Fir Island Journal; A Peace With the River on Its Terms
This is the season of trumpeter swans and leaden afternoons in the Skagit River country, a time when everybody looks up, wondering how much water will fall from the sky.
It is best to have a boat parked outside the front door and a flashlight that floats.
The rains start off gentle enough, a soft drizzle at sea level, snow in the North Cascades, 50 miles to the east.


Review/Ballet; A 'Nutcracker' Eludes The Opera-House Spirit
"The Nutcracker," in the Joffrey Ballet's warm-hearted Americana version, has arrived early this season but not too soon for the squads of children in the audience who squealed in delight at Saturday's matinee.
Right on the heels of Thursday's opening, led by Tina LeBlanc and Tom Mossbrucker, the Joffrey offered two other casts of principals.
The Sugar Plum Fairy and her Prince on Friday night were Jodie Gates, dancing with exquisite classical style, and Tyler Walters.
Saturday afternoon's performance at the City Center (131 West 55th Street), where this "Nutcracker" is in residence through Dec. 1, was led by Deborah Dawn, in a debut as a glamorous Sugar Plum, partnered by Scott Jovovich.


Easy Now Suffers a Costly Loss in Demoiselle
Easy Now, the uncrowned queen of the juvenile fillies who was snubbed for the Breeders' Cup, abdicated the title yesterday when she ran third to Stolen Beauty in the $200,000 Demoiselle Stakes at Aqueduct and lost for the first time in her young and rosy career.
Easy Now, the 2-year-old daughter of Danzig and a half-sister to the renowned Easy Goer, went to the post with flags flying.
She won her first two starts at seven furlongs by a combined total of 14 lengths, and she was the 1-to-5 favorite to keep the streak alive and probably to get the inside track for the Eclipse Award as the nation's best young filly.


Market Place; Similarities to 1987, and Significant Differences
At first glance, the similarities between 1987 and 1991 are haunting: a long, increasingly exuberant rally in the stock market that abruptly ended, on an autumnal Friday, with a selling frenzy that slashed more than 100 points off the Dow Jones industrial average.
But market professionals see telling differences between last Friday and Oct. 16, 1987, which was followed by "Black Monday" on Oct. 19, the worst one-day market crash in the nation's history.


Knight-Ridder Faces a Newspaper Puzzle
A year after Knight-Ridder Inc. reinvented The Boca Raton News in Florida as a newspaper calculated to appeal to baby boomers, the results are both heartening and frustrating.
Readers overwhelmingly approve of many of The News's innovations, including a rigorously enforced prohibition against having articles continue on another page.
According to an April survey by the Simmons Market Research Bureau, 91 percent of The News's readers "mainly like" that particular change.


Ms. Wechsler Has Wedding
Elizabeth Mina Wechsler, a daughter of Joel I. Wechsler of Brooklyn and Susan Simon of Boca Raton, Fla., was married yesterday to Aby Jacob Rosen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Isak Rosen of Tel Aviv.
Rabbi Arthur Schneier officiated at the Pierre.
Mrs.
Rosen, 27 years old, graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a managing director of the Edward S. Gordon Company, a New York real estate concern.


2 Fatally Shot in Bronx While Passing Car
The driver and a passenger of a 1990 Honda were shot to death on a Bronx street yesterday by the passenger of another car the driver tried to pass, the police said.
The Bronx victims and two other men were driving along Seward Avenue in the Soundview section about 4:40 P.M. when a car in front of them stopped inexplicably, said Lieut.
John Sebring of the 43d Precinct.


Week's Treasury Auctions Involve Regular Bill Sales
This week, the Treasury plans to hold only its regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills today.
About $20.4 billion is expected to be raised.
Late on Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 4.55 percent and the six-month bill at 4.58 percent.


Police Still Needed at Polling Places in Hotly Contested Races
To the Editor:
I must disagree with "Police at the Polls" (Topics of The Times, Nov. 3), supporting the proposal that police no longer be required at polling places in New York City on Election Day.


Asher Wolk Dies at 78; Founded a Magazine
Asher Wolk, a magazine editor and writer, died Saturday at the Veterans Administration Hospital Center in the Bronx.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a major bacterial infection and had been ill for the past four years after a fall caused severe neurological problems, his family said.


After Delays, Orion Films' Release Set
Despite somber financial difficulties, the Orion Pictures Corporation said today that it would release 12 films in 1992 whose release was delayed this year because of money problems.
At the same time, William Bernstein, Orion's president and chief executive, expressed some optimism that the company would complete its financial overhaul and begin producing five or six movies next year.
Such a move would buoy writers, directors, actors and producers in Hollywood, who have viewed Orion as a studio with an impressive track record that gave film makers unusual creative freedom and maintained a hands-off attitude toward them.


Presidents' Plan to Name Successors Skirted Law
Acting outside the Constitution in the early 1980's, a secret Federal agency established a line of succession to the Presidency to assure continued government in the event of a devastating nuclear attack, current and former United States officials said today.
The officials reached today refused to discuss details of the plan, the existence of which was disclosed in a television program tonight on the Cable News Network.
The CNN report said that if all 17 legal successors to the President were incapacitated, non-elected officials would assume office in extreme emergencies.


The Louisiana Election; Duke's Loss Brings Joy Even as It Fans Anger
From an easy chair in his living room, Cleveland Johnson stared at the television picture of David Duke as the former Ku Klux Klan leader delivered his concession speech.
Finally, it was over.
And Mr.
Johnson began to chuckle, softly at first, and then in great, lusty gales.
"I felt like rejoicing," said Mr.
Johnson, a 44-year-old steelworker who recalls the day in 1970 when he was reprimanded at work for using the restroom for whites.
"Duke can say whatever he wants. Fact is, he lost. And he lost big."


Dark Skies For Bush; Rain on His Parade Buoys Democrats
There are more than just a few scattered clouds over the White House in the past few days.
The sagging economy, a new challenge from the party's right and some rough new attacks from the Democrats have combined to produce a siege of bad weather for President Bush.
What worries many Republicans is whether this White House, this political team and this President can adjust.
Mr.
Bush's fortunes, after all, have changed very quickly.
In recent days, the Administration has seemed rattled and forced into playing defense again and again, feeding concerns in the party that Mr.
Bush and his political apparatus are not yet ready for 1992.


Bowl Pairings Take Almost No Time at All
The matches for the 18 bowl games were all but completed yesterday, the official day for extending invitations according to the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
But there was plenty of evidence that promises and deals were made in advance of Saturday's games even though the N.C.A.A. committee on post-season events had threatened to fine any obvious violators as much as $250,000.


The Louisiana Election;
Businesses, labor unions and wealthy individuals made at least $43.5 million in political contributions that ended up going to state and local parties last year to get around the law that limits direct giving to candidates for Congress, according to a new study.
The nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics, in a study to be made public on Monday, traced such contributions, called "soft money," by the national parties and their affiliates in nine states and found that the Republicans were by far the most successful at collecting them.


Reluctantly, Black Churches Confront AIDS
From the pulpit of the Memorial Baptist Church in Harlem, to a chorus of nods and cries of "Yes, yes" from the congregation below, the Rev.
Dr.
Preston R. Washington Sr. was preaching his gospel of necessity.
"When will we cry out for our young people?" he asked.
"When will we cry out about the indiscriminate violence? When will we cry out for those silently walking around with the HIV virus?"


Good Grief: It's Same Old Story for Bowden
Bobby Bowden went home late Saturday afternoon after another generation of his Florida State Seminoles had suffered the kind of crushing 1-point defeat to the University of Miami that defines a torturous imperfect season.
The sorting out of details would just extend the agony, with reminders of opportunities that were missed and big plays that were not made.
But at first, at home, the hoped-for celebration of a house full of guests was turned into commiseration.


'Hidden Vote' for Duke Never Materialized
Although the prospect of a large "hidden vote" for David Duke received a lot of speculation from poll takers and commentators in the weeks before Louisiana's runoff election for governor, a hidden vote did not materialize in Edwin W. Edwards's victory over Mr.
Duke.
A hidden vote could have occurred if some voters were not willing to disclose their preferences to poll takers.
In Mr.
Duke's past attempts at public office, his support was stronger than some polls had predicted, making some poll takers wary about simply using their standard methods in the runoff.


Ally &amp; Gargano to Buy A New Jersey Agency
Ally &amp; Gargano Inc., New York, has agreed to acquire Dugan/Farley Communications Associates Inc., an Upper Saddle River, N.J., ad agency specializing in health-care accounts.
Dugan/Farley, which has $50 million in billings from clients including Merck Sharp &amp; Dohme, Lederle Laboratories and Ciba Pharmaceuticals, will become Ally's health-care division.
"I've been searching for a couple of years now for a way to add a health-care capability," said William Luceno, chief executive of Ally, which until now had two health-care accounts, Pfizer's Ben-Gay ointment and Plax dental rinse.


United States Cellular reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Puzzle for Plainfield: Children as Drug Couriers
Once or twice a week, the police say, two women loaded children into a car and drove into the the Bronx, where the children hurried out to pick up packets of cocaine and heroin.
Then the families drove back to this once-proud city, now troubled by crime, where the children would deliver the drugs to dealers in homes and on street corners, investigators said today.


Sports of The Times; The Good Old Giants Hold That Playoff Line
THE Giants finally resembled the Giants yesterday, more or less.
For the first time this season, they defeated a team that was higher in the standing before the game.
And with their backs to the wall regarding their Super Bowl XXVI playoff chances during the 22-9 victory over the Dallas Cowboys, they did it as other recent Giants teams had: with their backs to the goal line.
"The goal-line stand," Coach Ray Handley said, "was indicative of years past."
Two years ago, Gary Reasons leveled Bronco running back Bobby Humphries in the Denver snow during a 14-7 victory.
In last season's playoffs, John Washington stopped Bear fullback Brad Muster in a 31-3 triumph.
And yesterday, Steve DeOssie jammed Emmitt Smith at the 1-yard line when a Cowboy touchdown would have narrowed the score to 16-13.


Basques, Too, Want a Peace Conference
To the Editor:
While the world focused on Madrid as the stage for the long-awaited Middle East peace conference, with hopes that the question of a Palestinian homeland would be constructively addressed, the choice of Madrid for the talks must have seemed a cruel irony to the Basque country.


Marion Bohmrich, 89, U.S. Research Analyst
Marion Letcher Bohmrich, a research analyst with the Office of Strategic Services and with the United States Mission to the United Nations, died on Thursday at Fair Haven Home in Bostic, N.C., where she was a resident.
She was 89 years old.
She died of pneumonia and suffered from Alzheimer's disease for 10 years, a spokesperson for the home said.
She had requested that her remains be made available for research at the Alzheimer's Research Center at Duke University in Durham, N.C.


St. Luke's Ensemble In All-Bach Program
The St.
Luke's Chamber Ensemble is to open its 1991-92 series of five concerts at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, on Dec. 10 at 8 P.M.
The opening concert, an all-Bach Christmas program, will include the Suite No. 2 in B minor, the Harpsichord Concerto in D, Cantata No. 51 and the "Brandenburg" Concerto No. 5.
Soloists are Elizabeth Mann, flutist; Chris Gekker, trumpeter; Robert Wolinsky, harpsichordist, and Lisa Saffer, soprano.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corp. expects to offer $2.2 billion worth of consolidated systemwide bonds in three issues at auction today. *
Kentucky Development Finance Authority's $62 million worth of hospital revenue refunding bonds were priced through John Nuveen &amp; Co. last week to yield 6.40 percent for a 2001 maturity with a 6.30 percent coupon.
The issue for the Sisters of Charity of Nazarene Health Corporation received an A- rating from Moody's Investors Service Inc. and an A+ rating from Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


William John Leete; Retired Banker, 87
William John Leete, a former vice president of the Bank of New York, died on Wednesday at Pomperaug Woods Health Center, in Southbury, Conn.
He was 87 years old and lived at Pomperaug Woods.
He died of Parkinson's disease, his wife, the former Janet Stuart Smethurst, said.


Effort to Cap Credit Card Rates Is Attacked
The Bush Administration mounted an attack today on a measure to limit credit card interest rates, which was approved in the Senate last week with little debate.
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said that the proposal was "wacky" and that it had caused the sharp decline in stock prices on Friday.
Vice President Dan Quayle predicted that the President would veto the measure if it won approval from both houses of Congress.


The Collapse of Clifford &amp; Warnke
The law office of Clifford &amp; Warnke, with its stunning views overlooking the White House, has for more than 20 years been a place where America's corporate leaders, baffled by the workings of Washington, have come for high-priced guidance.
The firm's main draw, without a doubt, has been the reputation of Clark M. Clifford, a former Defense Secretary and informal adviser to Democratic Presidents, a man whose studied courtliness well matched the wood-paneled, faintly English ambience of the place.


TV Guide Seeks to Renew Its Energy
When Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation paid nearly $3 billion three years ago for TV Guide, the little digest with the giant circulation became the most expensive magazine ever acquired.
Many people wondered at the time if it was worth it.
Since then, circulation has declined by 949,000.
Advertising pages are down 20 percent so far this year.
And some industry experts question whether the weekly magazine is moving aggressively enough to combat competition from local Sunday newspaper supplements that are carrying more and more television listings.


Women Become Top U.S. AIDS Risk Group
To the Editor:
Statistically, women represent the highest risk group in the United States for contracting AIDS.
In the last year, the numbers of gay men with AIDS, previously the highest risk group, increased only 19 percent, whereas cases of AIDS in women increased 37 percent.
Minorities now rank No. 2 at highest risk, with teen-agers running a close third, intravenous drug users fourth and gay men now fifth.


Andrew V. Stout, 89; Led Investment House
Andrew Varick Stout Jr. a former governor of the New York Stock Exchange and retired chairman of the investment banking firm of Dominick &amp; Dominick, died on Friday at his son's home in Norwich, Vt.
He was 89 years old and a resident of Hobe Sound, Fla.
He died of pneumonia, his son, Andrew, said.


Texas Bank Shows Deficit
Analysts say the First City Bancorporation of Texas may require additional Federal assistance after reporting a big loss for the third quarter.
The banking company, which obtained nearly $1 billion of Federal assistance four years ago to rebuild under new owners, said last week that it lost $58.9 million in the third quarter, and that its capital had fallen further below minimum levels set by Government regulators.


Reviews/Music; Boston Festival Raises the Issue of Newness
Despite recent challenges from the West Coast, Boston remains the early-music capital of the country, a status that has been anchored over the last decade by the biennial Boston Early Music Festival.
With less hoopla, the city has also developed a strong tradition of support for contemporary music of late.
And now some of the area's major musical and academic institutions have undertaken a broader campaign on that front as well, with New Music Harvest, a citywide festival planned to take place every two years, which sprang to life over the weekend.
The organizers, in their more ambitious moments, undoubtedly hope the festival will give Boston the kind of international standing in this field that it has in early music.
But New Music Harvest grew out of a more immediate and parochial concern.


Same Challenges, Different Cuomo
HOW best to serve?
Is 1992 the right time to run?
Can I be even more effective where I am?
Why do I talk to myself out loud so listeners think they can read my mind by reading my lips?
These questions, familiar to anyone who follows politics, define the Cuomo dilemma.
The answers may lie in the stars; the questions are lodged in the genes.
They are now being asked by another generation.


Traveling From France to Harlem To Study Rap Culture at Its Roots
"Rap is a rude awakening," the New York hip-hop artist Harmony was saying.
Her definition came late in the game for a weary audience of French journalists, urban cultural officials, police officials and, yes, even rappeurs at the Apollo Theater in Harlem.
For three days ending on Saturday, they had been undergoing total immersion in American rap at the "Rap and Society" symposium sponsored by the World Culture Association, a nonprofit organization based in Paris.
The rude awakening came early.
American rap, and the rhetoric surrounding it, turned out not to be as the French had expected.
Many participants said they had come unprepared for the anger and the stark racial division they encountered, accustomed as they were to French rap's one-world message.
Suddenly, they found themselves face to face with American racial politics.


For the 90's Scene, It's Roller Hockey Set on Concrete
DENNIS MURPHY, the fellow who brought us the American Basketball Association (Remember the Oakland Oaks?), the World Hockey Association (Who can forget the New York Golden Blades?) and World Team Tennis (the Philadelphia Freedoms ring a bell?), is back.
Today, the promoter will announce his plans for the game of the 1990's -- hold on, now -- indoor roller hockey.
In the league that Murphy plans, the game will be played on cement and skaters will wear skates with on-line wheels, which allow ice-hockey-like maneuverability.


Overtures to Asia Pose Risk For U.S. Aerospace Industry
Negotiations by America's second-largest aircraft maker, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, about selling a big stake in its civilian aircraft operations to a consortium of Asian companies are threatening to accomplish what Congress spent the late 1980's trying to prevent: teaching Asia's strongest industrial powers how to build giant commercial jets.
So far, aerospace has been one of the few American high-technology industries virtually free of competition from Asia.
To keep it that way, Congress has insisted in recent years on extraordinary restrictions to prevent the transfer of commercially valuable aerospace technology to Japan and South Korea, even slowing down the joint production of a new fighter.


Little Comfort in Mr. Duke's Loss
David Duke's defeat in the Louisiana governor's race brings both a sense of relief and fresh alarm about where American politics seems to be headed.
Relief, because electing a former Nazi and Ku Klux Klansman governor would have been an appalling endorsement of bigotry.
Alarm, because Mr.
Duke's rapid rise in politics makes clear that racism has a large constituency.


Rutgers, Denied a Bye, Isn't Ready to Say Farewell
Rutgers brushed aside the disappointment of being denied a first-round bye in the N.C.A.A.
Division I soccer tournament and produced a 2-0 victory over Old Dominion this afternoon.
Rob Johnson, the sensational striker whom many consider the best freshman in the country, scored the crucial first goal in the 33d minute of play, and Lino DiCuollo sealed the victory in the 69th minute.


Dena Zeisel Has Wedding
Dena Ellen Zeisel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Zeisel of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., was married yesterday to Charles Bernard Friedman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Friedman of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Stephen Listfield officiated at Temple Emanu-El in Englewood, N.J.
Mrs.
Friedman, 29 years old, is a senior tax analyst for The New York Times.
She graduated from Emory University.
Her father is the president of the Accura Machinery Corporation, a machine tool importer and distributor in Englewood.


Police Still Needed at Polling Places in Hotly Contested Races; Not an Easy Day
To the Editor:
Re "Police at the Polls" (Topics, Nov. 3): Most police officers do not care for election duty; it is not easy, and can be quite demanding.


No Energy Bill This Year? Good
A glittering pedigree guarantees nothing, as the sponsors of the Senate's energy bill discovered.
The bill came to the floor with the imprimatur of President Bush and many powerful Democrats.
It failed to survive a procedural vote.
The country has reason to be grateful.
It was a bad bill.
The main reason for the defeat was a provision opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling.
As some senators noted, there are other places to find oil at far less risk to the environment.
Furthermore, the provision symbolized the bill's mindless bias toward energy production as opposed to conservation.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Wednesday titled "Leaders in Computer Sales," with an article about Computerland's marketing strategy, described the figures incorrectly.
The chart showed 1991 sales through September for leading computer dealers, not just retail chains, and the estimated number of sales locations for each.


Cheers for Johnson In Return to Forum
Magic Johnson returned to the Forum tonight for the first time since his stunning retirement and was met by a thunderous, standing ovation from his former Laker teammates, the Atlanta Hawks players and a crowd of 16,750.
With Johnson cheering, instructing and exhorting them from the bench, the Lakers won their fourth game in a row, beating the Hawks, 111-89.


Bavaro Answers Request to Coach At a High School
The new tight-ends coach at St.
Dominic Savio High School in East Boston, Mass., is a walk-on.
But his name is familiar: MARK BAVARO.
Bavaro was known as enigmatic and almost-reclusive in his career with the Giants, which was cut short after last season because of a degenerative knee condition.


Congress Preparing To Quietly Approve An Anti-missile Plan
With little fanfare, Congress is close to approving a new anti-missile system for the first time in a quarter-century.
But questions have been raised about its usefulness, its high cost and a possible expansion that would conflict with the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with the Soviet Union.
The plan, whose cost is estimated at $10 billion to $60 billion, has already been approved by Congressional negotiators, and is expected to be approved soon by the full House and Senate as part of the military spending bill for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1, despite the House's long history of skepticism about anti-missile systems.


Corrections
The TV Sports column yesterday gave an incorrect date and rating for a football game between Miami and Notre Dame.
The game, which drew the highest rating for games between the two teams since 1987, was on Nov. 25, 1989.
The rating was 14.9.


Ms. Geldzahler, Executive, Wed
Jacqueline Carol Geldzahler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sol S. Geldzahler of New York, was married yesterday to Alan Lee Goldberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George S. Goldberg of Dix Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Barton Shallot officiated at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Goldberg, 28 years old, is the vice president of Gloss Enterprises, a wholesale jewelry company headed by her father in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her mother, Lucy Geldzahler, is a corporate gifts consultant.


Women Become Top U.S. AIDS Risk Group; Condom Failure Rate
To the Editor:
"After Magic, the Extra Mile" (editorial, Nov. 12) criticizes Vice President Dan Quayle's call for abstinence "as the only way to stop sexual transmission of HIV." You call this forthright and correct position of the Vice President a "blind spot."


Blacks and Affluent Whites Give Edwards Victory
As Edwin W. Edwards savored a resounding victory over David Duke in the voting for governor on Saturday, an analysis today showed that the Democrat's landslide resulted not only from a huge black turnout but also from the overwhelming support of relatively affluent whites.
Whites who voted for Mr.
Edwards said they feared that race relations would worsen and that economic catastrophe would result from the election of Mr.
Duke, a former neo-Nazi and grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan.


CBS Finds Glory Costly At Olympics
IN the CBS broadcast center in Moutiers, France, just down the road from Albertville, the home city of the 1992 Winter Olympics, the freshly constructed rooms for the CBS producers, technicians and other staff members are stocked with new videotape machines and the latest in computer graphic equipment.
But there is no paint on the walls, no rugs on the floor and no drop ceiling to conceal the framework of steel and wire that rises to the roof.


Review/Theater; Piercing Those Who Dare to Puncture English
Have you ever wondered why Luchow's went out of business?
It was all because of Roger Rosenblatt and his brother, whose telephone number was one digit away from that of the famous restaurant.
When people phoned the Rosenblatt home by mistake, the two young men played an increasingly elaborate practical joke.
They would book tables in what they called the Himmler Room and, in the dead of winter, they would ask diners if they wanted to be seated on Luchow's roof.
If someone tried to cancel a reservation, they were adamant in their refusal.
Mr.
Rosenblatt confesses this caper in his one-man show at the American Place Theater, using it to illustrate the capacious title of his monologue, "Free Speech in America." Where most humorists would like to be taken more seriously, it would seem that this commentator would like to be taken more humorously.
In his professional theatrical debut, he proves to be as adept at lectern comedy as he is at writing articles and books.
He appears on the "MacNeil/ Lehrer Newshour" and his essays are published in Life magazine.


Disney Picks A Publisher
Lynn A. Lehmkuhl has been named publisher of Disney Adventures: The Magazine for Kids.
Ms.
Lehmkuhl, 40 years old, has been associate publisher of the magazine since it was started in October 1990.
She previously spent nine years with Newsweek, most recently as New York sales director.
In January, Disney Adventures, which is aimed at children ages 7 to 14, will increase the circulation it guarantees to advertisers to 525,000 from 350,000.
The digest-sized magazine includes profiles of athletes like Michael Jordan, articles about television, rock and movie stars, and comic strips.


Review/Pop; Judy Collins Looks Back And Branches Out
Judy Collins's annual preholiday New York concerts have become almost ceremonial occasions in which this lyric soprano reminisces about the last year to a faithful, mostly middle-aged audience and performs her signature songs in a silvery voice that mingles wistfulness with inspirational uplift.
Although this year's concert, which was held at Carnegie Hall on Friday evening, held many pleasures, Ms.
Collins's voice showed ominous signs of wear and tear.
The singer was at her best accompanying herself on the piano and performing original ballads whose folk-flavored melodies were enriched by flowing semiclassical pianism.
The most impassioned performance was "The Blizzard," a relatively recent original ballad about spiritual transformation set in the Rocky Mountains during a snowstorm.
Ms.
Collins's renditions of Stephen Sondheim's "I Remember Sky" and "Send In the Clowns" and of the Leonard Cohen and Jennifer Warnes ballad, "Song of Bernadette," were also clear and ringing.


Top TB Peril: Not Taking The Medicine
The fight against the ominous increase in tuberculosis cases in the metropolitan region comes down to one seemingly simple problem: how to get people to take their medicine.
Elsewhere in the United States doctors have experimented with bribery.
In Denver, for example, they have offered free cans of beer to patients who keep their clinic appointments.
Denver and other cities have also resorted to sending a social worker to every patient's house every day to watch them swallow their pills.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday None Tuesday Merchandise Trade...Sept.
Wednesday Housing Starts...Oct.
Thursday Weekly Jobless Claims Friday Budget Deficit...Oct.


Adam Levin and Tara Delson Marry
Tara Lisa Delson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas J. Delson of Wappingers Falls, N.Y., was married yesterday to Adam Keith Levin, a son of Gabrielle Levin and Ira Levin, both of New York.
Rabbi Myron S. Geller officiated at the Tarrywile Mansion in Danbury, Conn.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated from Vassar College, as did the bridegroom.
She is a freelance documentary film researcher in New York.
Her father is a quality assurance adviser for the International Business Machines Corporation in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Her mother, Estelle Logan Delson, is a fashion designer and personal shopping consultant.


METRO DIGEST
BLACK CHURCHES JOIN THE AIDS FIGHT
Faced with the overwhelming reality that minorities account for an alarming proportion of the new AIDS cases being diagnosed, many black churches and mosques are beginning to turn their influence to the fight against the disease.
Clergymen and women are speaking out in sermons, starting counseling and support groups and sponsoring housing for homeless people with AIDS.
And they are doing so against the powerful traditions of their conservative theology.
Page A1.
NEW YORK CITY  MAYOR DINKINS'S TRIP TO SOUTH AFRICA ENDS
In the final hours of a trip he called "one of the most profound experiences I've ever had," Mayor David N. Dinkins accomplished a major goal he had set for his journey to South Africa: announcing a package of economic programs involving New York City businesses.
But he failed to accomplish another: meeting with a top government official to press the cause of change.
His meeting with Foreign Minister Roelof F. Botha was canceled at the last minute without explanation.
Page B3.
SAME QUESTIONS, ANOTHER CUOMO
Andrew Cuomo, the Governor's son, who has had considerable success over the years in overcoming community opposition and government bureaucracy to build housing for the homeless, has been contemplating whether public office is the most effective vehicle for coping with the growing problem of homelessness.
Metro Matters, Page B3.
A TRAIL OF RANDOM VIOLENCE IN THE BRONX
A man talking with his wife from a pay phone in the South Bronx was shot and killed by an unidentified man with a shotgun -- apparently a random act of violence.
Two relatives standing nearby were also sprayed with shotgun pellets.
The shooting occurred shortly after a dispute between two groups of men erupted into gunfire a short distance up the street.
Page B3.
A SHOOTING IN MIDTOWN RESTAURANT
A dispute among a dozen men in a Chinese restaurant on Fifth Avenue near 32d Street erupted into gunfire on Saturday evening, leaving one man dead and another seriously injured.
The police, who were still trying to identify the victims and learn what prompted the argument, said they believe the incident might have involved Asian gangs.
Page B3.
A young girl died in a house fire in Queens started by her brother.
Page B3.
REGION USING CHILDREN TO RUN DRUGS
Once or twice a week, the police say, two woman from Plainfield, N.J., loaded their children into a car and drove to the Bronx, where the children hurried out to pick up packets of cocaine and heroin.
Then the families drove back to Plainfield, where the children delivered the drugs to dealers.
Prosecutors said they broke up the ring on Friday night with the arrest of the two women.
Page B5.
THE GAPS BETWEEN NEW JERSEY'S CHILDREN
The first county-by-county analysis of children's well-being in New Jersey shows "startling extremes" between the richer, generally suburban areas of the state and the poor, mostly urban areas.
The survey, which considered 12 factors from infant mortality to high school dropout rate, ranked Bergen County first and Essex County last.
Page B5.
WHERE DID YOU GET THAT HAMMER?
In additions to books and other such things, the public library in Wyandanch, L.I., lends tools.
After years of giving borrowers books that told them how to do things, but neglecting to give them the tools carrying them out, the library began the tool-lending program two years ago with a $10,000 Federal grant.
It has been a means for the library to be relevant to a painfully poor neighborhood where many people prize a trowel more than a novel.
Page B5.
THE TRIANGLE CLUB'S 100TH ANNIVERSARY
Princeton University threw a three-day party to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Triangle Club, the undergraduate theater troupe almost as well-known for its tradition of men-in-drag chorus lines as for its crisp original productions.
With more than 750 past members on hand, nostalgia reigned.
Princeton Journal, Page B5.
The Traffic Map B4
Chronicle B4


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about Elliott Abrams's sentencing in the Iran-contra case misidentified the people with him as he arrived at court.
They were his wife, Rachel, and her stepfather, Norman Podhoretz, editor of the journal Commentary.


Corrections
An article last Saturday about a contest in which computer programs tried to mimic human conversation referred incorrectly in some copies to a program that carried on a dialogue with human judges about romantic relationships.
It was Turing, developed by Dr.
Kenneth Colby and his son, Peter, both of Malibu Artifactual Intelligence Works of Malibu, Calif.
An article about a winner in the contest appears today on page 21.


Corrections
The Highs/Lows table in Business Day on Saturday, showing stocks that reached new high or low prices, reported the results of Thursday's trading, not Friday's.
The Friday trading table appears today on page D7.


Jay Winik and Lyric Wallwork Wed
Lyric Wallwork, a writer, and Jay Winik, a senior fellow at the National Defense University in Washington, were married yesterday by Rabbi David C. Levy at the Fiddler's Elbow Country Club in Bedminster, N.J.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Wallwork of Far Hills, N.J.
Mr.
Winik is a son of Mrs.
Steve Abrams of Boston and Herb Winik of Branford, Conn.
Mrs.
Wallwork Winik, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father, who is retired, was a partner in Wallwork Brothers, a distributor of heating and air-conditioning equipment in West Caldwell, N.J.
Her mother, Lark Wallwork, is a special assistant at Morristown (N.J.) Memorial Hospital.


Jets Take Off, Crash, Then Take Off Again
In one corner of the Jets' locker room, fullback Brad Baxter talked about the improbability of his fumbling twice in a game deep in his team's territory to set up scores for the opponent.
A few feet away, Trevor Matich, a 6-foot-4-inch, 297-pound guard pressed into a role as the largest tight end in the league, talked about the improbability of his catching a 3-yard touchdown pass to win the game.
But such were the circumstances surrounding the Jets' 28-21 victory today over the Patriots (3-8), who scored 21 points in the fourth quarter to tie the game and were one foot and a few seconds away from sending the Jets into their third overtime game of the season.


Not the End
Twenty-seven years ago, the Republican Party made a Faustian bargain with Southern antecedents and national implications.
On Saturday, the bill almost came due.
David Duke lost, which saves the day, but did not end his political career.
More to the point, his emergence as a national figure was the logical result of decisions repeatedly made by Republican mainstream leaders ever since Barry Goldwater went "hunting where the ducks are" in the Presidential election of 1964.
The road from Goldwaterite opposition to the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to Duke's overt, though slickly packaged, racism is a straight line.
Long the party of Abraham Lincoln, the G.O.P. has become the party of white reaction and Southern Redemption.
Its most recent Presidents, with the honorable exception of Gerald Ford, the accidental chief executive, have repeatedly driven their policies and campaigns deep into the racial fault lines of American society.
David Duke is the first, but he won't be the last, political atavistic consequence.


Amy Greenberg Marries on L.I.
Amy Ruth Greenberg, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert Greenberg of Oyster Bay Cove, L.I., was married yesterday to Richard Goldman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard Goldman of New York.
Rabbi Ezra Finklestein officiated at Temple Beth El in Great Neck, L.I.
Mrs.
Goldman, 25 years old, is a merchandise and production coordinator at Albert Nipon Inc., the dress designer and manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is a podiatrist in New York, and her mother, Marcia J. Greenberg, is his office manager.


No. 32 Receives New Life on 76ers
When Philadelphia's CHARLES BARKLEY wanted to honor MAGIC JOHNSON by wearing his number, the 76ers took BILLY CUNNINGHAM's No. 32 out of retirement.
That still left the 76ers with four retired numbers: 6, JULIUS ERVING ; 13, WILT CHAMBERLAIN ;, 15, HAL GREER, and 24, BOBBY JONES.
Chamberlain is one of two players whose numbers have been retired by two teams.
He enjoys that honor on the Lakers as well.
OSCAR ROBERTSON is the other, but under different numbers.


Women Become Top U.S. AIDS Risk Group; Johnson's Sex Partners
To the Editor:
When a talented, popular young athlete such as Magic Johnson becomes ill, we all share his sorrow.
That is decent and appropriate.
Yet there is a second, subterranean suffering that has yet to be addressed: that of the young women who were Magic Johnson's sex partners.
We can be certain that he has harbored the human immunodeficiency virus at least six months, and it is likely that he has been infected for years.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Eyes on Stocks
The similarities between big market drops on Fridays in 1987 and 1991 seem haunting at first glance: long, exuberant rallies abruptly ended with frenzied selling.
But market professionals see telling differences between last Friday and Oct. 16, 1987, which was followed on Monday by the worst one-day market crash in the nation's history.
Among these are declining interest rates, calmer mutual fund customers, new restrictions on institutional trading and more sensible use of "portfolio insurance." Market Place.  [ Page D1. ]  In Tokyo today, stock prices fell 2.9 percent.  [ D6. ]
The abrupt 120-point drop in the Dow Jones industrials ended a week in which new economic data seemed to provide convincing evidence that the recession is not behaving like other post-World War II downturns -- and that an economic upturn is still weeks or months away.
Economic analysis.  [ D1. ]


CHRONICLE
There probably are thousands of Connecticut residents who would love the chance to throw a cream pie in the face of Gov.
LOWELL P. WEICKER Jr., but only the two winners of the Connecticut Opera pie-throwing contest on Saturday will get a chance to do so.
Mr.
Weicker, an opera buff, has a cameo role in the opera company's production of "The Barber of Seville." The Associated Press says the Governor will play a singing Keystone Kop for two nights in the production, which is set in the 1920's.
Governor Weicker will perform on Thursday and Friday.


INSIDE
Leaders After Doomsday
To assure the Government's continuity in the event of a nuclear attack, a secret Federal agency expanded the Presidential succession.
Page A12.
Rethinking a Coronation
Victory in '92 once seemed so sure, but President Bush is now visibly slipping and Republicans are worried.
News Analysis, page A10.
TB: A Preventable Epidemic
The fight against the ominous increase in tuberculosis cases in New York comes down to getting people to take their medicine.
Page B1.
Turkey Ponders Its Identity
The defeat of Turkey's governing party may result in a shift away from the strongly pro-Western policies of the last few years.
Page A6.


The Louisiana Election; Female Lawmakers Wrestle With New Public Attitude on 'Women's' Issues
Women in public office who have been energized by revived discussion about sexual harassment and other women's issues are also at something of a loss on how they can best capitalize on it.
As 900 lawmakers met here over the past few days at a conference for women in state government, they wrestled in a curiously apolitical way over how to keep up with the changing landscape.
Underlying every policy discussion was this political truth: just as they have reached substantial numbers in office at the state level, many women have discovered it has suddenly become unfashionable to be on the inside.


Accounts
*
After a review, the Pennsylvania Lottery has renewed its contract with FCB/LGK, Philadelphia.
The account, worth $12 million annually, runs until 1994.
The Philadelphia Daily News reported that the other finalists were Earle Palmer Brown &amp; Spiro, Philadelphia; Elkman Advertising and Public Relations, Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., and Weightman Advertising, Philadelphia. *
Lord Dentsu &amp; Partners, New York, has resigned the advertising, public relations and sales promotion account of National Foods of the Bronx and its Hebrew National meat products.
Billings were estimated at $2 million. *
Spanish Tourist Board, Madrid, to Delvico/Bates, Madrid, a unit of Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, New York, for its international advertising account, with billings of $8 million.
The agency said the three other finalists were Arge/FCB, Contrapunto and the incumbent Tandem/ DDB, all of Madrid. *
Grand Cypress Florida Inc., Lake Buena Vista, Fla., to Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine Inc., Orlando, to advertise the Grand Cypress Resort.
Billings were not disclosed.


Croats Concede Danube Town's Loss
The government of the separatist republic of Croatia acknowledged today that it had lost the three-month battle for this Danube River town, suffering its most significant defeat in more than four months of fighting against the Serbian-led Yugoslav Army and Serbian irregulars.
As holdout Croatian forces continued to defend some pockets of the besieged town, Croatian officials offered an orderly surrender on condition that the army guarantee the safety of thousands of civilians huddled in cellars beneath Vukovar's ruins.


Turkish Election Results May Shift Basic Policies
Burdened by a 70 percent inflation rate and disintegration along its borders with the Soviet Union and Iraq, Turkey is scrambling to redefine itself in the wake of the election defeat of President Turgut Ozal's governing Motherland Party.
The defeat in the Oct. 20 elections has returned Suleyman Demirel to the Prime Minister's office for the seventh time, and with him the fear that the country could slip back into the violent political infighting that led to a military coup in 1980.
Mr.
Demirel was ousted in that coup, as he had been once before, in 1971.


Broncos Come Clean In Another Fine Mess
When the Denver Broncos and the Kansas City Chiefs tangle, strange things usually happen.
The ball bounces and flutters and winds up in the unlikeliest hands.
Both defenses take pride in forcing turnovers, so big hits are followed by bigger ones and everybody is always reaching and grabbing for the football, always trying to pry it loose.


Miscellany
*
Times Mirror Magazines, New York, is consolidating the sales and marketing operations of Ski and Skiing magazines.
As part of the restructuring, Jim Flynn, previously advertising director of Skiing, becomes associate publisher for ski-related advertising, while Ed Pitoniak, previously advertising director of Ski, becomes associate publisher for general advertising.


BAKER'S CHINA TRIP FAILS TO PRODUCE PLEDGE ON RIGHTS
Three days of talks between Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and China's leaders ended today with some limited Chinese gestures to curb missile sales but with little progress toward easing China's suppression of human rights.
Mr.
Baker's talks, which both sides suggested were quite blunt, marked the first public high-level contact between the Bush Administration and China since the Tiananmen Square massacre in June 1989.
Congress is now expected to scrutinize the limited results of the visit to determine whether it really justified the recognition it conferred on China's hard-line leaders and whether it supports the Administration's argument that engagement with China is more likely to change its behavior than punishment and trade sanctions.  'The Gulf Is Too Wide'
"It has now been two and one-half years since the tragedy of Tiananmen," Mr.
Baker said at a news conference at the close of his 18 hours of talks with China's leaders.
"Unless we were to keep U.S.-China relations in the deep freeze forever, we had to start talking. I did not come here expecting a dramatic breakthrough. The gulf is too wide to accomplish that in one trip."
American intelligence officials indicated that China's senior leaders were up most of Saturday night debating what concessions to offer Mr.
Baker today, after giving him virtually nothing on the first two days of his visit.
The fractious behavior of China's leaders raised some doubts on the American side whether they can ever get together to make the sort of tough decisions required for a real and sustained improvement in relations.
The Bare Minimum
While in the end the Chinese made some limited concessions, they offered nothing that would provide President Bush with a trump card to silence Congressional critics of his policy of "constructive engagement" with Beijing.
Instead, the Chinese gave what they apparently calculated was the bare minimum Mr.
Bush would need to overcome Congressional misgivings.
Mr.
Baker tried to make the most of it, saying, "What we have here represents clear gains in the fields of proliferation and trade and some gains with respect to the area of human rights -- not as much as we would have hoped."
A senior American official said that it was midway through today's concluding five-hour session between Mr.
Baker and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen before the Chinese side began to respond concretely to some of the American demands.
This 11th-hour overture is a typical Chinese negotiating tactic, but it may also have reflected a response to the letter carried by Mr.
Baker from President Bush for China's elder statesmen, Deng Xiaoping.
Mr.
Baker was not able to deliver the letter to Mr.
Deng, who is 87 years old and in poor health, but he apparently shared it with all of his Chinese interlocutors today.
In it, Mr.
Bush appealed to Mr.
Deng to intervene and save the relationship with America that he helped to build and that is now seriously at risk.
China has also been known to announce major concessions to Washington weeks or months after high-level meetings between officials of the two Governments, presumably to avoid giving the impression that it was caving in to American demands.
A Commitment on Missiles
The most significant achievement cited by Mr.
Baker from his three days of meetings with Mr.
Qian, President Yang Shangkun, Prime Minister Li Peng and the Communist Party chief, Jiang Zemin, was what he described as a Chinese commitment not to export M-9 missiles to Syria and M-11 short-range missiles to Pakistan and other countries.
Mr.
Baker said the Chinese told him that they intended to "observe the guidelines and parameters" of the Missile Technology Control Regime, an international convention signed by 18 nations that restricts the export of missiles and missile technology above certain ranges and payload sizes.
There is no formal written agreement with China on this issue, only Mr.
Baker's understanding of what the Chinese said to him, which he said he went over with them in detail before his news conference.
China had argued that the M-11 was not subject to the missile export convention because of its short range.
China has already exported some M-11 missile launchers and a few missiles with dummy warheads to Pakistan and is believed to have contracted to sell M-9 medium-range missiles to Syria.
But the Chinese commitment on the missile control restrictions was not unconditional.
Mr.
Baker said the Chinese agreed to make this commitment "if we will remove the proliferations sanctions imposed June 16 on two Chinese companies that own the licensing of high-speed computers and satellites to China."
Those sanctions were imposed in reaction to intelligence reports that China had exported M-11 missile technology to Pakistan.
Mr.
Bush ordered that China be barred from the commercial opportunity to launch certain American satellites from their missiles and from access to certain American high-speed computers.
Civilians Win the Day
China had already signaled its intention to adhere to the missile control regime, but its commitment to Mr.
Baker was its most explicit to date.
American officials said they thought it required a good deal of wrangling between the army and civilian leadership in China, with the civilians winning the day by arguing that it was better to sacrifice a few billion dollars in arms sales for continued preferential trade status with Washington.
China's annual trade surplus with the United States is $13 billion.
The Chinese have made and broken promises to the United States about missile exports several times, so the value of their commitment to Mr.
Baker can only be tested over time.
The Chinese reiterated to Mr.
Baker another arms-control commitment that they had already made public in recent weeks, which is to sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty by the end of the year.
But Mr.
Baker said the Chinese had made no commitment not to export nuclear technologies that are ostensibly for civilian use but could easily be adapted for nuclear weapons programs.
The Chinese appear to be selling such technologies to Iran and Algeria.
On human rights, Mr.
Baker made little headway.
For the first two days of talks, the Chinese leaders refused to even engage in a discussion with him on the subject, American officials said.
He specifically requested the release of some of the 800 advocates of democracy arrested after the Tiananmen Square killings who are being held for nonviolent, political acts.
Mr.
Baker also asked that the Red Cross be allowed to visit some of these political prisoners and that the Chinese halt their jamming of Voice of America broadcasts.
All of these demands were rebuffed.
Two Small Concessions
Mr.
Baker said the Chinese did offer two small concessions.
One was to provide an accounting of the 800 political prisoners that lists "which of these persons have been convicted, which are still under investigation, which have been released and which cannot be identified." The Secretary also said the Chinese had assured him that prominent intellectuals and relatives of dissidents who have fled abroad will not be denied exit permits as before.
"We were assured that any person against whom no criminal proceedings were pending would be allowed to leave after completing the usual formalities," Mr.
Baker said.
In fact, most of the spouses of dissidents who have fled abroad have been allowed out since August.
It is the Chinese dissidents who do not have relatives abroad and want to leave who have been having the most trouble obtaining passports and exit permits.
The value of this concession, too, can only be tested by performance over time, especially since the Chinese detained two dissidents over the weekend, apparently in an effort to keep them from meeting with Mr.
Baker.
On the trade front, Mr.
Baker said he and his Chinese counterparts reached agreement in principle on cooperative efforts to prevent the import of Chinese prison labor products into the United States.
While this should help stem the flow of prison-made products to the United States, the fact is such exports have been officially banned by China for years.
The problem has been getting the Chinese central and local governments to carry out their own laws.
Mr.
Baker did not make any headway, though, on the larger trade issue: Chinese restrictions on markets access that have helped to produce China's $13 billion trade surplus with the United States.
The Chinese did put forward some new ideas on how to address American concerns over China's failure to respect patents or pay royalties on some American intellectual properties.
The Chinese are sending a delegation to Washington to follow up on this progress next week.


Thousands of Fascists Crowd Central Madrid in Tribute to Franco


Venture Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


World Economies


Even Though the Sun Was Shining, November Made Its Presence Known


Cowboy Coach Furious Over the Officials' Calls
Forty minutes after he shaved, showered and put on a nice brown suit, Jimmy Johnson still was roaring like a tornado from his native Texas.
He had, he claimed, "never, ever, ever seen anything as poorly officiated as this -- including replays."


Children's Care Varies Widely In New Jersey
The first county-by-county analysis of children's well-being in New Jersey shows "startling extremes" between the richer, generally suburban areas of the state, and the poor, mostly urban areas.
The eight-month study released last week by Kids Count in New Jersey, a child advocacy organization made up of government and private groups, shows that in general, children in wealthier counties fared better than those in poorer ones, and that suburban children were better off than those in either big cities or rural sections.


Teetering on the Brink of Stardom
Larry Fishburne spends most of his time working in Los Angeles, but he lives with his wife and small children in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn.
"I grew up in Park Slope but can't afford to live there now," he says with a gentle laugh.


TRANSACTIONS
BASKETBALL Continental Basketball Association
BAKERSFIELD JAMMERS -- Waived Keith Hill, guard. Activated Conner Henry, guard.
OKLAHOMA CITY CAVALRY -- Signed Stephen Thompson, guard. Global Basketball Association
GREENSBORO CITY GATERS -- Waived Jason Lobo, center, and Mike Smith, guard.
FOOTBALL National Football League
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Placed Bill Fralic, guard, on injured reserve.
Activated Joe Fishback, safety, from the practice squad.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Waived Mark Murray, linebacker.
Activated Jeff Mills linebacker, from injured reserve.


An Anxious Oil Industry Meets
The American Petroleum Institute expects that when it opens its annual meeting here on Monday, attendance will be better than in any year since 1985, with about 2,000 drillers, refiners, distributors and retailers gathering to talk business.
Despite the promising turnout, the industry gathers with a number of dark clouds overhead.


Issue by New York City To Cut Borrowing Costs
For the better part of three years, City Hall in lower Manhattan has not been a fount of good economic news.
This week, however, some should trickle out.
New York City is expected to offer investors $1.21 billion worth of uninsured general obligation bonds tomorrow.
The negotiated sale itself is not noteworthy, since New York is by far the nation's largest issuer of tax-exempt debt securities, but this issue is different: over the 30 years it will cut the city's borrowing costs by well over $100 million.


CHRONICLE
Gov.
MARIO M. CUOMO delivered himself of a barrage of opinions on the radio yesterday -- on food, on baseball, on music -- on everything but politics of any sort.
The program, on the JONATHAN SCHWARTZ Sunday Show on WNEW-AM, was a rebroadcast of a lengthy interview Mr.
Schwartz had with the Governor in 1984.


Aide to Pol Pot Back in Capital To Share Power
The Khmer Rouge formally returned today to Phnom Penh, the city it emptied 16 years ago at gunpoint at the start of a revolution that would prove to be as radical and murderous as any in a generation.
The Khmer Rouge's return to the capital, from which it was routed by a Vietnamese invasion in 1979, came in the person of Son Sen, who is to be one of two Khmer Rouge representatives in the four-party coalition government being set up in Phnom Penh under a United Nations plan to end Cambodia's civil war.


Cowboys' Owner Busy in New York
It was a busy New York sports weekend for JERRY JONES, whose Cowboys faced the Giants yesterday.
The owner-president-general manager met on Saturday with Madison Square Garden officials, joined by N.F.L. commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE.
Jones thinks stadiums have to be busier, and offer more to attract fans.
"If we can dome our place," he said, "we can go from 30 events a year to 200." Jones was presumably speaking with the Garden officials because the renovated Garden expanded its food operations and opened several shops. . . .
So far, 500 athletes who have received organ transplants are registered for the Olympic-style United States Transplant Games.
The games will be held in Los Angeles next July.
Competitors include recipients of kidneys, livers, hearts, lungs and pancreas.


Women Become Top U.S. AIDS Risk Group; Mandatory Reporting
To the Editor:
Although the American Medical Association endorsed mandatory reporting of cases of AIDS to public health officials almost a year ago (news article, Dec. 7, 1990), New York State has not yet designated AIDS as a reportable disease, and physicians are forbidden by law to test patients suspected of being carriers of the AIDS-HIV virus without their written permission.
By the time those who have delayed giving permission for a blood test do so, the complications of the disease are usually far advanced.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  CHINA OFFERS BAKER LITTLE
Three days of talks between Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Beijing's leaders yielded some limited Chinese gestures to curb missile sales, but little progress toward easing political repression.
Page A1  China detains two more dissidents over the weekend.
A8  KHMER ROUGE IS BACK
The Khmer Rouge returned to the Cambodian capital in the person of Son Sen, who served as head of a genocidal army in the 1970's.
His arrival traumatized the city.
A1  RUSSIA STAKES ITS CLAIM
With a burst of decrees, Boris N. Yeltsin moved to assert the Russian republic's dominance over the Soviet economy.
Russia proclaimed control over its dwindling oil and gold reserves and lifted most controls over imports, exports and foreign currency transactions.
A1  KURDISH CITY ON THE MEND
Halabja Journal: After a long and forced exile, Iraqi Kurds are returning to the scene of the worst chemical attack on civilians of the eight-year war with Iran.
A4  SAUDIS PLEDGE REFORMS
King Fahd promised a series of changes in his Government by January, including a new citizen's council to advise the monarchy.
Few expect an easing of social constraints in the Islamic kingdom.
A3  CROATIAN STRONGHOLD FALLS
The Croatian republic conceded the loss of Vukovar, a cherished town on the Danube, to Yugoslav federal forces.
Croats pleaded with the army to guarantee the safety of thousands of civilians huddled in cellars beneath the city's ruins.
A3  TURKEY SEEKS NEW IDENTITY
With an inflation rate of 70 percent and its borders threatened, Turkey is scrambling to redefine itself after the election defeat of the pro-Western governing party.
A6  WONDERING ABOUT MAXWELL
Almost two weeks after his mysterious death, detectives are still seeking a definitive explanation of how the British publisher's body ended up in the ocean.
A9  National A10-13, B6-7  WRITING AND REWRITING HISTORY
As shown in the dispute over the 1991 Civil Rights Bill, an arcane bit of Washington life, the legislative history of a bill, has taken on new importance.
A1  MISSILE SYSTEM ADVANCES
Though Congress is near approval of a new anti-missile system for the first time in 25 years, questions remain about it utility and cost.
A1  AFTER THE ELECTION
Edwin W. Edwards basks in his unexpectedly lopsided victory over David Duke to be the next Governor of Louisiana.
A1  Bitter election campaign ends, racial divisiveness remains.
B6  WHAT NEXT FOR DUKE?
News Analysis: David Duke gained a national forum and a national network of financial support, but his overwhelming defeat also shows that he is now "damaged goods." B6  No hidden vote for Duke.
B7  WORRIES FOR REPUBLICANS
News Analysis: President Bush's political fortunes have quickly deteriorated, and many Republicans worry whether Mr.
Bush and his political team can adjust in time to salvage the '92 election.
A10  AFTER THE NUCLEAR CATACLYSM
In the early years of the Reagan Administration a secret Federal agency established a line of succession to the President outside the Constitution to assure continued government in the event of a devastating nuclear attack.
A12  TURNING POINT FOR WOMEN
Just when the times have become favorable to national discussion of their traditional issues, female lawmakers are learning that being on the inside politically also has a down side.
B7  PAYING FOR A POLITICAL RACE
A new study supports the charge that major political donors are bypassing Federal limits on direct contributions to candidates by pumping money into state parties that then help Federal candidates through voter registration drives and other efforts.
B7  WATER, WATER EVERYWHERE
For the people of Fir Island, Wash., destructive floods just part of making their personal peace with the elements in the wettest corner of the United States.
A10  Countdown for a shuttle launching begins.
A10  Metropolitan Digest, B1 BLACK CHURCHES FACE AIDS
Haltingly, black churches and mosques nationwide are beginning to turn to the fight against AIDS.
Forced to recognize that blacks account for an alarming proportion of cases, the black clergy is speaking out in sermons and starting counseling and support groups.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Sports C1-10  Baseball: Mets start discussions with Bonilla C8  Basketball: Magic Johnson makes appearance at Forum C8  Column: Berkow on Jets' Matich.
C4  Anderson on Giants' defense C6  Features: Sidelines C2  Football: Giants stop Cowboys.
C1  Jets outlast Patriots.
C1  College bowl picture.
C3  Disappointment for Bowden.
C3  Broncos top Chiefs.
C4  Redskins go to 11-0.
C4  Millen leads late Patriot drives.
C5  Bears beat Colts C6  Horse Racing: First setback for Easy Now.
C2  Soccer: Rutgers gains in N.C.A.A. tourney.
C3  Tennis: Capriati at 15.
C1  Sampras takes A.T.P. title.
C2  Obituaries B9  Marion Bohmrich, U.S. research analyst Arts/Entertainment C11-16  The director looks at the New York City Opera season.
C11  Actor on brink of stardom.
C11  A rap symposium for the French.
C11  New nominee to the humanities endowment's advisory panel.
C12  Theater: "Free Speech in America." C11  Dance: Joffrey 'Nutcracker' C13  Music: New Music Harvest.
C12  New York Philharmonic.
C12  Judy Collins in concert.
C13  Editorials/Op-Ed  Editorials A14  No comfort in Duke's loss.
No energy bill? Good.
A forest primeval.
Old problems in Trenton.
Letters A14  William Safire: Ukraine marches out.
A15  Anthony Lewis: "America, be on guard." A15  Hodding Carter: Not the end.
A15  Dennis P. Culhane: Poorhouse revisited.
A15


Patriots' 2-Minute Drill Was on Time
Although the Patriots lost the game, 28-21, and were inches away from the Jets' end zone at the final gun, the way New England Coach Dick MacPherson was talking, you might have thought his team had won the game today.
"We had to do something to get some life back into the team and so we put in a two-minute offense," said the MacPherson, who was brought in from Syracuse to try to inject some rah-rah spirit into a moribund team that finished 1-15 last season.
"We just didn't do a good job of getting the ball in the end zone in the third quarter and we just kept battling and you know the story from there."


Abroad at Home; 'America, Be on Guard'
A sigh of relief: That is the first reaction to the result in Louisiana.
David Duke lost, and we can put aside our worst fears.
America is not so susceptible to the virus of racism.
But it is not really an occasion for relief when a man who as recently as two years ago openly peddled Nazi propaganda wins nearly 40 percent of the vote in an American state.


Ms. Leinwand Has Wedding
Adrienne Sue Leinwand, the director of special personnel projects for the City University of New York, and David Chester Maslin, a vice president and a senior international economist at J. P. Morgan in New York, were married in New York yesterday by Rabbi Ronald Sobel at the Parker Meridien hotel.
Mrs.
Maslin, 38 years old, is a daughter of Dr.
Gerald Leinwand of New York, the president emeritus of Western Oregon State College, and the late Selma Fienberg Leinwand, a high-school teacher and guidance counselor in New York.
The bride graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in education from Boston University and a doctorate in higher education administration from the University of Oregon.


Dinkins, in South Africa, Widens Economic Efforts
Winding up a six-day trip he called "one of the most profound experiences I've ever had," Mayor David N. Dinkins announced today a package of economic programs involving New York City businesses.
But the trip's last day held a final disappointment for the Mayor as well, as a brief meeting at Jan Smuts Airport with Foreign Minister Roelof F. Botha was canceled without explanation at the last moment, according to The Associated Press.


Corrections
An article yesterday about traffic congestion on the Tappan Zee Bridge misidentified a commuter from Nanuet, N.Y.
He is R. Clinton Taplin.


New Power, Old Troubles in Trenton
The Republicans have won overwhelming control of New Jersey's Legislature, and an overwhelming obligation to use it responsibly.
They seized both houses from the Democrats by promising to roll back unpopular tax increases.
Suddenly empowered, they're talking big.
Reality says they should start thinking small.
Gov.
Jim Florio, who seized office from the Republicans in 1990, launched his administration with a bold $2.8 billion tax hike.
It made the state's income tax more progressive, raised and broadened the sales tax and infuriated a large body of voters.


Carol Perline Is a Bride
Carol Eve Perline, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving W. Perline of New York, was married yesterday to Jesse Michael Feder, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie Feder of Ossining, N.Y.
Rabbi Joel Goor officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hall, the Tarrytown caterer.
The bride, 31 years old, is the director of special events at the Greater New York March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation in New York.
She graduated from Clark University.
Her father owns Orion Fashion Jewelry, and her mother, Brigitte Perline, is a preschool teacher at the Ramaz School, both in New York.


Dividend Meetings


Chargers Rally to Stun Saints
Chargers 24, Saints 21
SAN DIEGO, Nov. 17 (AP) -- John Carney kicked a 19-yard field goal with 5 seconds left after San Diego's opportunistic defense led to Marion Butts's tying touchdown run as the Chargers upset the New Orleans Saints today.


Grocers and Shoppers Spar Anew Over Pricing
Consumer advocates won a battle in 1976 when New York State passed one of the first laws in the country requiring that virtually every item on supermarket shelves have a price tag.
Fifteen years and about a zillion price tags later, what is the newest consumer issue in New York?
A drive for "item- pricing" laws in counties across the state.


Giants Get the Verdicts and a Victory
Take nothing away from the Giants.
On this chilly, blustery day, their offensive line pushed the Dallas Cowboys off the line of scrimmage and controlled the ball for 36 minutes 37 seconds.
Their defense got penetration and limited the Cowboys to one long gain, Emmitt Smith's 36-yard run.
But in their 22-9 victory today, the Giants certainly received help from an unexpected source, the game officials.
Time after time, crucial calls went against the Cowboys.


Pat V. Auletta Is Dead; Civic Leader Was 79
Pat V. Auletta, a small-businessman and member of Community Board 13 who was known as the mayor of Coney Island, died on Saturday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and lived in Coney Island, Queens.
Mr. Auletta died of a heart attack, said his son, Ken Auletta, the writer.


Humanities Adviser Nominated
Kenny Jackson Williams, a professor of English at Duke University, has been nominated by President Bush to serve a 6-year term on the 26-member council that advises the National Endowment for the Humanities, the Federal agency that supports scholarly and educational projects.
Because Ms.
Williams has been outspoken in her criticism of liberal orthodoxy, including ethnic initiatives on college campuses, her nomination, announced by the White House on Thursday, is likely to generate opposition.
Nevertheless, many of those who helped defeat Mr.
Bush's previous choice for this position, Carol Iannone, a professor of literature at New York University who is also an outspoken conservative, praised the nomination of Ms.
Williams.


Buyer Sought For a Magazine
New York Woman, a five- year-old magazine aimed at sophisticated young New York women, has been put up for sale by the American Express Publishing Corporation.
The magazine has been struggling recently because of sagging advertising revenues.
"It's true that it is up for sale," said Betsy Carter, the magazine's founder and editor.
"We are doing everything we can do to find a buyer."


Dickens Wept Writing 'Christmas Carol'
To the Editor:
I was surprised to read in "The House of Morgan, Doubled" (editorial, Nov. 8) Charles Dickens's manuscript of "A Christmas Carol" described as "ridiculously unintelligible." While his handwriting may be "small" and "spiky," it is hardly "impossible."


Hard-Hitting Spots Assail Clothing and Textile Imports
AMERICAN consumers will find a large lump of coal being put in their Christmas stockings by an organization seeking to insure that those stockings bear labels reading "Made in U.S.A."
In television commercials running from today through Dec. 15, the Crafted with Pride in U.S.A.
Council Inc., the trade organization representing apparel, fiber and textile manufacturers, is undertaking its hardest-hitting, highest-budgeted campaign against the flood of imported merchandise that has decimated the operations of its more than 500 members.


Not So Typical, Not So Different
There she is, the latter-day Tom Sawyer of the tennis set, a congenial teen-ager with a toothy grin, an affection for denim and an appreciation of the joys of playing hooky.
Although she carries a designer racquet instead of a paintbrush and can of whitewash, Jennifer Capriati, improbably the consummate American kid despite her millions and her corporate sponsorships and her BMW's, is still using the tennis circuit as her personal picket fence.
It has been almost two years since the ponytailed Capriati, amid a deluge of hype that would have stultified a less confident prodigy, became a professional at age 13 and commenced an unapologetic assault on the women's tennis circuit.
Today, when the $3 million Virginia Slims Championships open at Madison Square Garden, Capriati will be seeded sixth and -- incited rather than intimidated by the presence of Monica Seles, Steffi Graf and Gabriela Sabatini -- will be on mission to win the whole thing.


Joint Bank-S.&amp; L. Bailout Is Weighed
With time running out in the legislative session and the insurance programs that protect the nation's banks and savings associations rapidly losing money, some members of Congress are recognizing that they may have to combine the requests for money for both funds into a $150 billion bailout package.
The Bush Administration and lawmakers have struggled for months to keep the enormous bank and savings and loan bailouts separate, judging that the combined bill would be too much for the public to swallow and would make impossible other banking and regulatory changes.


Princeton Journal; Old Boys Honor Triangle Club in Long Kick Line
The distinguished gray-haired gentleman opened his tweed blazer, threw off his tam and started kicking, Rockette style, in front of throngs of cars waiting to enter a packed parking lot.
Horns blasted in a tone-deaf chorus of approval.
It was that kind of weekend on the majestic Gothic campus of Princeton University.
In a tribute to the 100th anniversary of the Triangle Club, the undergraduate theater troupe almost as well known for its tradition of men-in-drag chorus lines as for its original productions, Princeton threw a three-day party -- and thousands of giddy alumni showed up.


Review/Television; The Image and Reality Of Hoover and His F.B.I.
"G-Men," tonight's slice of "The American Experience," at 9 on Channels 13 and 49, investigates the creation of the crime-busting reputation of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and J. Edgar Hoover, its head for nearly half a century.
The reputation, which is not the same as the reality, has Mr.
Hoover's fingerprints all over it.
This unflattering hour traces the F.B.I.'s ascendance to Hoover's "public-relations genius" for turning the post-World War I Red scares and the explosion of crime during Prohibition to personal and institutional aggrandizement.
The fact that the pudgy career bureaucrat looked nothing like the model agent portrayed in the material he planted in comic books, as the photographs here attest, makes his celebrity the more remarkable.


The Symbols Spawned by a Killing
Julio Rivera and Daniel Doyle were two young men with only one thing in common.
They were both in the same wrong place one warm summer night in Queens, around 3 A.M. on July 2, 1990, when Mr.
Rivera was punched, clubbed and hammered in a darkened Jackson Heights schoolyard and Mr.
Doyle stabbed him to death.
Actually, they shared one other thing: to those who knew them well, Mr.
Doyle seemed no more likely a murderer than Mr.
Rivera seemed a victim.


Books of The Times; How Hollywood's 'Bonfire' Crashed and Burned
The Devil's Candy 'The Bonfire of the Vanities' Goes to Hollywood By Julie Salamon Illustrated. 434 pages.
Houghton Mifflin. $24.95.
That the movie this book is about was a flop does not mean that the author set out to write a book about a flop.
To the contrary, when Julie Salamon, the film critic for The Wall Street Journal, decided to write about the filming of Tom Wolfe's best-selling satirical novel, "The Bonfire of the Vanities," her intent, as she says, was simply to follow "the making of a big Hollywood film from beginning to end -- something that no outsider had done, to my knowledge, since John Huston invited Lillian Ross to observe the making of 'The Red Badge of Courage' almost 40 years before."


The Louisiana Election; Even in Losing, Duke Spread Message to Nation
For State Representative David Duke merely losing an election need not be the end of his career.
When he conceded defeat in the Louisiana governor's race to former Gov.
Edwin W. Edwards on Saturday night, he said, "this is the beginning, not the end." Indeed, even as he waged a losing campaign, Mr.
Duke greatly expanded the national audience for his message of middle-class resentment.
And in network interviews today he refused to rule out the possibility of running for President.


U.S. Nuclear Technology Tactics Vex Iran
President Hashemi Rafsanjani criticized the United States today for trying to prevent other countries from selling nuclear technology to Iran and said his Government would continue to seek the "tools" it needs to preserve its "independence and survival."
"With utter insolence, the United States declares that Iran does not have the right to utilize nuclear technology even for non-military purposes," Mr.
Rafsanjani said in a speech before a graduating class at an air force academy. .


Redskins (11-0) Show Steelers Why They're Perfect
Eleven teams have tried this season and eleven have failed to find a way to derail the Washington Redskins.
Some have tried razzle-dazzle, others have tried to fluster the Redskins with nonstop blitzes.
This afternoon, the hapless Pittsburgh Steelers tried a new approach: they attempted to bore Washington into a loss.


Man Dies in 5th Ave. Restaurant Shootout
A man was shot to death outside a Chinese restaurant in midtown Manhattan Saturday evening and another man was seriously injured in an incident that possibly involved Asian gang activity, the police said yesterday.
The shooting grew out of a gathering of about a dozen men on the second floor of the Hunan Fifth Avenue Restaurant at 323 Fifth Avenue near 32d Street, an area frequented by tourists a few blocks south of the Empire State Building, the police said.


China Detains Two Dissidents During Baker Visit
With Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d visiting here in part to press for the release of hundreds of Chinese dissidents, two more of them were detained over the weekend as the Beijing authorities apparently sought to prevent them from meeting with Mr.
Baker's aides.
Before Mr.
Baker arrived in Beijing on Friday for a three-day visit, American officials had tentatively arranged meetings between his deputies and several dissidents in Beijing.


Uranium Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


People
*
Jim Ficco, 37 years old, has been named executive vice president and chief operating officer at Ketchum Advertising, Pittsburgh.
He had previously been senior vice president and group director. *
Donald L. Albert, 34, has been promoted to director of marketing and sales development for Sports Illustrated, New York, from director of sales support.
He succeeds Alvaro Saralegui, who is now the magazine's advertising sales director. *
Wayne Cornils has been named to a senior management position, with a title to be determined, at the Radio Advertising Bureau, New York.
He had previously been a management and sales consultant to radio stations. *
Sam B. Vitt, the 65-year-old founder of the media-buying firm Vitt Media International Inc. in New York, has retired as chairman and chief executive.
He will be succeeded by Roy A. Muro, 49, the president and chief operating officer.


Young &amp; Rubicam Quits Unisys Account
Young &amp; Rubicam New York has resigned the Unisys Corporation's advertising account, estimated at $8 million, which the computer company has decided to place in review.
The account had been handled by Y.&amp; R. since 1986, when Burroughs and Sperry merged to form Unisys.
"We're disappointed that they've withdrawn," said Robert O'Leary, Unisys's advertising director.
But, he added, the company wanted to see if it could find fresher, better ads.


Halabja Journal; In Town Iraqis Gassed, Kurds Now Breathe Free
After a long and forced exile, the Kurds are coming back to Halabja, scene of the worst chemical attack on civilians of the Iran-Iraq war.
They are coming from Iran and from refugee camps north and west of here and they are working day and night because the first winter of their resurrection is coming.


Sports of The Times; Most Unlikely Last-Minute Football Hero
THE guy who caught the pass to score the winning touchdown for the Jets in the last minute of the game against the New England Patriots yesterday says he wasn't the first or even second option on the play.
"I think I was about 197th," he said.


One First-Rounder Left
The Orlando Magic and Indiana Pacers signed first-round draft picks yesterday, leaving LUC LONGLEY, who was selected by the Minnesota Timberwolves, as the only first-round selection unsigned.
The Magic signed BRIAN WILLIAMS to a multiyear contract and placed rookie center STANLEY ROBERTS on the injured list with a sprained ankle.


Helping Grandparents Who Are Parents Again
WHAT's wrong with this scene?
Nancy Hulsizer has a birthday party celebrating the first half-century of life of her husband, Ernest.
As the evening wears on, Mrs.
Hulsizer wears down.
Long before midnight, with 40 or so guests still milling about the house, the hostess makes an announcement from the stairs: "Please continue enjoying yourselves, but I'm going to bed now. The baby will be up at 5:30." Everyone applauds.
Mrs.
Hulsizer sleeps.
Until 5:30.


BTR Realty Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Europeans Decide to Allow Duty-Free Zones Till 1999
Like the riddle of the Sphinx, the question gnawed at delegates to the European Commission in Brussels for months: In a new Europe in which there will no longer be internal borders at which customs duties must be paid, can there still be such a thing as duty-free shopping?
The commission's finance ministers have decided that yes, it is possible.
But only until 1999.


Witness Says Noriega Got $10 Million in Drug Bribes
The Medellin drug cartel paid $10 million in bribes to Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega for his permission to ship 20 tons of cocaine to the United States from Panama, a former Panamanian diplomat who says he was a go-between in the deal testified here today.
The witness was Ricardo Bilonick, who has admitted supervising the cocaine shipments aboard an airline he owned in partnership with Colombian drug traffickers.
He also said today that Pablo Escobar, leader of one of the most powerful arms of the cartel, once boasted to him that when General Noriega flew to the United States on an official visit late in 1983 he did so aboard a plane "loaded with cocaine."


Fight for Cape Cod Shanty May Finally End
One of the nation's longest-running lawsuits is expected to be resolved on Friday, when a 69-year-old woman faces eviction from a two-room cottage that was once part of a writers' colony on Cape Cod.
Nestled behind sea grass on the dunes along the Atlantic in Provincetown, the cottage is one of 17 primitive shanties that were once retreats for writers like E. E. Cummings, Jack Kerouac, Norman Mailer and Eugene O'Neill.
But in 1967, the National Park Service claimed the cottages as part of the Cape Cod National Seashore.


Dollar's Decline Is Eased By Resurgence in Stocks
The dollar fell against major foreign currencies yesterday, but traders said the slide was moderated by the rebound in the stock market.
Gold prices rose, with gold for current delivery gaining $1.50 an ounce of the Commodity Exchange in New York to close at $361.
The Republic National Bank quoted a late bid of $361.50, also up $1.50 an ounce.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Mayor David N. Dinkins's trip to South Africa included an erroneous report from The Associated Press about the Mayor's scheduled meeting with the South African Foreign Minister at Jan Smuts Airport.
It was not canceled; Mr.
Dinkins met with the Foreign Minister for 45 minutes.


Ruling Is Delayed on Status Of School-Accrediting Unit
Facing the loss of Federal authorization for its work evaluating colleges and universities, the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools yesterday persuaded a committee investigating the accreditation process to postpone final hearings scheduled for this Thursday and Friday.
Education Secretary Lamar Alexander will rule on whether to reauthorize the Middle States group, which has been criticized for considering the multicultural nature of college curriculums and other "cultural diversity" criteria as part of the evaluation process, after he receives the recommendations of this panel.


New Jersey Teams Land in Playoffs
Glassboro State, Ramapo and William Paterson, three of the seven teams in the New Jersey Athletic Conference, will have football playoff games Saturday.
Glassboro (9-1), the conference champion, will play for the first time in the 16-team Division III national tournament.
The Profs will visit the Eastern region's top-seeded team, Ithaca (8-1).


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday analyzing declines of more than 100 points in the Dow Jones industrial average on Fridays in the last five years omitted two and listed one erroneously.
The average fell 108.35 points on Friday, Oct. 16, 1987, and 140.58 on Friday, Jan. 8, 1988.
Oct. 19, 1987, when the Dow fell 508, was a Monday.


On Credit Cards, D'Amato Finds Victory and Defeat
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato knows a good political target when he sees one.
Saddam Hussein, for one.
Credit card interest rates, for another.
But while his attacks on the Iraqi leader generated little debate, the latest attempt by Mr.
D'Amato to use the rates as grist for his toughest re-election campaign set off an open battle between New York's junior Senator and the White House and is being blamed for provoking Friday's stock market plunge.


FOOTBALL -- Playoff Scramble: Major Steps in Right Direction; This Time, Jets Score When It Counts
On Nov. 10 against the Indianapolis Colts, when the Jets needed their two-minute drill to work, it failed.
The next Sunday, facing the same set of circumstances, the Jets went to their two-minute drill and it worked against New England.
The difference between the two situations was the difference between winning and losing.
No matter how the season ends, the Jets will examine the contrast as one of the keys to the season.
In both cases, quarterback Ken O'Brien was the point man and made the difference.


Biscayne Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Phillips Collection Head Announces Resignation
In a move that will make way for the first director outside of its founding family, the Phillips Collection in Washington has announced that Laughlin Phillips, its head since 1972, will resign from that post.
Mr.
Phillips, who is 67 years old, is the son of Duncan and Marjorie Phillips, who founded the museum -- the oldest museum of modern art in the United States -- in 1921.


G.M. Registers Preference Stock
The General Motors Corporation filed a shelf registration on Friday for up to $750 million in preference stock, according to an announcement by the auto maker yesterday.


Organic Wines Enter the Mainstream
The nation's wine makers are quietly going organic.
Small and large, premium and budget-priced, wineries are giving up pesticides for predatory wasps and abandoning chemical fertilizers and weed-killers for compost and cover crops.
A handful of producers have made organic wines since the early 1980's and brought them to market, but these were mostly small operations more firmly rooted in the organic-farming movement than in fine wine.
Now their ranks have been joined by many successful wineries, including Gallo, Fetzer, Sutter Home and Buena Vista.


Morgan Keegan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Business Scene; Testing the Limits Of Pay Restraints
A STRIKE and a lockout have partly shut down Caterpillar Inc. in a labor dispute that highlights a new turn in the long-running process of holding down workers' wages so that American industry can be competitive in world markets.
Caterpillar has clearly become competitive against almost any rival.
So now the question is: Should wage restraint continue, to allow an already-efficient company to get a leg up on competitors, here and abroad?
Put more broadly, the issue is whether corporate America, after a decade of holding down wages, should turn to other methods for improving competitiveness -- better management techniques, for example, or more emphasis on research and product development.
Caterpillar says its own advantage has come in part from just such efforts.
But holding down labor costs keeps a permanent place in the Caterpillar formula.


Banks Uneasy at Focus on Credit Cards
The debate in Congress that led to consideration of a cap on credit card interest rates subsided yesterday, but it turned an unwelcome spotlight on one of the banking industry's richest businesses at a time when the industry can least afford the attention.
As many of the nation's largest banks struggle with losses from commercial real estate loans, the credit card business was one of the industry's few bright spots.
It accounted for a quarter of all bank profits and generated returns that have been double the amount banks strive to earn on their loans.


Patterns
Roehm Returns
Carolyne Roehm, flanked by dressmaker's dummies and two moving vans, was spotted outside her new studio on East 65th Street last week.


So Do You Need One?
SHOPPING for a computer can be baffling for first-time buyers.
The technology has evolved so rapidly that it can be confusing even for people who are replacing older PC's.
Which brands are good today?
Which features are important?
Where is the best place to shop?
The best place to start, however, is with the $64K question: Do you really need a PC?
The question is not as dumb as it sounds, given the title of this column, since many fancy computers wind up gathering dust in the closet or posing as high-tech sculptures on the desk in the den.


Sybron Acquisition Co. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Notes and Bonds Decline in Price
The stock market's return to stability helped to push down prices of Treasury notes and bonds yesterday, but credit market participants said the drop was of minimal significance.
On Friday, when stocks registered their biggest decline in more than two years, investors poured money into short-term notes and bills.
When it became apparent that a further big drop was not likely to take place yesterday, those positions were unwound.


People
*
Mark A. Morrissey, David Desmith and 10 other executives from Young &amp; Rubicam, New York, have joined two former colleagues at Mezzina/ Brown, New York, an agency formed after the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. assigned it the Camel cigarette account previously at Y.&amp; R. Mr.
Morrissey, a Y.&amp; R. management supervisor, has been named Mezzina/ Brown's director of client services, while Mr.
Desmith retains his previous title, associate creative director. *
Chuck Balestrino has been named to the new position of executive vice president and multinational account director at J. Walter Thomspon Worldwide, New York.
He had been an executive vice president and general manager at J. Walter Thompson, Detroit.


Thackeray Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
Most tournament players are familiar with, and tend to apply, Goldwater's Rule, a whimsical guideline credited to Harry Goldwater of Manhattan, now a puckish nonagenarian.
His idea is that a lead out of turn should be accepted, because a player who does not know whose lead it is has probably chosen the wrong lead anyway.
This is not as easy to apply as it was when it was devised more than 30 years ago.
There are now two ways to accept: As well as having the normal declarer take charge, with the lead coming around to the dummy, the legal declarer can become dummy.


Time Almost Buried Ancient Maya Secrets
WHEN the American lawyer John Lloyd Stephens rediscovered the ancient Maya ruins in the early 19th century, the strange engravings on stone monuments fascinated and puzzled him.
Of the city of Copan, he wrote: "One thing I believe, that its history is graven on its monuments. Who shall read them?"
Until 1960, it looked as if no one ever would.
Archeologists had never found a Maya equivalent of the Rosetta Stone, which was used to decode the ancient Egyptian inscriptions.
Descendants of the Maya living in Central America had lost the knowledge of how to read the complex glyphs.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  SCHOOLS LOTTERY: JACKPOT IS HALF FULL
Ten weeks after being introduced, a special "Invest in Kids" lottery that was to pay for added security at New York City public schools is bringing in only half as much money as expected.
And city officials say the proceeds will be used to plug a gap in the Board of Education's budget, rather than for anti-crime programs, as originally planned.
Page A1.
NEW LIFE FOR A NEW SCHOOL
A group of parents and teachers have won their battle with the local school superintendent to preserve the Bronx New School, the alternative public school they created in a church basement three years ago.
Page B3.
TESTING FOR TUBERCULOSIS
State officials began testing prison inmates and employees for tuberculosis in an attempt to stop the spread of a drug-resistant strain that has killed 14 people in the prison system.
Page B3.
CITY SUSPENDS GOTTI RELATIVE'S CONTRACT
The Dinkins administration suspended a $1.8 million-a-year contract given to the son-in-law of John Gotti for the removal of abandoned cars from streets in Brooklyn.
Page B3.
Transit executive accused of nepotism. Page B3.
Jury weighing gay-bashing case. Page B3.
Dinkins returns from South Africa trip. Page B3.
American Indians plan their own Thanksgiving parade.
Page B3.
REGION BUDGET PLAN: TALK, NO DETAILS
For all the bold talk about combining New York State's budget gaps into one huge problem and then crafting a grand solution to last into 1993, nobody has yet described how it would actually work.
That helps explain why there has been little progress in negotiations so far.
Page B9.
RACIAL QUESTIONING IN A WHITE SUBURB
White students who performed a high school skit grinning in blackface have set off an angry examination of racial attitudes in the affluent, overwhelmingly white suburb of Rye.
Page B7.
D'AMATO ON THE OFFENSIVE
Facing the toughest re-election fight since he went to Washington, Senator D'Amato last week seized a politically powerful issue by calling for a cap on credit-card interest rates.
That call has provoked open conflict with the Bush administration and is blamed for helping to cause Friday's stock market plunge.
Page B7.
WEICKER ON THE OFFENSIVE
Governor Weicker seized the initiative at the opening of a special legislative session called to consider repealing the new income tax.
He announced that Connecticut's $7.6 billion budget was already out of balance by $175 million and headed for another deficit.
To close the gap, he proposed a series of cuts in local aid, pension deferrals and more tax increases.
Page A1.
A FISHERMAN'S STORY
Daniel Hand is still a Long Island fisherman without a boat.
But at least he now has a Government promise of $220,000 to compensate for the loss of his old boat, which he was forced to sink after netting a World War II torpedo.
Page B7.
Page B7. Our Towns B6  Obituaries B14


Fisherman's Torpedoed Career Is Refloated
Capt.
Daniel Hand, gazing longingly out to sea, declared that it was "a great day to go fishing" today.
But he still didn't have a boat.
Captain Hand's last vessel, the Shinnecock I, in which he'd gone to sea for 18 years, was sunk eight months ago by the United States Navy after he netted a World War II torpedo along with a heavy load of fish in the Atlantic off the south shore of Long Island.


Socanav Inc. reports earnings for Year to July 31


Indians Plan Own Parade Before Macy's
Perhaps it was inevitable in the year in which the tomahawk chop became the most politically incorrect hand motion in sports history.
A group of American Indians announced yesterday that it will conduct its own Thanksgiving parade next week on the day before Macy's.
"We don't fit into Macy's traditional vision of a national television show," said Bruce Cohen, the spokesman for the Parade for America's Indigenous Peoples.
"They have a tightly constructed view of what the parade should be. So we decided to do our own."


Military Mission For Shuttle Is Prepared
Six astronauts are to be launched Tuesday evening aboard the space shuttle Atlantis on a mission carrying the latest in a series of satellites intended to detect missile launchings and nuclear detonations from space.
The military mission will also include the testing of the concept of a "soldier in space" and how useful he might be in providing tactical information to commanders on the ground.
The crew is to use a telescope, an electronic still camera and binoculars to examine military bases, airports and other points of military interest from an orbit 195 nautical miles above the earth, Air Force officials said.


Pat V. Auletta Is Dead; Civic Leader Was 79
Pat V. Auletta, a small-businessman and member of Community Board 13 who was known as the mayor of Coney Island, died on Saturday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and lived in Coney Island, Brooklyn.
Mr. Auletta died of a heart attack, said his son, Ken Auletta, the writer.


Researchers Report Cloning of Gene for Key Brain Protein
SCIENTISTS say they have cloned a gene that directs the making of a crucial brain protein, an achievement they hope will eventually lead to new drugs for stroke, epilepsy, memory loss and a variety of degenerative brain conditions.
The protein is the so-called NMDA receptor, the most intriguing member of a family of receptors that traffic in glutamate, a chemical that binds to nerve cells and transmits signals between them.
NMDA, or N-methyl-D-aspartate, is a synthetic form of glutamate.


Seattle Filmworks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Graf and Navratilova Perform as Expected on Opening Night
A couple of champions, the two-time winner Steffi Graf and the four-time champion Martina Navratilova, were in appropriate form last night as the $3 million Virginia Slims Championships got under way at Madison Square Garden.
With a crashing serve and her trademark blistering forehand, Graf simply overpowered 19-year-old Conchita Martinez, a quarterfinalist here last year, 6-0, 6-3.
Graf, who continues to receive therapy on sore tendons in her right wrist, said the match was tighter than the score indicated, but never close enough to worry her.


On My Mind; The Louisiana Lesson
Now for the really good news from Louisiana: The campaign against David Duke shows how he can be defeated again if he tries for national office -- he or the likes of him.
Yes, we all know that the country is not rid of him.
And it is obvious that Patrick Buchanan, a politician who uses journalistic print and air to become the rally point for the Republican right wing, will sooner or later put hat, foot and mouth in the Presidential ring.


Duke Says He Is Considering Entering Races for President
Two days after his resounding defeat in the Louisiana governor's race, State Representative David Duke said today that he may enter "a number of primaries" in next year's Presidential campaign.
Mr.
Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan leader and neo-Nazi who ran on the Republican ticket in Saturday's election despite President Bush's disavowal, has repeatedly said he had "no plans" to run for the Presidency against Mr.
Bush.


Micro Healthsystems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Buttes Gas &amp; Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BRIEFS
Debt City of Hamilton, Ohio's $60 million water system mortgage revenue bonds, 1991 series A, will be priced today through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.


Wilson Brothers ei reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Art; Connections Amid Diversity In 2 London Retrospectives
Two of the most stimulating shows of the fall in Europe, focusing on two of the most stimulating painters of the day, have opened here.
They make for a curious comparison.
Richard Diebenkorn, the pre-eminent California modernist, and Gerhard Richter, the post-modernist from Germany who epitomizes the resurgence of European art, are dissimilar in most respects.
Mr.
Richter's work is steeped in irony and forever casting doubt on its own devices, making it appealing to critics who have little interest in painting.
To admire Mr.
Diebenkorn, on the other hand, is to revere painting.
Tradition-minded and completely lacking in irony, his work flourishes in another artistic universe from the one in which Mr.
Richter has become a star.


Observer; Great Caesar's Scalp
The lack of public excitement about the recent discovery that Julius Caesar was completely bald says a great deal about the decline of American education.
Fifty or even forty years ago this remarkable news would have spawned a thousand jokes from schoolchildren struggling with Caesar's history of the Gallic wars and graybeards equally at home with the Odes of Horace and the cutthroat world of Wall Street.
In those days many Americans would have been inspired by the startling news of Caesar's baldness to compose an ode in the style of Horace, such was the popular command of Latin and Roman history created by American educators' determination to create a love for the classics.


ELECTIONS IN INDIA BOLSTER PREMIER
Five months after taking office, Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao and his minority Government have received the first signal that India's voters are coming to accept their policy of moving India from a socialist economy toward a free-market one.
In elections on Saturday to fill seats in Parliament, millions of voters across the country sent more members of Mr.
Rao's Government to the lower house than had been anticipated by many political commentators.
Mr.
Rao, who was required to win a seat in Parliament himself to remain Prime Minister, won a landslide victory in his home state without even visiting his electoral district.


What We Get From Our War on Marijuana; No. 1 Cash Crop
To the Editor:
Marijuana is not as hip a drug as it was in the 1970's (front page, Oct. 29), but neither are cigarettes, alcohol or coffee.
Combined, alcohol and cigarettes, two legal drugs, take the lives of half a million Americans annually.
Marijuana is nontoxic, not physically addictive and is not known ever to have caused an overdose.


Gatekeepers to the Famous and the Powerful
Rose Gross-Marino knows when a full moon is near.
Those are the days when the phone in her office rings and a would-be Barry Manilow is baying into the receiver.
At home in Harrison, N.Y., Ms. Marino has pet birds that don't sing, "and they don't
want
to sing," she said thankfully. But in her office at Arista Records, where she is the personal assistant to Clive Davis, the president, the people who call her -- sometimes collect -- desperately want to sing. These callers, who are invariably "the sister of a cousin of a friend," will do practically anything to get past Ms. Marino, for whom the telephone is a football field and she the offensive lineman.


Stocks Up, Relieving Some Fear
The stock market steadied itself yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average regaining a quarter of the ground it lost in Friday's drubbing.
Action on the New York Stock Exchange was hectic again, with volume surpassing even the heavy trading of the previous session.
After plummeting 120.31 points on Friday, its worst one-day loss in two years, the Dow regained 29.52 points yesterday, to 2,972.72.
But much of the buying was concentrated in blue-chip issues; more Big Board stocks showed losses than gains.


A Hess-B.P. Deal
The Amerada Hess Corporation, based in New York, agreed to trade its undeveloped oil and gas assets in the Ross field of the North Sea for properties owned by the British Petroleum Company in the North Sea Angus field.
The agreement, which has been approved by the British Government, brings Amerada Hess's total holding in the Angus field to nearly 94 percent.
Premier Consolidated Oilfields holds the remainder.
British Petroleum's stake in the Ross field is now 57.66 percent.
The other license holders in the field are British Gas P.L.C. with 21 percent, Ultramar P.L.C., the operator of the field, with 16.33 percent, and Pict Petroleum, with 5 percent.


Brazil Creates Reserve for Imperiled Amazon Tribe
Overriding mining interests and military protests, President Fernando Collor de Mello has moved to reserve a stretch of Amazon rain forest as a homeland for the Yanomami Indians, a tribe virtually untouched by modern civilization whose ways date from the Stone Age.
The new reserve, coupled with a slightly smaller park across the border, in Venezuela, will allow the Yanomami, South America's last major untouched tribe, to roam freely over 68,331 square miles of Amazon wilderness, an area the size of Missouri.


For More Than Just a Season
The big question among designers preparing their spring collections was whether, in a grim economic climate, their customers would focus on classic wear-forever styles or would veer toward lively, adventurous never-seen-before designs.
The answer, in the first week of buying after the spring ready-to-wear openings, lay somewhere in between.
Designers who had a clear idea of what they wanted to show generally fared better than those who tried to touch all bases.


Miscellany
*
The New York Times Magazine and the women's publishing division of The New York Times Company's magazine group will publish in the spring their first joint-venture all-advertising supplement, Family Travel, to be inserted in the April 12 Times Magazine and the May issue of Child.


The Magic Word That Could Solve Cuomo's Budget Problems: 'Multiyear'
For all the bold talk about combining New York State's budget gaps into one huge problem and then crafting a grand solution to last well into 1993, nobody has yet described how it would actually work.
The lack of progress in fashioning such a plan could carry dire implications, not only for the fiscal outlook of the state, but also for the political future of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who said today that if there was no solution soon, he would not enter the campaign for President.


BUSH SEES NO NEED FOR MAJOR EFFORTS TO REVIVE ECONOMY
President Bush said today that he believed that the American economy was basically sound and that he planned no major new programs to stimulate growth, but he acknowledged having trouble convincing the public that his policies were adequate.
Amid evidence that the continued economic sluggishness was already throwing his re-election campaign off balance, Mr.
Bush called reporters to his office on short notice to strike a confident note about the country and his plans for a second term.


A Touchy Issue For Newsweek
The Nov. 25 issue of Newsweek, commemorating the 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, is appearing without a number of Japanese advertisers that often appear in the magazine.
But two chose to remain.


Accounting Board Report
In a move that could make financial statements far more relevant and uniform, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued a discussion paper yesterday that examines how companies account for financial assets and liabilities.
"This is our attempt to look at all the issues on a comprehensive basis," said Dennis R. Beresford, the board's chairman, who said that until now, the board had to concern itself with "putting out fires" each time Wall Street invents new types of securities or other financial products.


CHRONICLE
The failings of nationalism seem an unlikely topic for a composition by MARVIN HAMLISCH , known for the scores of "A Chorus Line" and the movie "The Way We Were." But tonight a symphonic suite by Mr.
Hamlisch, "Anatomy of Peace," will have its premiere performance by the Dallas Symphony Orchestra in the Morton H. Meyerson Hall in Dallas.
"I have always thought of music as a highway with many lanes," Mr.
Hamlisch said yesterday.
"This is just opening another lane."


A Chance to Be Coach for a Day
IT is second and seven for the Whammers on their own 36-yard line.
As head coach you call for a quarterback sneak.
Ouch!
A moment later, it's third and nine.
The accursed Badmen have done it again.
This isn't a scene from "Monday Night Football," but from PlayMaker Football, by Broderbund of Novato, Calif.
The game, with about as many options and ins and outs as the real thing, was previously available for Macintosh computers and has now been rewritten for MS-DOS machines.


CHRONICLE
PRESIDENT BUSH yesterday presented the Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian honor, to BETTY FORD, the former First Lady; TED WILLIAMS, the former Red Sox outfielder; THOMAS P. O'NEILL, the retired House Speaker, and seven others.
Mr.
Bush said the winners "have enriched our nation, whether as leaders of popular movements, as friends of the common man or as intellectual giants," the Associated Press reported.
BARBARA BUSH joined in the ceremony in the East Room of the White House, placing the gold medals around the necks of the men and giving most a kiss on the cheek.
She handed the boxed medals to the two women who received them, Mrs.
Ford and HANNA HOLBORN GRAY, president of the University of Chicago.


FOOTBALL -- Playoff Scramble: Major Steps in Right Direction; Giants Take Their Show On the Road
Two weeks ago, after the Giants' disastrous 30-7 loss to the Philadelphia Eagles, Coach Ray Handley brushed off talk about reaching the playoffs.
"We have to string together three or four wins before we can think about that," he said.


McDonald's, Turner in Deal
The McDonald's Corporation and the Turner Broadcasting System said yesterday that they had agreed in principle to explore the development of a television entertainment and news network that would be shown in McDonald's restaurants.
While McDonald's has agreed to the concept, a spokeswoman for the company said, "We need to explore details and specifics."
Trade publications have reported that the network would consist of television monitors, playing special programming and commercials, to be installed by Turner in the approximately 8,600 McDonald's restaurants across the country.
The network would be the latest in a series of so-called placed-based media in sites like supermarket check-out lines, airport lounges and doctors' waiting rooms.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Talk of capping credit card interest rates turned an unwelcomed spotlight on one of the banking industry's richest businesses at a time when it can least afford the attention.  [ Page A1. ]
There was less momentum behind legislation that would cap interest rates on credit cards as lawmakers got cold feet about making a political point that risked damage to the stock market and possibly the economy.  [ D9. ]
President Bush said he believed the American economy was basically sound and that he planned no major new programs to stimulate growth, but he acknowledged that he was having trouble convincing the public that his policies were adequate.  [ A1. ]
The oil industry has begun to talk tough on the environment, after recent setbacks, for the first time since the Exxon Valdez accident almost three years ago.  [ D1. ] Markets
Stock prices recovered, and the Dow posted a gain of 29.52 points, to close at 2,972.72.
Action on the Big Board was hectic, with volume surpassing even the heavy trading of the previous session.
Nearly 242 million shares changed hands.  [ D1. ]
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds fell as the stock market returned to stability, but credit market participants said the drop was of minimal significance.  [ D16. ]
The dollar fell against most foreign currencies, but traders said the slide was moderated by the stock market rebound.  [ D17. ]
Soybean futures prices surged, leading the grain markets mostly higher amid revived hopes for a Soviet food-aid package and signs of stronger export sales.  [ D17. ] International
Can there still be such a thing as duty-free shopping in a new Europe in which there will no longer be internal borders at which customs duties must be paid?
Yes, it is possible.
But only until 1999.  [ D1. ]
Czechoslovakia plans to give ordinary citizens stock-buying coupons for big nationalized industries.  [ D5. ]
Western nations should grant debt assistance to the Soviet nation as it tries to weather the winter and reorder its economy, said Robert Strauss, the United States Ambassador.  [ A14. ] Companies
Salomon Brothers is dismissing as many as 135 professional employees, Wall Street executives said.
Also, some 15 managing directors are expected to resign by the end of the year.  [ D1. ]
A handful of wine producers have made organic wines since the early 1980's, but now their ranks have been joined by wineries like Gallo, Fetzer, Sutter Home and Buena Vista.  [ D1. ]
A.T.&amp;T. is offering a new form of data transmission nearly 30 times as fast as current methods.
The service will speed the transfer of text, numbers and images among banks, hospitals and insurance companies.  [ D2. ]
Midway Airlines asked a Federal judge to force Northwest Airlines to proceed with a buyout that would have kept grounded Midway in the air.  [ D4. ] Today's Columns
The labor dispute at Caterpillar highlights a new turn in the process of holding down workers' wages so that American industry can be competitive in world markets.
Louis Uchitelle: Business Scene.  [ D2. ]
By increasing its exports of uranium to raise cash, the Soviet Union has dealt a blow to the American uranium industry.
Market Place.  [ D10. ]
The first company to advertise condoms on network television was a surprise.
Carter-Wallace showed a commercial for its Trojan Extra Strength brand; the maker of Ramses and Sheik condoms had been expected to be first.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D19. ]


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary in some editions yesterday about Pat V. Auletta, a member of Community Board 13 in New York City, referred incorrectly to Coney Island.
It is in Brooklyn, not Queens.
The obituary is reprinted today on page B14 for readers of editions that did not carry it.


Wilder's '92 Campaign Looks for Blacks' Votes
In the two weeks since the Rev.
Jesse Jackson announced that he would not be a Presidential candidate in 1992, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia, who is, has begun positioning himself as heir to the so-called "Jackson vote."
It is far from certain that the Governor, with his moderate-to-conservative record and his low-key campaign style, can be as successful in winning blacks' votes as the more liberal and more theatrical Mr.
Jackson.


The Penguins Are Sold But Price Is a Mystery
The sale of the Pittsburgh Penguins to a group headed by Howard Baldwin and Morris Belzberg was formally approved yesterday at a meeting of the National Hockey League Board of Governors in Manhattan.
Baldwin said the franchise had a value "in the $45 million range" but he declined to reveal how much he and Belzberg were paying.
Spectacor Management Group, which operates sports facilities in many cities, is buying the lease to the Pittsburgh Civic Arena for $24 million in a separate agreement announced earlier this autumn.


Neglected Economist Honored by President
For years, Friederich von Hayek was a prophet little honored in this land.
In a 1944 best seller, "The Road to Serfdom," the Austrian-born economist warned the West that socialism -- whether German Nazism, Soviet Communism or the "gentler and kinder" British brand -- would inevitably lead to poverty and loss of liberty.
An ardent opponent of most government intervention in the economy, Mr. von Hayek, though respected for early contributions to monetary theory, was all but ignored by other economists for 30 years after World War II as Keynesian thought became a dominant intellectual force, the European social democracies boomed and the Soviet Union and other centrally planned economies scored impressive feats of industrialization.
Even after he won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science in 1974, Mr. von Hayek's following in the United States consisted mostly of a small band of monetary economists and libertarians.


Careers; 'Hot' Areas For the 90's And Beyond
THE Rochester Institute of Technology has released a list of what it calls "hot career choices for the remainder of the 1990's and the start of the next century." For young career planners and career changers, there are a dozen areas, including information technology and environmental management, for which the institute offers programs and degrees.
The other programs are in imaging science, microelectronic engineering, packaging science, telecommunications, food marketing and distribution, biotechnology, travel management, allied health sciences, electronic still photography and biomedical photographic communications.


Justices Won't Hear Inmate's Plea To Let Relative of Victim Testify
When the Supreme Court ruled in June that prosecutors in murder cases could argue for the death penalty by introducing evidence of the effect of the killing on the victim's family, the Court did not address a corollary question: Can the defense also introduce evidence of the thoughts and feelings of a victim's family if those might help prevent the death penalty?
If there is another side to the coin of such evidence, called victim-impact statements, the Court indicated today that it is not interested in examining it.
Without comment, the Justices turned down an appeal by an inmate on death row in Oklahoma who sought the right to present evidence that a relative of one of his victims did not want him to be executed.


Beard Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Nov. 7 about the defeat of an initiative in Washington State that sought to permit assisted suicide referred incorrectly to groups working for similar measures in other states.
Two such groups are Californians Against Human Suffering and the Hemlock Society (Oregon); the National Hemlock Society supports the option of assisted suicide but is not affiliated with them.
The article also misidentified the founder of the National Hemlock Society; he is Derek Humphry.


Washington at Work; Education Scholar Finds Delight as Federal Official
For years, Diane Ravitch dismissed the kind of Potomac lures that have attracted scholars from Henry Kissinger to Arthur Schlesinger Jr. to public service.
"I didn't want to work in government ever," Ms.
Ravitch said.
"I thought that if I wanted a government job that it would corrupt me."


Giants Coach Says He Made a Mistake
With 1 minute 52 seconds left in Sunday's game, the Giants were leading the Dallas Cowboys, 22-9, and were running out the clock.
The Giants had just made a first down, and everyone expected them to have Jeff Hostetler, the quarterback, kneel down on each play and let time run out.
Instead, on first down, Maurice Carthon ran, and the Cowboys stripped the ball and recovered it.
With 58 seconds left, the Cowboys took over on their 32-yard line and completed 4 passes for 54 yards to the Giants' 14 before time ran out.


Silicon Graphics In Siemens Pact
Silicon Graphics Inc. said it had entered an agreement under which Siemens-Nixdorf Information Systems A.G. of Germany would resell the American company's computer work stations and server products.
Siemens is expected to buy about $100 million worth of systems from Silicon Graphics under the three-year agreement, which gives the German company unrestricted, though nonexclusive, marketing rights worldwide.


QUESTIONS ON ROLE OF QUAYLE COUNCIL
The White House Council on Competitiveness, a regulatory review panel headed by Vice President Dan Quayle, has refused to turn over documents to several Congressional committees seeking to determine its role in Federal rule making, and one committee has replied with a subpoena.
The House Government Operations subcommittee on human resources sent the subpoena Friday to David Kessler, the head of the Food and Drug Administration, after the agency withheld a number of documents the panel had requested.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.87
7.56
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.59
4.57
7.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.63
4.60
7.05
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.94
6.93
8.22
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.84
7.81
8.51
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.81
9.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.85
6.81
7.50
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Stung by Protest Over Crackdown, Kenya Calls U.S. Envoy a Racist
In a deepening diplomatic dispute between the United States and Kenya, the Kenyan Foreign Minister called the American Ambassador a racist today, saying he had "contempt for Africans" and the attitude of a "slave owner."
The Foreign Minister, Wilson Ndolo Aya, called in the Ambassador, Smith Hempstone, for a private dressing-down.
He said afterward at a news conference that he had told Mr.
Hemptone that he regretted the United States had chosen "a man of his caliber to represent his country."


A Problem That Cadillac Likes
It would seem like an auto maker's dream: Customers standing in lines for a new car.
Cadillac executives have longed to see those lines for years, but now that they have them, such strong demand is a mixed blessing.
Car buyers who are getting their first look at the redesigned 1992 Cadillac Seville and Eldorado luxury cars, which went on sale in late September, are as enthusiastic about them as auto writers were in the summer.
Despite a wait of up to three months, customers are placing orders -- some without even taking a test drive.
The cars -- priced from $32,500 to $38,500 -- are luring import owners, as well as the younger drivers that Cadillac needs to replace its graying customers, who on average are 63 years old.
On the Waiting List
But the introduction has not been trouble free.
The cars, especially the premium models, are in short supply, which Cadillac attributes to the painstakingly slow start-up of its assembly line while the company tries to insure that the cars are perfect.
Still, even with the attention to detail, some reports of defects are cropping up from dealers and customers.
And some dealers are worried that a long wait will cause customers to give up and buy a different car.


Employee Dismissals Reported at Salomon
Salomon Brothers Inc., aggressively seeking to shape a new identity in the wake of the Treasuries market scandal, is dismissing as many as 135 professional employees, Wall Street executives said yesterday.
Also, some 15 managing directors are expected to resign by the end of the year, executives inside and outside the firm said.
The managing directors are among Salomon's top executives, a group that coincidentally numbers about 135.


What to Do About Water
For New Yorkers, the water news of the season has been storms, like Hurricane Bob, that washed away homes and beaches.
The real news, however, has not been too much water but too little.
The reservoirs that enable the city to drink, bathe and flush now stand at 46 percent of capacity, compared with 69 percent in a normal year.
That's an ominous difference, which led Mayor Dinkins to declare a "drought warning" on Nov. 8.
Trouble is, people aren't paying any more attention to the warning than they did to the "drought watch" the Mayor declared on Sept. 27.
A "watch" is issued when there's a 50 percent probability that the reservoirs won't be filled by the following July 1.
A "warning" is issued when the probability of shortage rises to 66 percent.


In Canadian Comic Book, AIDS Is the Villain
A glossy, brightly colored, sexually explicit comic book brought out with federal funding by Montreal General Hospital is stirring sharp reactions both inside and outside the city.
Its aim is to promote safe sex among thousands of "wildcat" teen dropouts, or "chats sauvage," of the inner city.


Don't Throw Homeless Out of Bus Terminal
To the Editor:
As a daily commuter, I object to the announced crackdown on the homeless in the Port Authority Bus Terminal (news article, Nov. 7).
It is being done on the ground that the homeless make commuters uncomfortable.


BELFAST PEACEFUL AS TROOPS FAN OUT
Patrols of three and four British soldiers outfitted for combat walked slowly up and down busy Falls Road in Roman Catholic West Belfast today, pivoting swiftly from time to time to take rifle aim at the top of buildings that might hide snipers, and then moving on again in the rain.
At the Park Center shopping mall, on the borderline between the Catholic area and a Protestant district, a mall employee, Seamus Weatherall, said he noticed more British Land-Rovers on patrol than usual.


Builders Transport reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sampson Gets Tryout
RALPH SAMPSON, happy to be out of Sacramento and eager to continue his N.B.A. career, went through a tryout with the Washington Bullets yesterday.
Sampson, who was released by the Kings during the preseason, went through a series of drills for about an hour in front of Washington Coach WES UNSELD and his assistant, BILL BLAIR, and General Manager JOHN NASH.
He will be given a physical today and could undergo further tests before the Bullets decide whether to offer him a contract.


South African Liberals Fight for Political Survival
The liberal Democratic Party, which has watched its longstanding opposition to apartheid pre-empted by President F. W. de Klerk and his National Party, is fighting to survive as a viable political alternative in South Africa.
In anticipation of the changes ahead, the Democrats are devising ingenious policies to bridge the considerable gaps between the National Party and the African National Congress.


Musicians Take Their Case to the Audience
With their contract negotiations moving along at a tempo somewhat slower than adagio, the musicians of the New York Philharmonic have taken up an unusual form of behind-the-scenes lobbying.
On Sunday evening, about 10 of the musicians turned up at the author E. L. Doctorow's home in New Rochelle to play chamber music for about 30 of Mr.
Doctorow's friends, neighbors and colleagues and to give them an idea of some of the issues that might lead to the orchestra's first strike since 1973.
The chamber music evening at Mr.
Doctorow's house was the eighth private performance the players have given since Nov. 1, mostly in Manhattan, at the homes of authors, college professors and others who promise to bring them sympathetic and, ideally, influential listeners.
Among those who attended Mr.
Doctorow's party were the authors William Styron and Avery Corman.


An Iceberg Bobs in the Latin Imagination
To the Editor:
The project to ship a sculptured iceberg from Antarctica to Expo '92 in Seville, Spain, proves what Chile intends -- that it is "as much European as Latin American" ("Chile's Chilly Idea," editorial, Nov. 8).


Gustav Husak, Czechoslovak Leader, Dies at 78
Former President Gustav Husak of Czechoslovakia, the old-line Slovak Communist who came to the fore after a Soviet bloc invasion stamped out the Prague Spring of 1968 and fell with the collapse of Communism, died yesterday.
He was 78 years old.
The nation's official press agency reported that he died in a hospital in Bratislava, the Slovak republic's capital and his hometown, of heart, circulatory and respiratory failure.
He had been hospitalized 10 days earlier.


Results Plus
BOXING  Americans Advance  Vernon Forrest of Augusta, Ga., became the second American to reach the semifinals of the world amateur championships when he outpointed Peter Richardson of England, 33-18, in a 139-pound bout last night in Sydney, Australia.
Eric Griffin, who won the 106-pound title at the world championships in Moscow in 1989, earned a semifinal berth when he stopped Tsocthargal of Mongolia in the third round. (AP) N.B.A.
Pacers Beat Pistons  Rik Smits scored 13 of his 26 points in the third quarter, sparking a 25-9 second-half spurt that lifted the Indiana Pacers to a 118-101 defeat of Detroit in Indianapolis last night.
Smits made a 3-point play to help put the Pacers ahead to stay, 72-69, with 5:41 left in the third quarter. (AP) N.H.L.
Canadiens Win, 1-0  Stephan Lebeau scored on a power-play goal nine minutes into the second period last night as the Canadiens beat the Edmonton Oilers in Montreal.
Edmonton had just 12 shots on goal.
Canadiens goaltender Patrick Roy recorded his third shutout this season. (AP) Penguins 7, Nordiques 3: Mark Recchi scored three goals and added three assists as the Pittsburgh Penguins won in Quebec in Pierre Page's first game as coach of the Nordiques.
Kevin Stevens also scored three goals for the Penguins.
The loss was the sixth straight for Quebec. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Fordham Tops Russians  Dave Buckner scored 18 points to lead six Fordham players in double figures last night and the Rams beat the Russian national team, 110-60, in an exhibition game at the Fordham campus. (AP) Canada 74, Seton Hall 69: Dwight Walton scored 29 points and hit four of five 3-point attempts to lead the Canadian national team to victory over Seton Hall in an exhibition game at East Orange, N.J.
Guard Terry Dehere, who scored 5 straight points to tie the game at 67, finished with 18 to lead the Pirates. (AP)


Classical Music in Review
American Symphony Orchestra
Carnegie Hall
In her brief tenure as music director of the American Symphony Orchestra, the French conductor Catherine Comet has brought an appealingly personal touch to her programming.
In many of her concerts, she has brought together American works that reflect the orchestra's heritage and French works that reflect her own.
The program she conducted on Sunday offered that kind of juxtaposition in its first half, with the second half devoted to a Russian work with French connections, Stravinsky's "Firebird" Suite.


Visit to China: Vexing Ritual; Baker's Trip Hindered By Misunderstandings
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d was excused from performing the ritual "nine prostrations" during his three-day visit ending Sunday, but in some ways his experience suggests that Americans and Chinese perplex and frustrate each other just as much as when Western emissaries groused two centuries ago about orders that they kowtow to the Emperor.
The Chinese this weekend appeared to display a characteristic capacity for shooting themselves in the foot, and showed little appreciation for the political pressures on Mr.
Baker and his need to justify his trip by winning concessions.
And the American public perhaps does not realize the constraints on Chinese leaders, which make them extremely wary of seeming to cave in to American pressure.


Oil Industry Lashes Out at Restrictions
The oil industry has begun to talk tough on the environment, after recent setbacks, for the first time since the Exxon Valdez accident almost three years ago.
About 2,000 industry executives, here at the annual convention of the American Petroleum Institute, lamented that the Senate recently voted not to consider an energy bill that would have opened the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil exploration.
Worse, they said, 11 Eastern states are rushing to join California in a new system of automobile pollution control, a program that the oil companies think will mean strict gasoline specifications.
And they complained about the Clean Air Act of 1990, which mandates cleaner gasoline, and about laws intended to protect underground water supplies.  'Inefficient Diversions'
Charles DiBona, the president of the institute, who has recently taken to referring to some new environmental regulations as "stupid," said in a speech to the convention, "There may have been times in the past when U.S. economic supremacy allowed this country to indulge in costly, inefficient diversions, but there won't be such times in the highly competitive world that lies ahead."
He added: "Inefficient regulation does hurt U.S. industries and working people. Plants will be driven elsewhere. Good jobs will be harder to come by."
The oil companies have long complained about the cost of environmental regulations, but most complaints were muted in the period of environmental concern after the grounding of the Exxon Valdez, the mass demonstrations on Earth Day and the passage last year of amibitious amendments to the Clean Air Act.
That period of reticence appears to be over.
The institute's departing chairman, Allen E. Murray, chairman of the Mobil Corporation, said he thought the public mood was changing.
"There is no doubt that the environment is the issue of the decade, but people are beginning to realize that there will be trade-offs," he said at a news conference, citing the state of the economy.
"I sense that we'll see a little bit of judgment. I hope it doesn't take harder economic times to do it."
The institute's new chairman, C. J. Silas, chairman and chief executive of the Phillips Petroleum Company, complained of "the amount of money we're spending to take care of emotional problems and not physical problems."
The attack on environmental initiatives was carried on by Margaret Thatcher, the former Prime Minister of Britain, who was the main speaker today.
Mrs.
Thatcher, who was once a research chemist, said oil company executives were as concerned as environmentalists about providing a clean environment for their children.
But, she said, the country should "have solutions that are sound scientifically, and some of the ones proposed are not."  Security Issues Fade
Another remarkable shift is the virtual end of talk about energy security, so prominent a year ago when Iraq was occupying Kuwait and the Soviet Union was still a world power.
"Environmental issues are replacing security issues in driving the oil industry," said Thomas G. Burns, manager of economics at the corporate planning and analysis department of the Chevron Corporation.
Adding to the gloom is the industry's lackluster financial performance.
A survey released by the institute today said the net income of a group of 20 oil companies had fallen 51 percent in the third quarter, to $2.2 billion, from $4.5 billion last year.
But income last year was swollen by the increase in crude oil prices after the Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait.
For the first nine months of this year, net income was $11 billion, down 16 percent from $13.1 billion a year earlier.
But oil did better than the rest of the economy over the nine-month period; a comparison group of 100 non-oil companies saw a 50.1 percent drop in income in that period, the survey found.
Low Returns
But the industry's recent financial track record is poor.
Arthur L. Smith, the chairman of John S. Herrold Inc., a consulting firm that evaluates oil properties, said the rate of return for oil companies, which was running at 20 percent at the beginning of the decade, was 2 percent last year.
"The numbers suggest that oil companies are in business for the public good, because no economic value has been created," he said.
A crucial question for oil companies is whether to invest in their refineries to produce cleaner gasoline that the Clean Air Act will require in years to come.
The market for gasoline has been flat for years, and could decline if natural gas, electricity or methanol came into wide use.
On the other hand, stricter environmental regulations could protect domestic refiners from competition.
"The international gasoline market is on the verge of a profound change," said Edward N. Krapels, president of Energy Security Analysis Inc., a consulting firm in Washington.
The United States, with many different gasoline specifications, would turn into a "boutique market." It is not clear how many foreign refineries that now export to this country would make the investments to be able to continue to do so, he said.


Andrew V. Stout, 89; Led Investment House
Andrew Varick Stout Jr. a former governor of the New York Stock Exchange and retired chairman of the investment banking firm of Dominick &amp; Dominick, died on Friday at his son's home in Norwich, Vt.
He was 89 years old and a resident of Hobe Sound, Fla.
He died of pneumonia, his son, Andrew, said.


A Hoarder's Life: Filling the Cache -- And Finding It
AS winter closes in, the stage has been set for the annual life-or-death struggle between the hoarders of food and the raiders they must fend off.
Lacking access to a year-round supermarket, the many species -- from ants to wolves -- that in the course of evolution have learned the advantages of hoarding must devote a lot of energy and ingenuity to protecting their stashes from marauders.


INSIDE
Envoy Urges Soviet Debt Aid
Robert S. Strauss, the United States Ambassador in Moscow, urged that Western nations grant debt assistance to the disjointed Soviet nation to head off social upheaval in the coming months.
Page A14.
Clash on Homeless Strategy
Mayor Dinkins should scrap his plan to put 24 homeless shelters in middle-class areas, said Andrew Cuomo, the chairman of the Mayor's own panel on homelessness.
Page B1.
Brazil Safeguards Indians
President Fernando Collor de Mello of Brazil has moved to reserve astretch of Amazon rain forest for the Yanomami Indians, a tribe untouched by modern life.
Page A3.
Downfall of the Mayas
Research on the ancient Mayas suggests that militarism may have eroded the ecological underpinnings of their successful agricultural economy.
Science Times, page C1.
Wine Makers Go Organic
America's wine makers are going organic, giving up pesticides for predatory wasps and abandoning chemical fertilizers and weed-killers for compost and cover crops.
Page D1.


Corrections
A "diary" article on Saturday about a correspondent's experiences in Dubrovnik under siege referred incorrectly to the Serbian poet who was the first person killed in the siege by the Serbian-led Yugoslav Army.
He wasMilan Milisic.


Transit Report Tells of Nepotism
A deputy vice president of the New York City Transit Authority intervened to see that friends and relatives were hired, the authority's Inspector General said yesterday.
The Inspector General, John S. Pritchard 3d, also found irregularities in the hiring practices of the Summer Transit Career Academy, which the deputy vice president, Carl Green, set up to make high school students aware of potential opportunities at the agency.
Mr.
Pritchard found that 13 of 16 academy jobs went to relatives of Transit Authority employees.


Ultraviolet Radiation Tied to Gene Defect Producing Skin Cancer
SCIENTISTS scrutinizing the tumor cells of skin cancer patients have detected the unmistakable signature of genetic damage from excessive sun exposure.
This is the first time researchers have been able to say that a tiny mutation in human tumor tissue was almost certainly caused by one carcinogen and one carcinogen only -- in this case, ultraviolet light from the sun.
Dr.
Douglas E. Brash of the Yale School of Medicine in New Haven and his colleagues found the telltale defect in patients afflicted with squamous-cell carcinoma, a common skin cancer that can lead to death, although in general it is far less dangerous than another, rarer skin cancer, malignant melanoma.


USMX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chess
That strange mixture of provocative arrogance and logical penetration that made up Wilhelm Steinitz never found resolution.
The man who dominated chess from 1866 to 1894 taught everyone how to play positionally, but in his own games often flaunted irrationality.
He well knew that king safety was one of the most important factors in any position, but still protested, "The king is a fighting piece."
He was true to his word by inventing the infamous Steinitz Gambit, 1 e4 e5 2 f4 ef 3 d4 Qh4 4 Ke2, with which he dared one and all to take advantage of his exposed king.
Amazingly, he won a number of games starting this way, but he also missed taking many first prizes that his ability should have entitled him to.


And That 10-Yard Loss Was Brought to You by. . . .
A National Football League game on NBC provides a vision of the future -- a bleak landscape when our daily activities will be sold to commercial sponsors, when Don Pardo's voice will be heard in your kitchen saying: "This trip to the General Electric fridge for leftover Domino's pizza is brought to you by Newmark &amp; Lewis. Dick Lewis is watching. Watching you eat."
The broadcast of the Jets-Patriots game on Sunday illustrated that virtually everything is up for sale to a paying sponsor.
With each quarter came a new bankroller of the 10-Minute Ticker scoreboard update, lateraling from I.T.T. to Budweiser to Hertz to Miller Genuine Draft.
Don't forget the game's Canon Camcorder Play of the Day, the Avis We Try Harder Award, the Domino's Pizza N.F.L.
Live Halftime Report and the Head and Shoulders N.F.L.
Live Postgame Report.


New York Halts Contract With Gotti Son-in-Law
The Dinkins administration suspended a contract yesterday with John Gotti's son-in-law to remove abandoned cars from Brooklyn streets and highways, saying it had been unaware that he might have ties to organized-crime figures.
Officials in the Sanitation Department, which awarded the three-year contract in June, said they had been alerted this month that the son-in-law, Carmine Agnello, was related to Mr.
Gotti, the reputed Mafia boss, and that Mr.
Agnello was under investigation in connection with a $25,000 bribe offered in a jury-tampering case.


U.S. Envoy Urges Debt Relief for Soviets
Warning that economic pressures could bring social upheaval in the next six months, Robert S. Strauss, the United States Ambassador here, urged today that Western nations grant debt assistance to the disjointed Soviet nation as it tries to weather the winter and reorder its economy.
Mr.
Strauss, emphasizing that he was expressing his personal view, urged the deferral of loan principal repayments as ministers of the Group of Seven industrial nations conferred here on the economic crisis with officials of the separate Soviet republics.


Market Place; Uranium Industry Hurt by Imports
SHARPLY increasing its exports of uranium to raise cash, the Soviet Union has dealt a blow to the American uranium industry.
The price of a pound of yellowcake, a lightly processed form of uranium ore, has slumped to $7 from a peak of nearly $12 in the summer of 1990.
Low though the price is, experts say it may go still lower, because of the unusual economics of the nuclear fuel business.
Normally if a commodity's price falls, customers buy more, and the higher demand helps to stabilize prices.
But the reactor construction business is moribund, and no one in the United States is likely to break ground on a new reactor because the cost of fuel is cheap.
And the customers, as regulated utilities, are unlikely to make bold purchase decisions, for fear of being judged imprudent by regulators if the market turns against them later.


Classical Music in Review
Batak of Sumatra  Kathryn Bache Miller Theater
Music from the Batak of northern Sumatra on Friday night brought a sampling of the many and intertwining musical cultures emanating from one part of Indonesia.
Batak is the general grouping of seven individual ethnic populations, but judging from this colorful and variegated event its music represents a crossroads of many influences rather than a series of protected enclaves.
Christian and Islamic strains answered back and forth on Friday.
In one rare instance of three-part harmony, the missionary zeal of Dutch colonials left its mark.


Mayor Returns From Africa, Buoyed by Trip
Mayor David N. Dinkins returned to New York City yesterday after six days of seeing poverty and racism in South Africa, saying, "It sure in blazes helps one put things in perspective." He added that some of the daily political troubles he faces at City Hall "are less important than they were before."
Asked what he meant, he told reporters traveling with him just before his plane landed at Kennedy International Airport, "Let me just say that, as the expression goes, some of those people that have been telling lies about me, I may decide to tell the truth about them."


Hostages, Then and Now; The October Surprise: Hear the Case
The October in question was in 1980 and the idea of a surprise has been around ever since.
For endless months, America had chafed over the captivity of the 52 U.S.
Embassy hostages in Iran.
That summer and fall, it is alleged, Ronald Reagan's campaign bargained with Iran to block a dramatic release that would boost President Carter's chances on the eve of the election.
Is that a repugnant but plausible accusation?
Or is it unworthy partisanship that plays on a public susceptibility to talk of plots?
Congress can do the nation a service by going forward now with a careful investigation and judgment.


His Captors Accused Waite of Spying for the West
Since disappearing in Beirut in January 1987 while on a mission to win freedom for Western hostages, Terry Waite, the emissary for the Church of England who was freed yesterday, has been regarded as a special case among his fellow captives.
To many, his captivity seemed the cruelest of all the injustices of Lebanon's sectarian strife, for he was a man of peace who had gone to Beirut on behalf of others, only to end up as a hostage himself, abducted by the very people with whom he had gone to negotiate.


Implants and Image
An advisory committee of the Federal Drug Administration showed commendable common sense when it voted to keep silicone breast implants on the market, at least temporarily.
The information presented by four manufacturers was insufficient to show that the implants were safe.
But it didn't prove them to be unsafe.
The panel therefore wisely recommended further reviews.
Over a 10-year period, the reviews will provide increasingly detailed information on side effects, like the formation of scar tissue and long-term effects on the body's immune system.
This schedule will enable manufacturers to collect the data needed by the F.D.A. and women.


A Place in the Sun for le Cinema
The third annual Sarasota French Film Festival, a five-day mini-extravaganza that began on Thursday, is at once a public forum for new French films, a marketplace and a subsidized opportunity for members of the French film industry to schmooze, which they do with all the elaborate rituals and cozy familiarity displayed by the pelicans and seagulls that cluster on Sarasota's gorgeous white-sand beaches.
It is also, of course, an opportunity for Sarasota to obtain ample coverage in the French press and for Sarasotans to hobnob with a glamorous slice of the French cinematic haut monde.
But this is really a French production.
The festival was originally intended to be supported half by the French Government and French corporations and half by state and private money from Florida.
The French have now assumed about 60 percent of the $800,000 in costs, counting such contributions as air tickets to bring some 150 French and American industry leaders, stars and journalists to Sarasota.


BURMESE WARNING ON ARMS BUILDUP
U Sein Win came to Washington last week to remind the Bush Administration that his popularly elected Government in Myanmar, formerly Burma, remains powerless because of a military dictatorship that is building an alarming weapons arsenal with the help of China.
A year and a half after winning a sweeping majority, Mr.
Sein Win's provisional Government is still barred from power by the State Law and Order Restoration Council, which has hounded, imprisoned or driven underground many of its victorious candidates.
Seeking Sanctions
"There is only one superpower left in the world," Mr.
Sein Win said in an interview on Saturday.
"We want the United States to use its influence to get other nations to cut links with the military regime and impose sanctions."


Classical Music in Review
Voytek Matushevski
Pianist Carnegie Hall
Like Jenny Lind before him and Luciano Pavarotti today, Paderewski led a career in this country in which artistic achievement and mass appeal became hopelessly confused.
On Nov. 17, 1891, Paderewski made a Carnegie Hall debut that started 45 years of incessant touring in the United States.
One hundred years later to the hour on Sunday, Voytek Matushevski played a piano recital of works by Paderewski and other Polish composers.


Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Mastercard Post To Experienced Banker
Mastercard International Inc. said yesterday that it had named William T. Sandalls, vice chairman and chief financial officer of Bay Banks Inc., Boston, to the new position of chief operating officer.
The company, which said that Mr.
Sandalls would join Mastercard in December, added that he would have responsibility for the company's global payment system and would report directly to Alex W. Hart, the company's president and chief executive.


LaFontaine Will Be Out For Up to Eight Weeks
PAT LAFONTAINE of the Buffalo Sabres will miss six to eight weeks of action while recovering from a broken jaw and slashed face he suffered during the team's victory Saturday over Calgary.
LaFontaine, the center obtained in a trade last month with the Islanders, was expected yesterday to leave the Calgary hospital where he was taken after being struck by the stick of the Flames' JAMIE MACOUN .
LaFontaine lost bone and teeth and bled profusely from a severed facial artery.
He had a plate inserted in his mouth and his jaw was wired shut in emergency surgery.


Refugees' Fears Survive Even Peace in Cambodia
As he watched a television report on Sunday on the return to Phnom Penh of a leader of the Khmer Rouge Government, Bryant S. Ben, a Cambodian refugee who lives here, saw "blood on his hands and blood on his face."
The return of the leader, Son Sen, under a peace agreement seemed a signal that the country still belongs not to the people who fled but to the leaders who brutalized them from 1975 to 1979, Mr.
Ben said today.


Civil Rights Exemption Unfair to Asians
To the Editor:
We believe the exemption from the provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1991 of the very employer involved in one of the 1989 Supreme Court decisions that provided the impetus for that law should disturb all Americans.
John P. MacKenzie's position in "An Exception to Civil Rights Rules" (Editorial Notebook, Nov. 8) that the exemption is an acceptable price to pay to obtain President Bush's signature on the bill is one that cannot be condoned.


DESPITE WAGE TAX, CONNECTICUT FACES GAP, WEICKER SAYS
Less than three months after the largest tax increase in state history and the introduction of a wage tax for the first time, Connecticut's budget is already out of balance and headed for another deficit, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. said today.
The projected gap, about $175 million, is a bit more than 2 percent of the budget of $7.6 billion, but state lawmakers said the psychological impact would probably be bigger than the actual size of the problem.


Contract Extension for Smith
The Rangers officially announced yesterday that General Manager Neil Smith had received a two-year contract extension through the 1993-94 season.
Smith entered this season with tenuous job security, at best.
He was passed over for the club presidency -- a post that still remains vacant -- and his contract was scheduled to expire next May.
Also, Paramount, which owns Madison Square Garden, had already dismissed three executives: Jack Diller, former president of the Rangers; Richard Evans, president of Madison Square Garden, and Knick General Manager Al Bianchi.


Wilbur Dow Jr., 85, An Admiralty Lawyer
Wilbur Egerton Dow Jr., an admiralty lawyer and the president of the Lake George Steamboat Company, died on Thursday at Glens Falls Hospital in Glens Falls, N.Y.
He was 85 years old and lived in Lake George.
He died of a blood ailment, said his son, William Paul.


What Doomed the Maya? Maybe Warfare Run Amok
AFTER hacking through tropical jungles in Central America and turning up stones of magnificent temples and tombs, archeologists over the years built up in their minds an idealized image of the Maya people who once flourished where now only wilderness thrives.
The Mayas' civilization was clearly the greatest to flourish in pre-Columbian America.
They studied the heavens to devise precise calendars, created a true writing system and built imposing cities, with no evidence of any fortifications.
Hence, archeologists assumed, the Mayas were an unusually gentle, peaceful people living in a relatively benign theocracy ruled by sage priest-kings.


Asher Wolk Dies at 78; Founded a Magazine
Asher Wolk, a magazine editor and writer, died on Saturday at the Veterans Administration Hospital Center in the Bronx.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a bacterial infection and had been ill for the past four years after a fall caused severe neurological problems, his family said.


Nuclear Support Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Western Micro Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dinkins Plan For Shelters Dealt Setback
Mayor David N. Dinkins's plan to scatter up to 24 shelters for the homeless in New York City's middle-class communities suffered a potentially devastating political setback yesterday when the chairman of the Mayor's own Commission on Homelessness said he favored scrapping the plan and starting over.
On the eve of the panel's first public hearing, the chairman, Andrew Cuomo, said that if he could not get the 18-member commission to agree with him, he might quit.
He said he was seeking a consensus for "radical change" in how, where and by whom homeless people are helped.


Sprague Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mandatory Testing for TB in Prisons Starts With Guards
Amid deepening concern over a shadowy new health menace, an ambitious program of mandatory tuberculosis testing in the New York State prison system began yesterday in an effort to control a drug-resistant strain of the disease that has killed 13 inmates and a guard.
The testing program, announced by correction and health officials last week as they disclosed the deaths caused by the new strain this year, is expected to reach all 60,000 inmates and 28,000 employees in the 68 prisons by the end of December.
It will then become a permanent feature of life in the system, with annual tests for all and semi-annual tests for those put at at high risk by other diseases.


High Court to Weigh Payments to Owners Of Regulated Land
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether landowners were constitutionally entitled to compensation when government bars all development in the interest of public safety or welfare.
Because the Court has been closely divided over the constitutional implications of land-use regulation, this case, involving a state-imposed ban on beachfront development along the South Carolina coast, may give Justice Clarence Thomas an opportunity to influence the development of an important area of the law.


Aztech International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Western Hostages Freed in Lebanon
The Anglican envoy, Terry Waite, and an American educator, Thomas M. Sutherland, were released by their Shiite Muslim captors in Lebanon today, amid signs that the remaining Western hostages may be freed soon.
The release today of two of the longest-held hostages came after intense negotiations by the United Nations that have led to the freeing of four other Western hostages since August.
It represents a dramatic leap toward ending the nearly eight-year hostage ordeal.


Innovative Bronx School To Keep Parental Control
Parents and teachers who banded together three years ago to create an alternative public school in the basement of a Bronx church will be allowed to keep their school under an agreement with city officials.
The school had become the envy of the district, a place where parents were active participants and where the curriculum was based on the idea of learning by doing.
It had also come under fire from a new superintendent, who called it "elitist" and merged it with another school in September.


A Last Spin Around the Top-Flight Rink
The simple mathematics of it, four into three, is the clearest indication that the equation has changed markedly since ankle problems took Jill Trenary out of competition nearly a year ago.
As Trenary was waiting out a staph infection in her right ankle last February, Tonya Harding, Kristi Yamaguchi and Nancy Kerrigan swept the medals at the national figure skating championships in Minneapolis, and then, stunningly, did so again a month later at the world championships in Munich, where the order was Yamaguchi, Harding, Kerrigan.


CHRONICLE
The other recipients were the author and editor WILLIAM F. BUCKLEY JR.; LUIS A. FERRE, the former Governor of Puerto Rico; the Rev.
LEON HOWARD SULLIVAN, a Baptist clergyman and business and civil rights leader from Philadelphia; RUSSELL E. TRAIN, the chairman of the World Wildlife Fund and the Conservation Foundation; Gen.
VERNON A. WALTERS, the retired diplomat and former delegate to the United Nations, and the economist FRIEDRICH AUGUST VON HAYEK.


Midtown Deli Owner Shot to Death in Bank
An owner of a delicatessen was shot to death and the weekend receipts from his restaurant stolen just after he entered a bank in midtown Manhattan yesterday, the police said.
The police said witnesses at the Chemical Bank branch, which is inside the M.G.M.
Building at 1350 Avenue of the Americas, at West 55th Street, saw two men shoot the victim, Ted Sevrides, 40 years old, of Pearl River, N.Y., just before 3 P.M., and then run down 55th Street.


The Sponsor Is the Surprise In Fox's First Condom Ad
THE Fox Broadcasting Company has become the first national broadcast television network to run a condom commercial.
On Sunday, during Fox's situation comedy "Herman's Head," Carter-Wallace Inc., the sales leader in the nation's estimated $250 million condom market, ran a 15-second spot for its Trojan Extra Strength brand.
As with almost every change on this fast-moving issue, the identity of the initial advertiser was a surprise.
It had been widely expected on Madison Avenue that the Schmid Laboratories division of the London International Group, which markets Ramses and Sheik brand condoms, would be the first to sponsor such commercials.


BRIEFS
*
Cadence Design Systems Inc., and Valid Logic Systems Inc., computer software companies based in San Jose, Calif., expect their merger to be completed by the end of December.
The waiting period under Federal antitrust law expired on Saturday without action being taken by the Federal Trade Commission. *
Chiquita Brands International Inc., Cincinnati, the food products company, will acquire Friday Canning Corp., New Richmond, Wis., for undisclosed terms.


A.T.&amp; T. Plans to Offer Faster Data Transfer
A.T.&amp; T., the world's largest telecommunications company, announced yesterday that it was offering a new form of data transmission nearly 30 times as fast as current methods.
Known as frame relay, the service will substantially speed the transfer of text, numbers and images among banks, hospitals, insurance companies and others whose fast computers have outpaced the capacity of telephone lines to transfer data quickly to remote offices.


New Valley Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Q&amp;A
Color of the Sun
Q.
Why is the Sun the color that it is?
A.
"If a star is a certain size, then it will have a certain temperature at a certain time in its life" and show a characteristic color, said Dr.
Harold Zirin, professor of astrophysics at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.


What We Get From Our War on Marijuana
To the Editor:
Re "Costly and Scarce, Marijuana Is a High More Are Rejecting" (front page, Oct. 29):


Senate Works On a Bank Bill
The Senate continued work today on banking legislation that would provide $70 billion for the nearly depleted bank insurance fund, tighten regulations and ease restrictions to interstate banking.
A growing number of lawmakers are saying that Congress will likely do little more than provide new money for the bank insurance fund, or perhaps combine into a single measure the money for the fund and the $80 billion the Administration has sought to continue the savings-and-loan bailout.


Israel Demands News of Airman
Israel said tonight that it would not release any more of the roughly 300 Arab prisoners in its hands until it receives word about the fate of an Israeli Air Force navigator who was shot down over Lebanon in 1986.
For months, Israel has insisted that information about its missing servicemen in Lebanon -- a "sign of life," as it is called here -- is its price for holding up its end of a comprehensive exchange of Middle East captives.


Fire Truck Tips; 2 Hurt
Two firefighters battling a blaze at an empty house were injured this morning when their truck toppled after its aerial ladder became overextended.
One firefighter, Michael Masullo, 27 years old was on the ladder about 4:30 A.M. as he fought the blaze at 200 North Columbus Avenue.
He was admitted to Mount Vernon Hospital in fair condition, Deputy Fire Chief Ronald Crohn said.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Named Tim Foli first base and infield coach; Mike Easler batting coach; Don Rowe pitching coach; and Bill Castro bullpen coach.
Retained Duffy Dyer, third base coach.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Promoted Bobby Ayala and Jason Satre, pitchers, and Jeff Branson, infielder, to their winter roster.
Announced that Terry Lee, first baseman, is a free agent after refusing assignment to Nashville of the American Association.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Released Kenny Williams, outfielder.
Signed Carlos Gonzalez, first baseman, and assigned him to their minor-league training camp.


Republican Conservatives Picked for Top Budget Posts
The leaders of the new Republican legislative majorities chose two fiscal conservatives today to head the finance committees in the Senate and the Assembly and to lead the fight to fulfill a Republican campaign promise to roll back taxes.
The President-elect of the Senate, Donald T. DiFrancesco, picked Senator Robert E. Littell as chairman of the Revenue and Appropriations Committee.
In the Assembly, Speaker-elect Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian made Assemblyman Rodney P. Frelinghuysen chairman of the Appropriations Committee.


Accounts
*
Weight Watchers Food Co., Pittsburgh, to Ally &amp; Gargano, New York, for its frozen foods, including the Ultimate 200 line to be introduced in January.
The company's longtime spokeswoman, the actress Lynn Redgrave, will not appear in the new advertising, which has a theme: "Total Indulgence. Zero Guilt." The $30 million account had been handled by DDB Needham Worldwide, New York, which earlier this year lost the Weight Watchers Weight Loss System account to Earle Palmer Brown, Bethesda, Md., but will continue as a Weight Watchers agency.
The company has not decided whether the Ally &amp; Gargano assignment will last past the first quarter of next year, said Linda Webb, a spokeswoman.


Books of The Times; Tailoring the Past to Accommodate the Listener
Eve's Tattoo By Emily Prager 194 pages. Random House. $19.
With her first two books, Emily Prager announced herself as a generously gifted writer, blessed with a hyperventilating imagination and a wonderfully idiosyncratic voice.
"A Visit to the Footbinder" (1982) was a bizarre, post-feminist collection of stories featuring sketches about such matters as the Chinese practice of foot-binding and the sexual locker-room talk of alumnae from a ritzy girls' school.
In "Clea and Zeus Divorce" (1987), Ms.
Prager muted her satiric wit to create a zany, Pirandello-like tale about a modern-day Fred-and-Ginger dance team who have trouble separating their lives from their art, their romantic difficulties from their anxieties about the world.


Benguet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Roger S. Schafer, 72, A Housing Consultant
Roger Straus Schafer, a New York lawyer who campaigned for affordable housing for more than four decades, died on Saturday.
He was 72 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Schafer died of a heart attack, his family said.


Borg Looks to Seniors
Former Swedish tennis star BJORN BORG has begun training at the tennis academy run by American coach NICK BOLLETTIERI to prepare for his latest comeback attempt -- on the seniors circuit.
The International Management Group said Borg, 35 years old, is training at Bollettieri's academy in Bradenton, Fla., the same school which produced such top players as ANDRE AGASSI and JIM COURIER.


Church to Offer AIDS Testing
A Methodist church here will offer tests for the AIDS virus at Sunday services.
The Rev.
Cecil Williams, pastor of Glide Memorial Methodist Church, in one of San Francisco's poorest neighborhoods,made the announcement at worship services on Sunday.


Toys 'R' Us Posts Profit
Toys "R" Us, the world's largest toy retailer, said yesterday that earnings grew 12 percent, to $32.1 million, or 11 cents a share, in its third fiscal quarter, ended Nov. 2, from $28.7 million, or 10 cents a share, a year earlier.
Sales expanded 12 percent, to $1.18 billion from $1.05 billion.
Excluding results from stores open less than one year, sales rose 3 percent in the quarter but fell 1.7 percent in in the first nine months of the year, Charles Lazarus, chairman, said in a statement.


The Dow Steadies


Gain for Fish Farmers
Scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology say they have devised an ultrasound technique that makes it easier to administer vaccines, reproductive hormones and antibiotics to fish.
"The major problem of the fish-farming industry is disease," said Dr.
Yonathon Zohar, an associate professor at the University of Maryland's Center of Marine Biotechnology.


Powerful Materials Foreseen
FULLERENES, hollow molecules whose carbon atoms are arranged in forms resembling soccer balls, have been the talk of chemists for the last two years.
The latest fullerene research has now given scientists a new class of carbon toys to explore: tubular carbon needles that might be used to create a new class of ultra-strong materials.
The existence of tubular carbon molecules was reported in the Nov. 7 issue of the British journal Nature by Dr.
Sumio Iijima, a scientist of the NEC Corporation in Tsukuba, Japan.
Electron micrographs of the molecule reveal that it typically consists of 2 to 50 concentric tubes, each one an array of carbon atoms linked together in a curved sheet.
The ends of each set of concentric tubes, which fit together like Russian nesting dolls, consist of hemispherical or conical arrays of carbon atoms similar to those found in the more or less spherical fullerenes.


Quotation of the Day
"All I can say, though, about the English: they take a hell of a long time to get things done. He came to get me out about five years ago and it's taken him five years to get me out, but finally he's taking me home." THOMAS SUTHERLAND, released American hostage, of his fellow captive Terry Waite.  [ A16:2. ]


Czechoslovaks' Big Stock Gamble
Some describe it as a daring leap into capitalism, others as a gambling game akin to a parimutuel.
In the end, Czechoslovakia's plan to give ordinary citizens stock-buying coupons for big nationalized industries may prove to be a dose of both.
Similar programs have been proposed in Poland and in the newly independent Baltic states.
But while the Baltics' privatization plans are only in the discussion stage, and Poland's draft legislation foresees distributing vouchers to mutual funds that would in turn offer shares to the public, only the Czechoslovak system affords ordinary people the chance to pick and choose companies themselves.


50 Mezuzas Are Stolen at Barnard College
Fifty mezuzas were stolen early Sunday morning from the doorposts of dormitory rooms at Barnard College in what the police are calling a bias crime, and the president of the college, Ellen V. Futter, called a meeting yesterday to address the concerns and fears of students and faculty members.
"This is a very serious offense," said Ms.
Futter, speaking in Brooks Hall, the dormitory at 116th Street and Broadway where many of the thefts took place.
She called the thefts "an act of bias that is deeply disturbing," and said that the police and Barnard security were investigating.


For Hostage's Scattered Family, a Dizzying Rebirth
It has been an incredible three days, a time of numbing sadness and soaring joy, for the family of Thomas M. Sutherland, the American hostage freed yesterday by his captors in Lebanon.
On Saturday, his 88-year-old father-in-law, who had served as the family's anchor and spokesman during the six and a half years that Mr.
Sutherland was in captivity, died after a long struggle with cancer.


Holyfield. Cooper. And in That Corner, Tyson.
It is a heavyweight championship fight by subtraction.
Deduct Mike Tyson and it leaves a far more routine title defense -- Evander Holyfield versus Bert Cooper on Saturday in Atlanta, in a bout to be televised live by HBO.
What it yields Holyfield is a no-win situation instead of the career-defining match his bout with Tyson could have been had it not been postponed last month.


Students in Blackface Ignite An Angry Response in Rye
White students who performed a high school skit in grinning blackface have set off an angry examination of racial attitudes in this affluent, overwhelmingly white suburb.
The Rye High School's Halloween show included white students, some wearing oversized sneakers and baseball caps, portraying black members of rap groups and television shows with black characters.


Salem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Florence Journal; Over Masterpieces, Protection Vies With Access
Ever since a crazed Sicilian took a hammer to Michelangelo's "David" recently, the statue has been cordoned off from viewers by a rope that next year is supposed to give way to a high glass screen.
The idea is to shield the statue -- its damaged toes repaired since the September attack -- without barring all access to it, because it is not only a masterpiece of sculpture but also one of the city's great attractions for the five million tourists who visit each year.


Dinkins's Goals Not Being Met By New Lottery
A special anti-crime lottery game that was to pay for new youth programs at New York City public schools is bringing in only about half the money city officials expected, state lottery officials said at a City Council hearing yesterday.
In addition, city budget officials revealed that the lottery receipts will not be spent on programs aimed at reducing crime despite Mayor David N. Dinkins's pledge when he announced his ambitious anti-crime package known as "Safe Streets, Safe City" a year ago.


When Riley's Upset, Knicks Work It Out
Perhaps the only thing that will improve Pat Riley's mood is winning.
For the second consecutive day, Riley kept the Knicks in practice for more than three and a half hours.
And when asked why practice was so long, the Knicks' coach responded testily.


Deliberations Begin in Trial of 2 Accused in Killing of Gay Man
After hearing sharply clashing summaries of the evidence, a Queens jury yesterday began deliberating the fate of two young men charged with murdering a gay man from Queens.
"What motivated them was hate and what they sought was death and they got it," the prosecutor, Daniel McCarthy, told a courtroom packed with gay rights advocates and relatives and friends of the victim and the defendants.


Manhattan National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; Stories to Tell in Motion
There were times when "Perfect Courage," presented on Sunday afternoon at Davis Hall at City College, resembled an intimate literary salon with a little dance added.
Wrapped around on three sides by audience, the little Theater B stage was bare except for three benches and three people.
And there were stories to tell, prompted by memories and the revealing of physical and psychic scars.
But there were a good many moments when the 90-minute piece fell short of the evocative promise of its title.
"Perfect Courage" is a collaborative effort, conceived and performed by Bill T. Jones, Rhodessa Jones and Idris Ackamoor, with music by Mr.
Ackamoor and choreography by Mr.
Jones.
A chatty program note describes the genesis of the piece, which was born from talk about scars and the body as map, over pasta and wine at an East Village restaurant.
Much of the movement is stylishly good looking but superficial, and Mr.
Jones's verbal contributions, particularly a long riff called "Bill's Fish Story," wander along without much touching the heart, though political and social buttons are tapped at from time to time.


Gravestones Can Finally Rest in Peace
For more than 30 years, residents of this 264-year-old town northeast of Concord have been hearing about missing gravestones.
Old slate markers belonging to their long-dead ancestors had been stolen, the story went, and were on display in a major Massachusetts museum.
Over the years, several of the most determined community residents took their binoculars and traveled about 115 miles to Sturbridge, Mass., in an effort to see what was in the fenced-off burial exhibit at Old Sturbridge Village, the 200-acre re-creation of an 1830's New England settlement.
But with little knowledge of whose tombstones they were looking for, they had no luck unraveling the mystery.


Albany Closing Centers For the Mentally Ill
To the Editor:
The New York State Legislature has passed without fanfare a bill to close the state's psychiatric and developmental centers when these facilities are so vitally needed for the long-term treatment and care of the mentally disabled.


By Design; Glamour Gloves
Gloves are like leggings.
Pull on the right pair and you have instant fashion.
Stores are now filled with novelty gloves.
Paw through the selection and you will find some that can give a real lift to day or evening outfits.
The most sensational are at Macy's and Henri Bendel.
They are made of stretch velour and are capped with a fluff of black feathers.
The gloves can be pulled up over the elbow or pushed down to the wrist.
Wear them during the day with a black suit or at night with a strapless dress.
They are by Tally B. and cost $145.
Incidentally, they might also keep your hands warm.


Powell Arrives in Japan for 3-Day Visit


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center
Alice Tully Hall
The Chamber Music Society introduced Bruce Adolphe's "At the Still Point, There the Dance Is" on Sunday afternoon.
The title is from T. S. Eliot and the format is three brief movements for solo clarinet and string quartet.
The dialogue between wind and strings makes this handsome piece seem more duet than quintet.
The "Aria" has the feel of a blues reverie set against a chordal background: a mood David Shifrin's clarinet playing expressed well.
The concluding "Dance" dances uneasily but without theatricality.
This is music confident in its ability to reach other ears without the need for grand gestures or sleeve-tugging salesmanship.


Medical Innovations Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets at 10 A.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M., 3 P.M. and 6 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234.
Tours are conducted 9 A.M. and 4:45 P.M.


EXECUTIVES
*
The Bank of New York Co., New York, named nine senior vice presidents: Richard L. Crowley, Michael F. Donahue Jr., Santiago L. Fernandez, Mark A. Hemenetz, Mitchell N. Kessler, Dorothy A. Kmetz, John J. McGoldrick, Deborah S. Rasin and Fred J. Ricciardi. *
Clinical Technologies Associates Inc., Elmsford, N.Y., a biopharmaceutical company, announced that Michael M. Goldberg M.D., president and chief executive, had been appointed to the additional position of chairman.


Westvaco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


What We Get From Our War on Marijuana; Potency-Increase Myth
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 29 front-page article on marijuana repeats one of the most pervasive myths about American marijuana.
The potency of marijuana (the content by weight of active delta-9-THC) has not changed since regular monitoring began.
The claim that potency increased tenfold was manufactured by comparing a high potency figure for domestically seized products in the early 1980's (approximately 3.9 percent) to a very low potency number (.4 percent) reported in the early 1970's.
This .4 percent figure was generated by assessing a small number of low-potency Mexican "kilobricks" seized by the Drug Enforcement Agency in 1974.


Review/Pop; Tried Is True for Sinatra
After opening his set at the Nassau Coliseum here tonight with his 1953 hit "I've Got the World on a String," Frank Sinatra made a little speech.
"I'm not going to do much that's new tonight," he groused, "because there's nothing new that's decent." Wearing a steel-gray suit, trading his pocket hankies for the bouquets that women from the audience lavished like vestal offerings, Mr.
Sinatra delivered an hour-plus program that leaned heavily on standards from the 1950's and 60's.
Introducing each song, he would make jokes about forgetting the name of the composers.
When he dropped his cordless microphone to punctuate a quip about how he doesn't drink alcohol, he earned a round of applause for his stiff, elaborate attempt to bend over and pick it up.


Marshall E. Dimock, 88, Author And Public Administration Expert
Marshall E. Dimock, a political scientist who was an authority on public administration, died Thursday at Gifford Memorial Hospital in Randolph, Vt.
He was 88 years old and lived in Bethel, Vt.
He died as the result of a stroke he suffered at his home on Wednesday, said his son Davis Ludlow Dimock.


Hostages, Then and Now; The November Development: Incomplete
Yesterday's release of two hostages, Thomas Sutherland and Terry Waite, brings heartening evidence that a sordid game is truly near its end.
Mr.
Waite was told by his captors that by month's end three remaining Americans, including Terry Anderson, would be freed.
Thanksgiving falls on Nov. 28.
It is reasonable to hope that Mr.
Anderson, a prisoner since 1985, will be home for the holiday.
Then let the bells peal everywhere.
If there is anything to celebrate after years of anguish, it is proof that ordinary people can survive years of confinement without succumbing to their captors' fanaticism.
The evil done to Mr.
Sutherland, an American, and Mr.
Waite, a Briton, did not warp their humanity.
Having barely rubbed their eyes, beset by the press in Damascus, these former hostages spoke simply, sanely, generously -- and in Mr.
Sutherland's case, even with engaging, professorial humor.


Rush of Callers Seek Extended Aid for Jobless
The ink was barely dry after President Bush signed the law extending benefits for the long-term unemployed when idled workers started calling unemployment insurance offices in the New York metropolitan region to ask for their checks.
State labor officials in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut are advising unemployed men and women who have exhausted their normal insurance since March 1 to wait for applications for extended benefits to come in the mail.
Mr.
Bush signed the $5.3 billion package after Congress passed an amended version late Friday, and first thing this morning calls began flooding regional labor department offices as labor union locals mobilized their laid-off members to find out if they were eligible.


Macy Bonds Drop Sharply
The price of R. H. Macy &amp; Company bonds tumbled yesterday as investors reacted to reports that a major factor would no longer guarantee payments for new merchandise shipped to the retailer, which operates Macy's, I. Magnin and Bullock's department stores.
The price of Macy's 14.5 percent bonds due 1998 fell 3 percent yesterday, to 77, raising the yield to 20.9 percent, according to Duff &amp; Phelps McCarthy Crisanti &amp; Maffei, a bond rating agency.


China Rebuff Seems Unlikely to Hurt Trade Status
The Chinese rebuff to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d over human rights and arms sales last weekend drew little initial criticism in Congress tonight and appeared unlikely to spur action on legislation to limit China's trading status.
President Bush said of the trip: "I think it was worthwile. I think when all of it's out, I think people will think some progress is made." He declined to disclose details of Mr.
Baker's successes, and said, "Now we sit down and figure out what's the next step."


MAYOR ON TRIAL


No Deals Yet, but the Mets Are Still Shopping Around
Sales updates from baseball's shopping network:
First, the Mets, whose potential interest in Eddie Murray is undiminished despite their cordial and ostensibly productive first meeting with Bobby Bonilla, yesterday spoke again with Murray's agent.


Man Fails to Show Jurors He Used Cigarette Brand
A Federal jury decided today that a man had failed to prove that he smoked cigarettes that contained asbestos.
He blames asbestos for his cancer.
The jury ruled that because the plaintiff, Peter Ierardi, did not prove that he smoked Kent cigarettes in the 1950's, he could not claim that the manufacturer was at fault for his illness.


Procter &amp; Gamble Gets S.&amp;P. Rating
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company has received an AA rating by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation for its $800 million registration of debt securities.
S.&amp; P. also affirmed a similar rating on the outstanding senior debt of the company and an A-1+ rating on its commercial debt.


Larry Wilsman, 43, Fashion Buyer at Saks
Larry W. Wilsman, the senior buyer of European and American designer collections at Saks Fifth Avenue, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 43 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack, said Helen O'Hagan, a spokeswoman for Saks.


Volvo to Keep Spots, Despite Chrysler Letter
Volvo Cars of North America Inc. has no plans to discontinue a television commercial attacking the safety of mini-vans, a spokesman said yesterday.
Volvo's decision came after it received a letter last week from the Chrysler Corporation, the nation's largest maker of mini-vans.
Chrysler criticized the spot, created by Messner Vetere Berger Carey Schmetterer, New York, for urging consumers to bypass mini-vans in favor of the Volvo 240 station wagon.
The commerical is part of Volvo's 1992 campaign, which carries the theme "Drive safely."


Whale Species Called No Longer in Danger
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration proposed today that the California gray whale be removed from the endangered species list.
This would be the first time a whale has been taken off the list.
The gray whales that live off the Pacific Coast of North America have been protected by the United States since 1946.
Their numbers have now grown to about 21,000, said John Knauss, Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere.


CBS TV Reorganizes New York Sales Staff
The CBS television network is reorganizing its sales department in New York, shifting its focus to selling to advertising agencies and their clients rather than by the time of day that commercials run.
The goal of the reorganization, announced in an advertisement in this week's Advertising Age, "is more efficient operations for both sides," a CBS spokesman said.
No personnel changes are planned, he added.


Congress Gets Cold Feet On Cap for Credit Cards
Momentum behind legislation that would put a cap on credit card interest rates dissipated today as lawmakers got cold feet about making a political point that risked damage to the stock market and possibly the economy.
In part, the turnabout resulted from vigorous arm-twisting by the Bush Administration and the banking lobby.
But it came primarily from the fear of some Democrats, who at first saw the bill as a good way to embarrass President Bush, that they would be blamed for a fall in the market.


Divided Pakistan Torn by Lawlessness and Scandal
Each time a passenger plane begins its glide toward this capital's airport, a flight attendant says, "We shall be landing soon, God willing." The invocation, while perhaps unnerving to travelers more inclined to put their faith in the pilot's training, is heard increasingly here, just one sign of the divisions that afflict this country.
Little more than three years since a return to democratic government, Pakistan is caught in a spiral of increasing lawlessness in many parts of the country.
It is at war in all but name with neighboring India.
A conflict between a resurgent Islamic clergy and an urban, Western-educated elite undermines efforts to forge a consensus on how Pakistan will approach the 21st century.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 12 about the decision by some newspapers against publishing the "Doonesbury" comic strip sequence concerning Vice President Dan Quayle referred incorrectly to The Advocate in Stamford, Conn.
It is publishing the sequence.


Ditka, a Throwback, Has the Bears Passing
When Mike Ditka became the Bears' head coach in 1982, he was squarely grounded in his football philosophy.
And under his direction, his teams grew to reflect the style of play he displayed as a Hall of Fame tight end and the tutelage he received from George Halas and Tom Landry.
The Bears blocked adeptly, they tackled viciously and they ran, ran, ran the football -- first with Walter Payton and now with Neal Anderson.
His 1985 team, which won Super Bowl XX, was stout on defense and, as usual, effective in the running game.
But since then, the Bears' formula has not matched the standard of the National Conference's biggest bullies: Washington, San Francisco and the Giants.
Washington booted the Bears from the playoffs in the 1986 and 1987 seasons; the 49ers did it in 1988, and the Giants eliminated them last season.
Since 1985, the Bears are 1-5 vs.
Washington, 1-3 vs.
San Francisco and 2-1 vs. the Giants.


AnnTaylor Stores Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3


Nord Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Advanced Medical Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mobile America Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Soybeans Soar on Hopes Of Revived Soviet Food Aid
Soybean futures prices surged yesterday, leading the grain markets mostly higher amid revived hopes for a Soviet food-aid package and signs of stronger export sales.
Crop prices may also have benefited from relief that the stock market rallied yesterday after posting its fifth-steepest decline Friday, analysts said.


Review/Jazz; Dewey Redman's Musical Reunion
"Dewey's Circle," presented on Thursday night at Alice Tully Hall by Lincoln Center Jazz, featured the reunion of a modern jazz supergroup: Old and New Dreams, with Dewey Redman on saxophone, Don Cherry on pocket cornet, Charlie Haden on bass and Ed Blackwell on drums.
The quartet, whose members all worked with Ornette Coleman, carries on the style Mr.
Coleman perfected in the 1960's and 70's: intuitive playing that takes off from a repertory of asymmetrical stop-start tunes and rarely looks back.
The free-associative Coleman style inspired Mr.
Redman.
But where Mr.
Coleman still sounds like a child at play, Mr.
Redman is more like a sly, knowing uncle, steeped in romantic Texas tenor-saxophone tradition.
If jazz solos tell stories, Mr.
Redman is like a modernist fiction writer, holding together exposition, digressions, fragments and fugitive insights through impeccable timing and convincing tone.


CBS Buys Show From ABC
CBS announced yesterday that it would add to its prime-time schedule a comedy series that had been the property of another network, ABC, until last week.
CBS acquired the rights to the series, "Davis Rules," after ABC agreed to its producers' request that it relinquish its rights to the show.
Other shows have switched networks, but only after being canceled.


Toys 'R' Us Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Chemists Make 'Smoke' As Solid As Plastic
AEROGELS, solid materials so light and ethereal that they are called "frozen smoke" or "San Francisco fog," have been little more than laboratory curiosities for most of the 60 years since the first one was created.
But new forms of frozen smoke are now wafting from laboratories to manufacturers, who hope to exploit them in combating various threats to the environment.
A chunk of the lightest of the new aerogels is so insubstantial it is difficult to see, except as a wisp of slightly bluish haze, the outlines of which are as blurred as a puff of smoke.
This material, made of the same stuff as common sand, is lighter than any other solid.
But despite its seeming lack of substance, it is strong enough to support astonishingly heavy weights.


U.S. Starts to Return Haitians Who Fled Nation After Coup
With more than 1,200 Haitian boat people being held aboard United States Coast Guard cutters, the State Department announced today that it was starting to send them back, resuming a repatriation program suspended since a violent coup overthrew Haiti's elected Government on Sept. 30.
The decision came after a weekend in which Coast Guard ships picked up hundreds of new refugees from small boats off northern Haiti, bringing the total number of Haitians in United States custody to nearly 1,800.
In addition to those still at sea, officials said, about 500 refugees are being temporarily housed at the United States' military base at Guantanamo, Cuba. 'A Very Tough Thing'
Officials said the decision to resume forcible repatriation of the Haitians, which quickly drew attacks from human rights groups, was made out of exasperation after weekend Voice of America broadcasts to Haiti urging listeners not to set out for United States shores failed to stem the flow of would-be refugees.


Sports of The Times; The Fan Who Pays The Salary
AT a Knick game in Madison Square Garden recently, a fan in a sweatshirt and jeans stood at courtside and shouted hello to the players.
An usher came over.
"C'mon, move it," he said.
"Get up to where you belong." The guy had apparently found his way to the classy seats from the boonies.
"Hey, whaddya pushin'?' " the guy said to the usher. "I'm payin' these guys' salaries."
Some people in the vicinity, in suit and tie, smiled at his presumption, this guy paying Patrick Ewing his $30 million.
Fact is, he is certainly contributing, and so were those nearby.
And they are paying more and more, and often getting less and less.


Alternative School in the Bronx Gets a New Life


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-18 2 LEBANON HOSTAGES FREED
An American educator, Thomas Sutherland, and the special envoy of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Terry Waite, were released by their Lebanese captors, amid signs that the remaining Western hostages might soon be freed.
Page A1 Terry Waite went to Beirut on behalf of others, only to become a captive himself.
A17 An incredible three days for Thomas Sutherland's family.
A16 Israel will not release Arab prisoners until it hears the fate of a missing airman.
A16  U.S.
OUSTING HAITIAN REFUGEES
With more than 1,200 Haitian boat people held aboard Coast Guard cutters, the United States said it was starting to send them back, resuming a repatriation program suspended since the Sept. 30 coup.
A1 A PLEA TO HELP THE SOVIETS
Warning of possible social upheaval in the Soviet Union, Ambassador Robert S. Strauss urged Western nations to grant debt assistance as the nation tries to weather the winter and reorder its economy.
He emphasized that these were his personal views.
A14 LITTLE REACTION ON CHINA
China's rebuff to Secretary of State Baker over human rights and arms sales and appeared unlikely to spur action on legislation to limit China's trading status.
A8 TROUBLED SOUTH AFRICAN PARTY
The liberal Democratic Party, which has watched its longstanding opposition to apartheid pre-empted by President F. W. de Klerk, is fighting to survive as a viable political alternative in South Africa.
A15 Kenya's Foreign Minister called the American Ambassador a racist.
A3 Much of Pakistan is caught up in worsening lawlessness.
A17 European countries offered to oversee a Yugoslav evacuation.
A7  NATIONAL A20-22, B10-12 PROPERTY RIGHTS DEBATE
The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether landowners are constitutionally entitled to compensation when the government bars all development in the interests of public safety or welfare.
A1 CUTTING OFF A DEATH APPEAL
Justices refused to consider an appeal by a death row inmate who sought the right to present evidence that his victim's family did not want him to die.
B11 CREDIT DEBATE SUBSIDES
The debate in Congress that led to consideration of a cap on credit card interest rates subsided, but it turned an unwelcome spotlight on one of the banking industry's richest businesses at a time when it can least afford the attention.
A1 A BULLISH GEORGE BUSH
Speaking to White House reporters, President Bush insisted that "some fairly good fundamentals" were present in the economy and that he had no plans to try to stimulate its growth.
A1 DUKE RAISES HIS SIGHTS
Two days after being defeated in the Louisiana governor's race, David Duke said he might enter several Presidential primaries in 1992.
B10 WILDER SEEKS JACKSON VOTE
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia has adjusted his Presidential campaign in an effort to secure the votes of blacks who supported Jesse Jackson.
B10 CAPITOL TUG OF WAR
A turf battle escalates between Congressional committees and a review panel headed by Vice President Dan Quayle.
B12 SMALL RECOVERY FOR STOCKS
The stock market steadied and the Dow Jones industrial average regained a quarter of the ground lost in Friday's drubbing.
The Dow ended the day 29.52 points higher, to close at 2,972.72 amid heavy volume.
D1 NORIEGA AND DRUG MONEY
A witness testified that General Noriega received $10 million from the Medellin drug cartel for his permission to ship 20 tons of cocaine from Panama to the United States.
A20 A RIPE ONE FOR POE
In Gilmanton, N.H., the mystery of the missing tombstones has been solved.
And the stones were where many people thought they were all along.
B12 DELAY IN HEARING
Facing the loss of its Government authorization, an organization that evaluates colleges and universities requested a delay in a Federal hearing on its status.
B12  Former smoker loses his suit against a cigarette maker.
B11 U.S. appeals ruling that lets V.M.I. deny admission to women.
A22 METROPOLITAN Digest, B1 UNBALANCED BUDGET, AGAIN
After the largest tax increase in state history and a tax on wages for the first time, Connecticut's budget is already out of balance and headed toward a deficit, Governor Weicker says.
The projected gap is about $175 million, a bit more than 2 percent of the $7.6 billion budget.
A1 ANTI-CRIME LOTTERY LAGS
A special anti-crime lottery game that was to pay for beefed-up security at public schools is bringing in only about half the money city officials expected, and despite Mayor Dinkins's pledge, the receipts will not be spent on new youth programs aimed at reducing crime.
A1 BUSINESS DIGEST D1  Science Times C1-13  The Maya emerge from new translations as a warlike people.
C1  A whisper-light solid called 'frozen smoke.' C1  Food hoarding among the animals takes many forms.
C1 Arts/Entertainment C15-22  Musicians take their case for more pay to the audience.
C15  French films in Sarasota, Fla.
C15  Art: 2 London retrospectives.
C15  Phillips Collection head quits.
C16  Word and Image: CBS buys rights to "Davis Rules" from ABC.
C16  "Eve's Tattoo," by Emily Prager.
C20 Fashion Page B13 Obituaries B14  Gustav Husak, former president of Czechoslovakia Sports B15-21  Baseball: Mets talk with Murray's agent.
B21  Columns: Berkow on ticket prices.
B15  Football: Giants take show on road.
B15  Tennis: Navratilova wins at Slims championships B15 Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  The October Surprise.
The November development.
What to do about water.
Implants and image.
Letters A24  A. M. Rosenthal: The Louisiana lesson.
A25  Russell Baker: Great Caesar's scalp.
A25  Robert Satloff: Arafat and Assad, together again.
A25  Barbara Roper: Stop the clock on swindlers.
A25


Apogee Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Committee Agrees to Rebuke Cranston Over Keating Case
Ending a two-year inquiry on Senator Alan Cranston that was marked by bitter partisanship, Congressional officials said today that the Senate Select Committee on Ethics has agreed to rebuke the California Democrat for his actions on behalf of Charles H. Keating Jr.
The officials said the committee would present its findings to the full Senate on Wednesday in what promises to be an unusual and dramatic proceeding, but that the members would not be asked to vote to censure or take any action against Mr.
Cranston.
However, in a largely procedural move, it is possible that the Senate might be asked to vote to accept the committee's report.


New York State Ballot Proposals Should Be in Plain Language
To the Editor:
One of the reasons so many people did not vote for any of the propositions on the Nov. 5 New York State ballot was that the proposals were confusing to understand.
New York needs a plain-language law for referendum questions placed on the ballot.


AIDS Drug Unaffected by Race or Sex
Two new analyses indicate that the AIDS drug AZT is just as effective in black and Hispanic men and in women of all races as it is in white men.
The studies addressed concerns that were raised in February when a Federal study indicated that black and Hispanic men who were infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, did not benefit from AZT, or azidothymidine.
This finding raised questions about how to treat members of racial and ethnic minorities who were infected with the virus.


DRCA Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NBC Official Leaves
The president of NBC Television Stations yesterday resigned to become head of Spectradyne Inc., the largest provider of pay-per-view movies for hotels.
Albert D. Jerome has been president of the television station division since 1982 and started with NBC 17 years ago.
The network owns stations in Denver, Los Angeles, Miami, New York and Washington.
"I am looking forward to expanding the scope of Spectravision," Mr.
Jerome said in a statement.
Robert C. Wright, NBC president and chief executive, said NBC would name a successor shortly, but that Mr.
Jerome would stay on for a brief period to help with the transition.


Mysterious Something Nears Earth
It is not an alien spaceship.
Of that astronomers are sure.
But otherwise they have only questions about a mysterious object in space that will show up virtually on Earth's doorstep, as scientists measure these things, in a little more than two weeks.
Astronomers say the object could be a new kind of asteroid or perhaps an old piece of the manned space program finding its way back home, possibly a lunar ascent module from one of the Apollo flights two decades ago.
In either case, nothing like it has been seen before.


EXECUTIVES
*
Banknorth Group Inc., Burlington, Vt., a bank holding company, named Robert M. Gillis president and chief executive of its subsidiary First Vermont Bank and Trust Co. and Steven J. Bourgeois president and chief executive of another subisidiary, Franklin Lamoille Bank. *
Electronic Associates Inc., West Long Branch, N.J., an electronic product services company, named Richard G. Rogers president and chief executive.


Howell Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


The Pop Life
Heavy Metal
Lita Ford, the heavy metal guitarist and singer, who was a member of the Runaways at age 16, has just released an album called "Dangerous Curves" (RCA).
The title may or may not refer to her figure, which is usually a prominent part of her marketing plan.
It's a hard-rock record, and her single "Shot of Poison" is climbing the charts.
She will perform tonight at the Marquee, 547 West 21st Street, Manhattan.


Hotel Investors Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Basic Earth Science reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Elsinore Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
AT&amp; E Corp., San Francisco, a communications company, said a bankruptcy court had approved an agreement with Seiko Corp. and Seiko Epson Corp. that provides for the sale to Seiko of substantially all the assets of AT&amp; E and certain of its subsidiaries. *
Apollo Acquisitions of Flordia II Inc., Sarasota, Fla., an investment company, acquired 88 percent of the outstanding stock of Microdisk Services, Redmond, Wash., a software concern.
Terms were not disclosed.


Court Halts Expulsion of Haitians As Hundreds More Leave for U.S.
A Federal judge in Miami ordered a five-day stay today in the forced return of Haitians trying to flee to the United States by boat, as hundreds more Haitians put to sea.
The ruling came only hours after a second group of Haitians numbering over 300 were returned to the island.
The United States resumed a decade-old policy of returning Haitians on Monday, after a period of relaxation following a military coup on Sept. 30 that ousted President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
The State Department says that 538 Haitians have been returned in the last two days.
Only 53 in the present exodus have been given asylum.


Allegheny &amp; Western Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Media Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Is a Springbok by Any Other Name as Swift?
Since President F. W. de Klerk promised an end to apartheid more than 21 months ago, no change has prompted such an uproar from whites as the news two weeks ago that the nation's athletes could not take the South African flag, anthem and sporting emblem to the Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain next year.
Announcing that South Africa, long banned from international sports, would compete in the Olympics for the first time since 1960, Sam Ramsamy, chairman of South Africa's National Olympic Committee, tacked on a few conditions.


BellSouth Wins Bid For Australia Service
The BellSouth Corporation, the regional Bell company based in Atlanta, said yesterday that it was part of a three-nation consortium that won the right to provide telecommunications services in Australia.
BellSouth said the group, which includes Cable and Wireless P.L.C. of Britain, bid the equivalent of $640 million.


As Slovak Separatism Gains, Havel Faces the Unthinkable
Two years after the "velvet revolution" that he led, President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia is struggling to preserve the unity of his country against Slovak separatist strivings.
The possibility of a breakup of Czechoslovakia, founded in 1918 after the demise of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, seemed unthinkable when Mr.
Havel came to power late in December 1989.
Now, though, the unthinkable occupies the top of the President's agenda, and he is considering the worst.


Lomas &amp; Nettleton Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jets Become Happy Winners Because Brown Was Smokin'
In the Jets' season opener last year, against the Bengals in Cincinnati, A. B. Brown tore up his right knee.
He then had reconstructive surgery and spent the rest of the season on the injured-reserve list.
For the first seven games of this season, he was listed as physically unable to perform.


ESI Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


JLG Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Circuit Research Labs reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Steve's Homemade Ice Cream reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Drinking on Job: Getting Help Is a Problem
THE chief executive of a Wall Street investment company dozes at his desk, and his secretary, acting on experience, decides against putting through an urgent call from a London trader.
A surgeon comes into the operating room laughing boisterously, and the nurses trade knowing glances.


Mali Seeking to Prevent Auction of Religious Statue
The Government of Mali in West Africa is seeking to prevent Sotheby's from selling the 31-inch-tall terra-cotta sculpture of a sheep that is pictured on the cover of its catalogue for a sale of African art today.
Mohamed Toure, Mali's Ambassador to the United States, said yesterday that under Mali law the sculpture belonged to his nation, as do all artifacts excavated in Mali after 1985.


Marine Drilling Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Comnet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tape Backs Account of '67 Israeli Attack
To the Editor:
Re A. M. Rosenthal's "Anatomy of a Scoop" (column, Nov. 8)," commenting on a column by Rowland Evans and Robert Novak: I am a survivor of the 1967 attack on the intelligence ship Liberty by Israeli planes during the Arab-Israeli war.


Trying to Rid the Streets of Guns, by Buying Them
In a campaign to curb violence, the Brooklyn District Attorney's office and the Police Department plan to spend $200,000 to buy firearms from the public for up to $75 a gun, officials in both agencies said yesterday.
The program is to begin on Monday and will last two weeks, officials said.
If it is successful, they said, it may be expanded to the other boroughs.


2 Weekend Hits Cheer the Film Industry
After months of lackluster films and economic gloom, the movie industry today welcomed the first tentative signs of holiday cheer with word of weekend success for two major new movies: Martin Scorsese's thriller "Cape Fear" and Disney's animated musical "Beauty and the Beast."
Although it is still too early to predict the eventual financial success of the two movies -- the first major releases of the holiday season -- the positive box-office indications so far have delighted the industry.


Smoky Fire on 93d Floor of World Trade Center Leaves 2 Injured
A smoky fire in an electrical shaft on the 93d floor of One World Trade Center forced the evacuation of several floors near the top of the 107-story tower yesterday and left two people injured, officials said.
But for many in the huge vertical city, life went on with routines undisturbed.
At Windows on the World, 14 floors above the fire, patrons dining by candlelight were not told that firefighters were rushing into the building.
Cleaning workers five floors below the blaze were not evacuated, either, but angrily stopped work and massed in the lobby once they learned of the fire.


Borg in Senior Debut
BJORN BORG, one of the world's top tennis players before he suddenly retired at age 25 in 1981, will make his debut on the Association of Tennis Professionals Senior Tour in a $100,000 tournament at Indian Wells, Calif., which begins next Feb. 29.


Nuisance Law Used to Close Hotel


Clashes Go On in Somali Capital
Heavy shelling reverberated through the bombed-out Somali capital of Mogadishu today as troops loyal to a rebel military commander, Gen.
Mohamed Farah Aideed, tightened control of the city, aid workers and diplomatic informants said.
On Monday, unconfirmed reports reaching Nairobi said General Aideed's men had ousted Interim President Ali Mahdi Mohamed, 52, after two days of intense street fighting.
Hundreds are believed dead.


Dewey Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vikings to Woo Holtz
LOU HOLTZ says he wants to finish his coaching career at Notre Dame.
WHEELOCK WHITNEY, part owner of the Vikings, hopes to change his mind.


Doctor Charged with Trying To Perform Illegal Abortion
The operator of an abortion clinic on the Lower East Side was arrested yesterday on charges that he tried to perform an illegal abortion in which the right arm of the fetus, who lived, was severed, the police said.
Dr.
Abu Hayat, 61 years old, was arrested at 12:30 P.M. at his Women's Medical Clinic in a four-story building at 9 Avenue A. Dr.
Hayat, a native of Calcutta, India, who lives at 1 Irving Place in Manhattan, has been in this country since July 1969 and served as a major in the United States Army.


Michaels Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28


Dick Clark Productions reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wine Talk
THREE prominent French wine specialists pooled their knowledge recently for the readers of the newspaper Le Figaro and came up with three ideal wine cellars for three different budgets.
The first cellar cost 5,000 francs, or about $890,; the second, 10,000 francs, or $1,780, and the third, 15,000 francs, or $2,680.
Last week I discussed most of the French sommeliers' choices, and suggested where an American collector might enhance the same selections with wines of Italy or California or Spain.
Now it's time to do the same with the sommeliers' most serious red wines.


British Air Deal Seen With KLM
British Airways P.L.C. is negotiating a takeover of KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, a union that represents Dutch transportation workers said today.
The FNV Dutch Transport Union said in a statement that Pieter Bouw, KLM's president, planned to sign a letter today that could pave the way for the takeover, The Associated Press reported today.


Where Children Learn How to Learn: Inner-City Pupils in Catholic Schools
Parents living in one of this city's poorest neighborhoods face a stark choice: send their children to public schools that they feel are too large, too dangerous and too lax, or scrape together the money for the Roman Catholic school around the corner.
For many, the lure was irresistible; they chose East Catholic High School.
In so doing, they cast a vote for Catholic schools that is endorsed by a growing number of researchers who have found that poor, minority children do particularly well in Catholic schools compared with their public school peers.
The researchers say Catholic schools hold high expectations and require academic course work for all students, give students plenty of personal yet demanding attention, and are relatively independent of a central bureaucracy.


Intek Diversified Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CE Software Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


DeWitt Media
DeWitt Media Inc., New York, an independent media buying and planning service, has named Steve Auerbach to the newly created position of executive vice president-national broadcast.
Mr.
Auerbach, 42 years old, had previously been senior vice president-national broadcast for Ally &amp; Gargano in New York.
Gene DeWitt, president of the firm, said DeWitt was trying to take advantage of a spate of $60 million and $70 million accounts that have recently moved to small- and medium-size agencies, which require outside services to handle media buying.


J2 Communications reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Bonilla Barnstorming In Search of Best Deal
A baseball free-agent's trek is the modern-day version of a whistle-stop tour.
Only this sleek campaigner is seeking dollars, not votes, and woos the game's most generous Daddy Warbucks, not John Q. Public.
And, whether the possessor of Hall of Fame numbers or merely a Hall of Fame attitude, the player is more likely to ride in first-class comfort rather than at the tailend of a caboose.
He is the star of the game's other ferocious season -- the business of baseball season.
This year's heavy hitter is Bobby Bonilla, the Pirates' slugger who's seeking to hit the biggest home run of his life off those who only pitch dollars and cents.


Penn Treaty American reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


If Your Gravy Runs Free, Why Not Buy a Little Consistency?
HERE are some of the many sources in the New York region for Thanksgiving-to-go.
Prepared foods are often available up to the last minute, but for the best selection, orders should be placed this week -- by Saturday at the latest.
Check shop hours for next week to arrange pickup.
Prices for roast turkeys are for the raw, not cooked, weight.
Manhattan
BAKERY SOUTINE,
104 West 70th Street, (212) 496-1450.
In addition to desserts like pumpkin mousse pie and apple pie, $18 for 10-inch versions, this fine bakery is also making roasted vegetables ($20 a quart), chestnut stuffing ($15 a quart) and a carrot and parsnip puree ($14 a quart).
BLACK HOUND, 149 First Avenue (10
th Street), (800) 344-4417.
This confectionery offers a change of pace in desserts, with a lush pumpkin coconut cream pie ($25 for 9 inches), a mousse-filled pumpkin roll ($13.50) and a buttery almond-honey tart ($4 for 4 inches, $25 for 9 inches).
Delivery, at $8 extra, can be arranged on orders over $50.
GABRIEL'S EARTH CUISINE, 48 West 21st Street, second floor, (212) 229-2113.
A five-course vegetarian Thanksgiving dinner is $75 and serves 4 people.
On the menu are mushroom pate; roasted corn chowder; the main dish, squash baked with bean-and-grain stuffing; roasted vegetables and other side dishes; salad, and for dessert, squash pie with hazelnut crust.
The dishes can also be purchased individually.
GRACE'S MARKETPLACE, 1237 Third Avenue (71st Street), (212) 737-0600
.
This well-stocked market is taking orders for fresh roast turkey breast ($12 a pound), wild rice stuffing ($12 a pound), honey-glazed carrots ($7 a pound) and acorn squash stuffed with cranberries ($4 each), among other dishes, plus stuffed apples en croute ($5.50 each) and sweet potato pie ($13.50).
HALE AND HEARTY,
849 Lexington Avenue (64th Street), (212) 517-7600.
Dishes with reduced fat and cholesterol include pumpkin bisque ($4.25 a pint), grilled vegetables ($19.80 for 4 servings), roasted sweet potatoes with apples and walnuts ($10.50 a pound), wild mushroom and cornbread stuffing ($9.50 a pound), roasted parsnips with fresh thyme ($9.90 a pound) and roasted turkey breast ($6.50 a pound).
LITTLE PIE COMPANY, 424 West 43d Street, (212) 736-4780
.
Advance orders are no longer accepted, but this little bakery expects to have a good supply of pies on hand for last-minute shoppers.
Cranberry apple is $12 for 8-inch, $17 for 10-inch; sour-cream apple walnut is $13.50 for 8-inch, $20 for 10-inch, and pumpkin pie is $8.75 for 8-inch, $12.50 for 10-inch.
MACY'S MARKETPLACE,
Herald
Square, (212) 695-4400, extension
2492,
to place orders with Macy's At Your Service.
Gene Hovis's recipes include creamed onions ($7.95 a pound), cranberry chutney ($10.95 a pound), sage stuffing ($7.95 a pound), Cheddar cheese biscuits ($7.95 a dozen) and a first-rate, beautifully glazed 11-inch pecan tart ($32.95) that will serve at least 10.
RENT-A-CHEF, 132 Ninth Avenue (19th Street), (212) 242-8819
.
This neighborhood catering shop has suitably homey parsnip soup ($6 a quart), spinach souffle ($7 a pound), casserole of fall vegetables ($7.50 a pound) and mashed potatoes ($5.50 a pound).
Roast turkey breast, $9.50 a pound, can be ordered.
SARABETH'S KITCHEN,
423 Amsterdam Avenue (80th Street), (212) 496-6280; 1295 Madison Avenue (92d Street), (212) 410-7335.
Autumn squash soup with ginger and kale ($11 a quart), deep-dish apple pie with crumb topping ($20) and creamy cinnamon-scented pumpkin pie ($16) are just a few of the dishes.
SAVORIES CAFE, Promenade Level, Rockefeller Center, (212) 246-6457
.
This shop offers a lavish complete dinner for 8 to 10 people that includes breads, New England clam chowder, a roast turkey with sausage and apple stuffing and gravy, cranberry sauce, broccoli pudding, braised red cabbage, candied squash, pumpkin pie and cranberry bread pudding, all for $125.
The dinner can be picked up or, for an extra charge starting at $29.50, can be delivered in New York City, Westchester, Long Island or New Jersey.
Orders can be placed until next Wednesday morning.
TAYLOR'S PREPARED FOODS AND BAKE SHOP,
523 Hudson Street (10th Street), (212) 645-8200
.
This bakery and cafe has dishes to go, including gravy ($6 a pint), cranberry compote ($4.95 a pound), cornbread loaf ($5) and sweet potato pecan pie ($7 and $16).
On Thanksgiving day, it will pack up a complete standard meal to take home for $9.95 a person.
No advance orders are taken for the turkey dinner, which includes side dishes and dessert.
WILLIAM GREENBERG JR. DESSERTS,
1377 Third Avenue (78th Street), (212) 535-7118; 1100 Madison Avenue (83d Street), (212) 744-0304; 2187 Broadway (77th Street), (212) 580-7300; 518 Third Avenue (35th Street), (212) 686-3344.
Along with traditional pies, there is a moist and spicy Grand Marnier pumpkin cake with a sugar glaze for $12.75.
WORD OF MOUTH, 1012 Lexington Avenue (72d Street), (212) 734-9483
.
A long list of side dishes for the holiday is available at this well-established catering shop, including corn pudding ($9 a pint), maple sliced sweet potatoes ($8 a pint), sweet potato puree ($7.25 a pint), apple, prune and sausage stuffing ($8.50 a pint), cornbread ($8 a pan), pumpkin praline pie ($22) and sweet potato pecan pie ($22).
YURA &amp; COMPANY,
1650 Third Avenue (92d Street), (212) 860-8060
.
This Upper East Side caterer is preparing a butternut squash and root vegetable soup ($6 a quart), carrot and parsnip puree ($8 a pint), cauliflower and brussels sprout gratin ($8 a pound) and gravy ($8 a pint).
Desserts include pumpkin custard pie ($14 for 9-inch) and sweet potato pecan pie ($14 for 9-inch).
Bronx
MISS GRIMBLE,
909 East 135th Street (Bruckner Boulevard), (212) 665-
2253.
This bakery sells wholesale and retail.
For the holiday it features 10-inch pumpkin cheesecake for $19, cranberry apple pie for $13.25 and pecan pie for $12.25.
For an extra charge delivery can be made in New York City, Westchester, New Jersey or Long Island.
Brooklyn
FAITH'S BAKERY,
in Park Slope: 1112 Eighth Avenue (11th Street),
(718) 499-8108; 169 Lincoln Place (Seventh Avenue), (718) 783-7833.
Delectable home-style pies, tarts and cakes include cranberry and sweet potato pecan pies, $9.50 to $21 depending on size.
Individual cranberry apple tarts are $3.25.
NEW PROSPECT AT HOME, 52 Seventh Avenue (Lincoln Place), Park Slope, (718) 230-8900.
On the menu this year are a corn and crab meat chowder ($12 a quart), roast free-range organic turkey, 10 to 15 pounds ($7.50 a pound), cornbread and sage stuffing with apricots ($8.50 a pound), sweet potato mousse ($8.50 a pound), pan gravy ($5 a pint) and cranberry bread pudding ($13.25 for 6 to 8 servings).
Queens
LE PETIT GOURMET,
44-35 Douglaston Parkway (Northern Boulevard),
(718) 224-9665
.
Although this shop specializes in Middle Eastern foods, for Thanksgiving, American tradition prevails.
It is making zucchini pie ($6.95 a pound), creamed cauliflower ($6.95 a pound), string beans with onions and garlic ($6.95 a pound) and roast turkey with apple and vegetable stuffing ($4.79 a pound).
Long Island
DIANE'S BAKERY AND CATERING,
25 Bryant Avenue, Roslyn, (516) 621
-2522
.
Besides excellent baked specialties like apple-raisin pie and walnut pie ($17 each) and cranberry-orange bread ($7), this catering shop is preparing an apple-raisin stuffing made with hallah ($4.95 a pound), roasted barbecued onions ($12.95 for two pounds), savory sweet potato pie ($12.95) and cranberry-pear compote ($10.95 a quart).
Roast turkeys are $5 a pound.
WAINSCOTT PRODUCE, Montauk
Highway, Wainscott, (516) 537-2330
.
On the menu at this country market are mashed potatoes with roasted garlic ($6.95 a pound), roasted winter vegetables ($7.95 a pound), stuffed fennel ($3.95 each), savory stuffed baby pumpkins with pumpkin mousse ($3.50 each), sweet potato puree ($7.50 a pound) and turkeys roasted on Thanksgiving morning ($5.50 a pound), with stuffing and gravy.
Westchester
GREYSTONE BAKERY,
114 Woodworth Avenue, Yonkers, (914) 375-1510.
For Thanksgiving, this bakery has added pumpkin cheesecake ($22) and a pecan tart ($18).
Both are 11 inches.
Connecticut
GOOD FOOD STORE,
865 Post Road, Darien, (203) 655-7355
.
This charming shop is preparing a butternut squash soup ($8 a quart), roasted fall vegetables ($8.95 a pound), brussels sprouts with butter and herbs ($8.95 a pound), sausage and fennel stuffing ($8 a pound) and apple pie with crumb topping ($15).
HAY DAY,
1026 Post Road East, Westport, (203) 227-9008; 1050 East Putnam Avenue, Greenwich,
(203) 637-7300; 21 Governor Street, Ridgefield, (203) 431-4400.
Some specialties are a multilayer vegetable terrine ($8.95 a pound), spiced sweet potatoes Anna ($7.95 for a cake serving six), glazed sweet potato spears ($5.95 a pound), stuffed acorn squash ($7.95 a pound), crab-apple compote ($10.95 a pound) and three-grain stuffing made with millet, barley and wheat berries ($3.95 a pint).
Desserts include bourbon-apple-walnut-raisin pie, $7.95 and $15.95.
New Jersey
DELICIOUS ORCHARDS,
36 Highway 34 South, Colts Neck, (908) 462-1989
.
The bakery at this farm market makes apple, pumpkin and mince pies ($5.50) and pecan pie ($6.25).
MICHELLE LORIE CHEESECAKES,
549 Hamilton Avenue, Trenton, (609) 393-0539
.
No advance orders are taken for the famous pumpkin cheesecake, so plan to wait in line Moscow-style.
The small size, serving 6 to 8, is $4.50; the large, for 16, is $9.


Far West Inudustries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Baltimore Sun Buyout
Because of declines in advertising and circulation, The Baltimore Sun has announced plans to reduce its staff by offering an enhanced severance package to employees who volunteer to leave.
A notice announcing the plan said "layoffs or other measures may still be necessary at a later date" if a sufficient number of employees do not leave.


Foreign Affairs; The 'Lost' Soviet Trade Bill
Mighty matters in the U.S.
Government often turn on small principles and on the whims of powerful men like Dan Rostenkowski and Richard Darman.
An eight-month tiff between the imperious chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee and the devious White House budget chief explains why Congress still has not approved a key ingredient of U.S. foreign policy -- the bill to establish most-favored-nation trading status for the Soviet Union.
In June, President Bush decided that Moscow had finally removed barriers to emigration and was thus qualified for normal, or M.F.N., trade rank.
His hope was to reduce tariffs quickly for Soviet exports, as one of the few inexpensive ways to help the deteriorating Soviet economy.


Quality Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wainoco Oil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER U.S.
Gains Quarterfinals April Heinrichs scored two goals as the United States routed Brazil, 5-0, in Canton, China, last night and clinched a spot in the quarterfinals of the first world women's soccer championship.
Carin Jennings, Michelle Akers-Stahl and Mia Hamm also scored for the United States, which beat Sweden, 3-2, Sunday in its opener and plays Japan tomorrow.
The Americans broke open the game in the final five minutes of the first half, scoring three goals to take a 4-0 lead.
In the other Group B game, Sweden routed Japan, 8-0.
In Group A, China tied Denmark, 2-2, and Norway beat New Zealand, 4-0.
In Group C, Germany beat Taiwan, 3-0, and Italy beat Nigeria, 1-0.
China, Denmark, Germany and Italy also have clinched spots in the quarterfinals. (AP) Manchester United Wins: Brian McClair scored with 23 minutes remaining as Manchester United beat Red Star Belgrade, 1-0, at Manchester, England, last night for its first European SuperCup.
The SuperCup usually is a home-and-home, total-goals series, but was shortened to one game this year because of the civil war in Yugoslavia. (AP) BOXING Medina Keeps Title Manuel Medina, the International Boxing Federation featherweight champion, was awarded a technical decision over Tom Johnson in the ninth round of their scheduled 12-round bout Monday night in Inglewood, Calif., when Johnson accidentally butted him.
The fight was stopped and was awarded to Medina because he was ahead on points. (AP)


General Devices Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


D.O.C. Optics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Loewen Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Early Weight Gain Tied to Fetal Health
FAILURE of women to gain enough weight in the first and second three-month segments of pregnancy is a major cause of low birth weight in newborns, according to a study of 2,000 young pregnant women.
The recently published findings suggest that programs providing adequate amounts of nutritious food to low-income pregnant women could help reduce the nation's relatively high infant mortality rate, according to Dr.
Theresa O. Scholl, the researcher.
The United States has one of the highest infant morality rates in the West.
Nearly 11 of every 1,000 babies die as newborns, and low birth weight is considered a major factor in the failure of more babies to survive.


Aspen Imaging International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
Many players, thinking back, could designate a "hand of a lifetime." But few would go back 45 years, and be able to name all the players, the place and the precise date.
One who can is David Pettit of Arlington, Va., who, a trifle belatedly, reports the diagramed deal, played Jan. 27, 1946, while he was at school at Andover.
He sat West, and the other players were: Don McDonough, North; Charles Blood, East, and Dave McLain, South.


Fishy Justice for Iran-Contra
Two months ago Robert McFarlane, a national security adviser to President Reagan, helped his former aide Oliver North beat a criminal rap by testifying that he had been confused.
Now Mr.
North, by claiming similar confusion, has helped another former Reagan national security adviser, John Poindexter, beat a similar rap.
If that sounds fishy, it is; but the U.S.
Court of Appeals in Washington calls it justice.
Only the Supreme Court can straighten out the law.
If it has the will it can restore the opportunity to protect two vital interests, the individual's right to a fair trial and the public's right to trust its government.


Sneaker May Be a Clue
A sneaker has been found in a marshy area near the Raritan Center office plaza in Edison, and the police say they hope it sheds light on the disappearance of 6-year-old Timothy Wiltsey.
Timothy's mother, Michelle Lodzinski, told the police her son vanished on May 25 while she was buying soda at a carnival.
Last month a passer-by found a muddy white Teen-age Mutant Ninja Turtle sneaker that fits the description of shoes Timothy was wearing, said Kenneth Kelly, a Sayreville police detective.
The police plan to send the shoe to the F.B.I. for testing, as well as a pair of Timothy's shoes.


Infodata Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


'Smart' Plans for Clogged Roads
Each day on the nation's streets, roads and highways, some 135 million cars -- one for every 1.8 people in the country -- are vying for the American right to freedom of movement.
But during peak periods, two-thirds of the cars on interstate highways are moving at less than 35 miles an hour.
And around cities like New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco, many are barely moving at all.
Seeking relief from the congestion, government, academic and industry researchers have for more than two decades experimented with automated highway and driver-information systems to route cars around bottlenecks or prevent tie-ups in the first place.
But so far, the work and the financing have been intermittent.


Two Freed Hostages Reunited With Their Families After Years of Separation; Waite Avoids Mentioning Issue of Whether He Was 'Used'
With a passionate call for the release of all hostages held in the Middle East, Terry Waite, the Archbishop of Canterbury's special envoy, returned today in a driving rainstorm to a joyful reunion with family and friends.
But he carefully avoided all mention of the mystery of why his Muslim extremist captors had held him captive for 1,763 days, amid growing questions about whether his mediation efforts had been "used" and compromised by President Reagan's national security aide, Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North, and his secret attempts to try to free the hostages by selling arms to Iran.


Command Security Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tape Backs Account of '67 Israeli Attack
To the Editor:
I want to thank A. M. Rosenthal for his accurate account (column, Nov. 8) of the events of 24 years ago involving the sinking of the United States intelligence ship Liberty exactly as I gave them.
I was more than pleased that he (unlike Rowland Evans and Robert Novak) repeated back to me the interview as I related it to him and that you published it in exactly the same way.
SETH MINTZ  Houlton, Me., Nov. 8, 1991


Turkish Parties to Form a Coalition Cabinet
The longtime politician Suleyman Demirel signed a pact today with the Social Democratic leader, Erdal Inonu, to form Turkey's first coalition Government since the 1970's.
Mr.
Demirel, twice ousted by the military in six previous terms as Prime Minister, told reporters he might submit a Cabinet list on Wednesday to President Turgut Ozal, his political rival.


Principal at Boys and Girls Says He May Quit His Job
The Brooklyn principal who got students at a rough-and-tumble high school to give up gold tooth caps and put on ties said yesterday that he was thinking of leaving the school system because it has not offered him a top policy-making position.
With palpable anger, the principal, Frank Mickens, told reporters covering a visit to Boys and Girls High School by Mayor David N. Dinkins that the administration of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez had not recognized the work he has done with a fitting promotion.


Continental Mortgage &amp; Equity reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York State Ballot Proposals Should Be in Plain Language; Inadequate Voter Guide
To the Editor:
Once again the letter carrier delivered a red, white and blue booklet before Election Day -- the New York City Voter Guide, produced by the New York City Campaign Finance Board, a city agency.


A Candidate's Joke, Recorded at a Rally, Is Bringing Criticism
Senator Bob Kerrey, a Democratic candidate for President, ran into political criticism today from gay, lesbian and women's groups for telling a sexual joke to another candidate at a New Hampshire political roast.
The Nebraska Senator issued an apology for his "inappropriate" remarks and said they were made in what he thought was a private conversation.


Claire's Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


McCartney Premiere at Carnegie Hall


Food Notes
Finding the Right Bird
It's time to decide on the main course for Thanksgiving and place an order.
Among the choices in poultry are fresh-killed turkeys (often Bell &amp; Evans brand), organically raised turkeys, wild turkeys (all dark meat and less than nine pounds) and game birds like guinea hen and pheasant.


Children's Discovery Centers of America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


8 Soviet Republics Said to Agree To Take On Entire Foreign Debt
Eight of the remaining 12 Soviet republics reportedly agreed today that they would shoulder the entire foreign debt of the Soviet Union if necessary to bolster the fractured nation's credibility in the eyes of industrialized countries whose help is considered vital to a rescue of its economy.
In response, officials of the seven leading industrial nations were reported ready to move ahead with a plan to ease debt repayment terms over the next year and provide some relief to the failing Soviet economy.


Wolves Sign Longley To Four-Year Contract
LUC LONGLEY, the seventh pick in the National Basketball Association draft, became the last first-round choice to come to terms yesterday when he signed a four-year contract with the Minnesota Timberwolves that will pay him approximately $1.6 million a year.


A Diplomat's Return


Dollar Closes Mostly Lower Following Tumble in Stocks
The dollar tumbled against most major currencies yesterday as traders took their cues from the slide in stock prices.
John McCarthy, chief dealer with ABN-AMRO Bank N.V., said the dollar followed the Dow Jones industrial average, which fell 41 points yesterday amid growing concerns about the economy.


Democrats Revive Doubts on Census
Congressional Democrats revived the lingering questions about the accuracy of the 1990 census today by issuing a subpoena to force Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher to make public the second, adjusted set of census figures whose use he had rejected in July.
The House Census and Population Subcommittee of the Post Office and Civil Service Committee, led by Representative Tom Sawyer, Democrat of Ohio, voted 3 to 2 along party lines to subpoena the full set of adjusted figures, including information at the neighborhood level.
Mr.
Sawyer said the adjusted figures were needed for scientific analysis into the strengths and weaknesses of the census methodology.


Hewlett-Packard Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Benton Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Uniforce Temporary Personnel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


State Senator From California Facing Racketeering Charges
A longstanding Federal inquiry into corruption among California officials led today to the filing of racketeering charges against a powerful state legislator, who immediately issued a letter of resignation in which he admitted breaking the law.
In a complaint filed by United States Attorney George O'Connell, State Senator Alan Robbins was charged with extorting money from special interests, engaging in obstruction of justice and filing a false tax return.


CHRONICLE
RICHARD DREYFUSS and MICHAEL BURNS grew up within six blocks of each other in Beverly Hills, Calif.
They went to elementary and high school together and they both became actors, Mr.
Dreyfuss in movies and Mr.
Burns on television, where among other roles he was a regular on "Wagon Train."


Viking Office Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; McCartney's 'Liverpool Oratorio'
Listening to the United States premiere of Paul McCartney's "Liverpool Oratorio" in Carnegie Hall on Monday night brought back memories of a time a bit over 20 years ago when the hottest rumor in the politically charged youth culture was that "Paul is dead" and his place taken by an impostor.
Hidden in recordings, went this conspiratorial notion, were cryptic signs of Paul's demise.
On the cover of "Abbey Road," Paul marches barefoot with a cigarette (a "coffin nail"); the jacket to "Sergeant Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band" shows a flower-covered grave; above Paul's head a hand is outstretched (a sign, it was said, of death).
Moreover, one Beatles song, "Revolution No. 9," if played backward on a turntable, made reference to a "dead man."
Mr.
McCartney, of course, was very much alive and has, in fact, been the most successful survivor of the Beatles' disintegration.
But that esoteric search through the Beatles' songs and artwork showed how earnest the public was about this group, how much complexity was felt to lie latent in its music, how profound and how "high" it all was.


K Mart Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Public &amp; Private; Making the Mosaic
There is some disagreement over which wordsmith first substituted "mosaic" for "melting pot" as a way of describing America, but there is no doubt that it is a more apt description.
And there is no doubt that it applies in Ms.
Miller's third-grade class and elsewhere within the walls of Public School 20 in New York City.
The neighborhood the school occupies is to the immigrant experience what Broadway is to actors.
Past Blevitzky Bros.
Monuments ("at this place since 1914"), past Katz's Delicatessen with its fan mail hung in the window ("Thank you for remembering me with the salami," Ronald Reagan wrote), past the tenement buildings where fire escapes climb graceful as cat burglars, P.S. 20 holds the corner of Essex and Houston.
Its alumni include the Gershwins and Jacob Javits.


Texas School Officials Seek To Oversee Whittle Show
Amid mounting complaints from parents and teachers, Texas education officials are considering ways to regulate Whittle Communications Inc.'s Channel One classroom program because it has commercials.
At a meeting on Nov. 8, members of the Texas State Board of Education asked lawyers for the Texas Education Agency to review options on overseeing the 12-minute program, which includes two minutes of commercials from a variety of consumer companies.


Book Notes
Sexton Biography
Diane Wood Middlebrook's "Anne Sexton: A Biography" (Houghton Mifflin) continues to evoke vociferous debates about the propriety of Anne Sexton's psychiatrist releasing tapes of private sessions with his patient to a biographer of the poet.


Arms Pact Allows for Soviet Breakup
The treaty that cuts NATO and former Warsaw Pact non-nuclear forces in Europe, headed soon for Senate approval, includes a number of novel provisions intended to permit future adjustments if the Soviet Union continues to disintegrate.
Lawmakers and Administration officials said the treaty's provisions could serve as a blueprint for future arms agreements with the Soviet Government and republics that have proclaimed independence.


Tape Backs Account of '67 Israeli Attack
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal's Nov. 8 column, "Anatomy of a Scoop," questions our credibility.
He quotes Seth Mintz, a former Israeli major who was in the Israeli Defense Forces war room when Israel made the decision to attack the United States intelligence ship Liberty on June 8, 1967, as saying he had been "misquoted, quoted out of context, used, abused and screwed" by our statement that he said Israel knew the Liberty was a United States Navy ship.


Nets Snap 'Misery Streak'
Near-jubilation broke out on the Nets' bench tonight with 5.7 seconds left, after Chris Morris's two free throws gave them a 4-point lead over the Sacramento Kings, the worst road team in the history of the National Basketball Association.
"Win, yes!" Drazen Petrovic declared, with an eye on reporters near the bench.
As no one rushed the story into print, it wasn't quite as premature as "Dewey Beats Truman." But it could have been.


Second National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Senate's Credit Card Blunder
The Senate's hasty reaction to President Bush's call for lower interest on credit cards is a model of how not to govern.
The President's exhortation was harmless jawboning.
But the Senate's overwhelming approval of an interest-rate cap barely 24 hours later was populist folly.
Price controls, whether on goods or the cost of credit, are a bad idea except in a genuine emergency.
They distort economic activity, and the eventual process of decontrol is always painful.
Nonetheless, with no public hearings and only 30 minutes of floor discussion, 73 senators agreed with Senator Alfonse D'Amato's rash proposal to chop most credit card rates immediately.


KMS Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Moore Paints To Gianettino
After a review, Gianettino &amp; Meredith Advertising in Short Hills, N.J., was awarded the advertising account of Benjamin Moore &amp; Company, it was announced yesterday.
Advertising executives estimated that billings on the Montvale, N.J., paint company's account exceed $2 million.
After gaining that account, the executives said, Gianettino decided that to avoid a potential conflict it would withdraw from a review for the estimated $5 million Channel Home Centers account.


Koger Equity reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Theater in Review
Tubes  Astor Place Theater 434 Lafayette Street Manhattan  Artistic coordinator, Caryl Glaab; directed by Marlene Swartz; set, Kevin Joseph Roach; lighting, Brian Aldous; costumes, Lydia Tanji and Patricia Murphy; sound, Raymond Schilke; computer graphic design, Kurisu-Chan; associate lighting design, Stan Pressner; associate producers, Akie Kimura and Broadway Line Company.
Blue Man Group Band, Brian Dewan, Larry Heinemann and Ian Pai.
Blue Man Group presented by Mark Dunn and Makoto Deguchi.
WITH: Matt Goldman, Phil Stanton and Chris Wink.
The three bald blue bullet-headed comedians known as Blue Man Group give a barbaric yawp of childlike pleasure as they attack the art and appetites of a computerized society force-fed junk food.
The blue men in "Tubes" look and act like robots from outer space trying to acclimate themselves to a brain-dead Planet Earth.


Security Guard Arrested in Slaying of Bronx Teen-Ager
A security guard who was working for an unlicensed agency that hires former gang members and some former convicts has been arrested in the slaying of a teen-ager at a South Bronx shopping plaza two weeks ago, the police said.
The guard, Michael Roldan, 21 years old, of 485 Jackson Avenue in the South Bronx, was arrested Monday night and charged in the death of Hassan Bey, 17.
Mr.
Bey was shot when he and two friends took a shortcut through the loading docks of the Concourse Village Plaza at 159th Street and the Grand Concourse.


Carl Winter, Imprisoned by U.S. As Communist Leader, Dies at 85
Carl Winter, a Communist Party official and former editor who in 1949 was among the first group of defendants to be convicted under the Smith Act of conspiring against the United States Government, died Saturday in New York.
He was 85 years old and lived in Detroit.
He collapsed at the party's offices in Manhattan and died of a heart attack minutes after giving a speech, said a party spokesman, Si Gerson.


Brock Exploration Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Valley Forge Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Caesars World Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Filene's Basement Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


British Credit Outlook
Brian Quinn, the executive director at the Bank of England responsible for banking supervision and operations, said today that he did not see signs of tight credit in Britain.
Speaking at a banking conference in London, Mr.
Quinn said demand for credit in Britain had slowed in recent months, and anecdotal evidence suggested that banks had the capital to lend, but that there were not many creditworthy projects being proposed.
The central banker said it would be impossible to assess the true availability of credit to potential borrowers until demand for cash picked up.


Doskocil Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Amstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Thoroughbred Breeders reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Care Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Portage Industries Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Corona reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


House Panel Votes Deposit Insurance Funds
While President Bush lobbied the Senate for passage of broader banking legislation, a House committee passed a streamlined bill today that primarily provides billions of dollars in taxpayer loans to the nearly empty fund that insures bank deposits.
The House banking measure, the third addressed by lawmakers in three weeks, cleared the Banking Commitee by a vote of 44 to 7 and is scheduled for a vote by the full House on Thursday.
It provides for tens of billions of dollars for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, more Government oversight of banks and new authority for regulators to seize ailing institutions before they become insolvent.
It also limits the ability of banks to enter the insurance business and make real estate investments, provisions that have drawn strong opposition from the American Bankers Association.


Tape Release Delayed
The lawyer for ERIC RAMSEY said yesterday that he would not release any more of the former Auburn football player's secretly recorded tapes until after the Nov. 30 Alabama-Auburn game.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY CLASHING ARGUMENTS AT KAHANE TRIAL
Rabbi Meir Kahane was assassinated not by the Egyptian-born Muslim immigrant on trial, but by someone within his own militant anti-Arab movement, a defense lawyer suggested in his opening statement.
But prosecutors argued that in a bloody spree in a public area, the defendant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, left "one man dead, two wounded and many others shaken up." Page B3.


A Woman and Her Child Are Found Slain in Their Bronx Apartment


Adrian Quist, 78, Tennis Champion
Adrian Quist, a tennis star from Australia who captured Wimbledon doubles titles 15 years apart, died on Monday in a Sydney hospital.
He was 78 years old.
He had been ill with cancer for some time, hospital authorities in Australia said.
Mr.
Quist was Australia's top-ranked male player in 1936 and 1937, and was ranked fourth in the world in 1937.
He captured the doubles title in 10 consecutive Australian Opens, with D.P.
Turnbull twice and with John Bromwich eight times.


Channel One May Provide Program for Grade Schools
WHITTLE COMMUNICATIONS is considering the introduction of an elementary school version of Channel One, its controversial advertising-supported daily news program for high schools, media and advertising executives say.
If Whittle Communications, which specializes in creating alternative media properties for advertisers, proceeds with the project, these executives said, it might be called Big Picture Television.
The name comes from the Big Picture posters, signs that Whittle has installed in elementary schools for several years featuring advertisements alongside information.


His Two Worlds Are Worlds Apart
He may not have had the artistic impact of the composer Charles Ives and the poet Wallace Stevens, both versatile executives who juggled careers in insurance and the arts, but Julius R. Nasso's dual career has a similarly diverse flair.
Mr.
Nasso runs Universal Marine Medical Supplies, which he has built into the world's largest distributor of pharmaceuticals to ships, while helping produce action films like "Hard to Kill" and "Out for Justice."


Seeded Threesome Advances to Quarterfinals of Slims Tournament
It didn't happen like clockwork, but three seeded players performed and three seeded players prevailed, sort of, last night at the $3 million Virginia Slims Championships in Madison Square Garden.
Third-seeded Gabriela Sabatini was the most efficient of the trio: She unfurled ribbons of signature topspin and eventually wrapped up Katerina Maleeva, 6-3, 7-6 (7-4).
Sabatini served for the match twice and failed twice, which energized the Bulgarian and sent the encounter to a seesaw of a tie breaker where Sabatini fell behind, 4-1, before embarking on a 6-point rampage.


Jacobson Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Theater in Review
The Guise
Triplex Theater Borough of Manhattan Community College 199 Chambers Street Manhattan Through Sunday
By David Mowat; directed by Brian Astbury; assisted by Yvonne Bryceland; set and costumes, Katrina Lindsay; music, William Hetherington; stage manager, Tony Kerr.
Presented by Arts Threshold.
WITH: Tania-Jane Bowers, Karen Bowlas, Timothy Chipping, Karl Collins, Michael Hodgson, Carine Sinclair and Andrew Weale.
The liveliest scenes in "The Guise," David Mowat's dramatic satire on censorship past and present, imagine a 17th-century English king who, to the horror of his family and the court, commissions plays that are little more than live sex shows.
A bawdy excerpt from one, acted in pantomime by members of the Arts Threshold Company, shows milkmaids lustfully competing for the favors of a country bumpkin.
Timothy Chipping, portraying a monarch who is a composite of Charles I and Charles II, offers a ribald Falstaffian caricature of a royal sex maniac running amok.


Jacor Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mobile Telecommunications Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Whatever It Takes, Holyfield Delivers
Evander Holyfield, the undisputed heavyweight champion, knocked out James (Buster) Douglas for the title with a textbook-perfect right-hand counter punch.
Against George Foreman last April, Holyfield was not too proud to hold Big George late in the fight, when it was to his advantage.
Holyfield, who defends his title Saturday night against Bert Cooper in Atlanta, has made a habit of doing what it takes to win.
But he wasn't always as cool an operative as he is these days.


Accounts
*
Trock Food Corp., New York, to Campbell-Mithun-Esty, New York, for a new line of Nathan's Famous snack foods, licensed by Nathan's Famous Inc.
Billings have not yet been determined.
Campbell also handles the advertising for another brand licensed by Nathan's, Nathan's Famous Hot Dogs, produced by John Morrell &amp; Co.


Gambling Debate Rages Anew Over Sports
New Jersey's multibillion-dollar gambling industry says that, like the rest of the economy, it is ailing, and it wants to expand its base by legalizing sports betting.
The proposal has raised tempers as well as interest.
Bills introduced in the New Jersey Legislature to allow betting on sporting events at Atlantic City casinos and at race tracks have drawn strong opposition from the National Basketball Association, the National Football League, the New Jersey Nets basketball team and the New York Giants and Jets football teams.


A Champion of Authentic Thai Food Keeps Up the Battle
EVEN under the pressure of organizing a banquet in New York for Queen Sirikit of Thailand, Chalie Amatyakul moves calmly and smoothly, stirring a sauce, crushing some peanuts, bestowing a compliment.
He is immaculate in a black silk scarf, black pants and black and white shirt, somehow avoiding the spatters of grease that leap out of kitchen pots.
When a deep-fried egg looks more like a woven basket than fine lace, he tells the cook how it should be done.
Always, he is teaching.
Raised to be a diplomat in his native Thailand, Mr.
Chalie chose instead, after studying interior design in Vienna and literature in France, to work with food.


Giant Food Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Archive Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Ripken Outpolls Fielder in Winning M.V.P. Award
In a carbon-copy of last year's outcome, Cecil Fielder failed to win the American League most valuable player award yesterday.
Cal Ripken Jr. of Baltimore won the award for the second time, repeating his 1983 victory by earning 318 points to 286 for Fielder.
A year ago Rickey Henderson of Oakland received 317 points to 286 for the Detroit Tigers' remarkable slugger.
Fielder's failures point up the confusion that apparently exists in the minds of the voters, a 28-person panel made up of two members of the Baseball Writers Association of America from each league city who cast votes before the post-season begins.
Are they voting for the player with the best overall statistics or the player whose play was most valuable to his team?


Back to the Bush in Zaire
As his country collapses around him, President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire finds that even his old American friends have deserted him.
The only argument in Washington is whether he ought to be induced to share power in a transition regime or nudged aboard a midnight flight to exile.
A nudge to the exit is long overdue.
Elevated to power with Western help, Mr.
Mobutu in 26 years has amassed billions, including castles, palaces and luxurious estates in Europe.
Meantime, the people of Zaire are poorer today than when the former Belgian Congo became independent in 1960.


At Fraud Trial, 2 Portraits Given of Jersey City Mayor
Mayor Gerald McCann of Jersey City heard himself portrayed alternately today as the mastermind of a scheme that swindled a Florida savings and loan of more than $250,000 and as a businessman who had a disagreement with his partners over how he was to be paid.
The different pictures were presented in Federal District Court to a jury of six women and three men who will decide whether Mr.
McCann is guilty of fraud and tax charges that carry a maximum penalty of 76 years in prison and fines of more than $1 million.
A List of Purchases
The charges have nothing to do with Mr.
McCann's official duties, since they stem from his business activity between the end of his first term, in 1985, and the start of his current term, in 1989.


Canamax Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Falcon Cable Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Florio Going to the People In Drive to Improve Image
Stung and rejected by an electorate that he feels neither knows nor understands him, Gov.
Jim Florio is planning an ardent courtship over the airwaves and in public meetings in coming months to win back the the public's affection.
He will be on radio talk shows, conduct town meetings, hold office hours in city halls and courthouses and make impromptu visits to shopping malls and other public places, with or without the press in tow.


In Hartford, Debate Shifts To Address The Deficit
Angry and anxious lawmakers scrambled today to deal with what for some is a grim realization indeed: their broad and emotional special-session debate about repealing Connecticut's unpopular three-month-old income tax will now actually have to achieve something, thanks to Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.
Mr.
Weicker, who opposed the idea of even calling the special session, announced as the first meetings were to begin on Monday that a $175 million hole had emerged in the budget.
The Governor asked lawmakers to take up, along with their repeal activities, a series of fee increases and cuts in property-tax relief and local school aid.


Personal Health
POT belly, beer belly, love handles.
By any name, it's plain old fat.
And there is now undisputed evidence that this accumulation of fat around one's middle is a serious health risk even for otherwise lean men and women.
Upper-body fat, above the hips, seems to account for most of the life-threatening health hazards associated with obesity.
But there is also good news.
Reducing one's equatorial region results in changes in body chemistry that should greatly improve the chances of living a long and healthy life.
Apples and Pears
In the "apple," or android, pattern typical of men, most or all the excess weight sits above the hips in the upper body, giving the body a shape resembling an apple.
Men and women with this pattern often are quite lean below the waist and, when assessed with a tape measure, are shown to have a high waist-to-hip ratio.
In the "pear," or gynoid, pattern common among women, fat tends to accumulate around the hips, buttocks and thighs, giving the body a pear shape.


Review/Television; Submarines and the Men on Board
The striking thing about "Submarine: Steel Boats, Iron Men" is the list of underwriters.
Ready?
The hourlong documentary at 9 tonight on Channels 13 and 49 was paid for by Newport News Shipbuilding, Hughes Aircraft, GE Aerospace, General Dynamics, Lockheed, Rockwell International, IBM, Westinghouse and 11 other companies known better to the Pentagon than to the public.
Viewers like you?


Genesco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Prime Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


China, Too, Needs an Independent Judiciary; Cultural Exchange
To the Editor:
"Cultural Links With Chinese Are Eroding" (news article, Nov. 6) leaves the impression that the Center for United States-China Arts Exchange at Columbia University, of which I am director, has greatly curtailed its program with China and is just barely in operation.
On the contrary, the center is in the midst of vast expansion.


New Chairman Plans To Refocus Action Auto
Norton W. Rose has been elected chairman of Action Auto Rental, which provides rental cars mostly through insurance companies and auto repair shops, for drivers who have lost their vehicles through accidents, theft and other causes.
Mr.
Rose, who is 62, has spent more than 30 years in the retail and insurance industries, and he hopes to use his skills in marketing to help refocus Action and revive its sagging financial performance.
The privately held company based in Solon, Ohio, near Cleveland, lost $19 million in the first three quarters of 1991, compared with $7.9 million in the corresponding period of 1990.


International Power Machines Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coaches Surviving Amid the Rubble
When Bill Fitch and Dick Motta shook hands yesterday morning, as Fitch's Nets trudged off the Byrne Meadowlands Arena court after a shootaround and Motta's Sacramento Kings ambled on, the gesture represented a total of 41 years of National Basketball Association head-coaching experience.
Here were two from the old school, well-traveled veterans whose passion for their craft has never waned, evidenced by the grief both have undertaken in attempting to rebuild two of the league's worst franchises.


Japanese Buy Studio, and Coaching Starts
When Universal Pictures first agreed to make "Mr. Baseball," it was intended to be a broad comedy about a genial but boorish baseball player who, after being let go by the New York Yankees, joins a team in Japan and clashes head-on with Japan's devotion to martial spirit, group harmony, saving face, grueling workouts and love-hate feelings for foreigners.
Then last year the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company acquired MCA Inc., the owner of Universal.
Now the film is a more complex romantic tale of an athlete coming to terms with himself and Japan.
Accepting Japanese Ways
"Mr. Baseball" is the first movie about Japan produced by a Japanese-owned Hollywood studio and the first test of the Japanese promise to leave creative control in Hollywood.


Economic Scene; Pricing Insurers Out of Business
TO most Americans, government-dictated prices have always seemed like a variation on the theme of "Yes, we have no bananas." Price controls guaranteed that everything for sale would be affordable, while assuring there would hardly be anything to buy.
But this time, argues Orin Kramer, the head of a Princeton, N.J., consulting firm and the author of a new study of auto and workers' compensation insurance for the Insurance Information Institute, the joke is on us.
He contends that regulated rates are eroding the industry's capacity to pay out claims and are creating a crazy-quilt of subsidies in which low-risk consumers cover the expenses of high-risk consumers.
Perhaps more important, he says, price controls are masking the core problem of accident insurance, delaying the day when policy makers tackle escalating legal and medical costs.


Attacks From Congress and White House Cloud Fate of Accrediting Groups
Since the turn of the century, the responsibility for overseeing the quality of colleges, universities and many other types of educational institutions in this country has rested largely with a group of private accrediting associations, influential but generally obscure.
Within the last year, these accrediting groups have suddenly found their own performances coming under harsh attack, both from the Bush Administration and from members of Congress.
The weight of the combined assault has thrown the future of this century-old accreditation process into question for the first time.


Jamesway Corp. reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 2


Dean Is Appointed at Kennedy School
Albert Carnesale, an expert on arms control, was appointed dean of the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University today by Neil L. Rudenstine, Harvard's president.
Mr.
Carnesale had been the acting dean of the Kennedy School since July, when the previous dean, Robert Putnam, resigned suddenly to return to teaching and research.


Gold and Silver Prices Rise As Investors Seek Safety
Precious metal futures prices rallied yesterday as investors sought refuge from the tumbling stock market in the historically safe harbors of silver and gold.
On New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for delivery in December rose $2.90 to settle at $364.40 an ounce.
December silver climbed 4.5 cents, to $4.072 an ounce.


Freight Train Derails Near Mexican City, Killing at Least 25
A freight train lost its brakes as it approached the provincial city of Tehuacan today, derailed and plowed into a line of cars and trucks, killing and injuring scores of people, relief officials said.
Hours after the crash, disaster relief officials said they were still uncertain how many people had been injured and killed because victims were trapped beneath the train cars and their cargo.


Theater in Review
Iron Bars
Riverside Shakespeare Company Playhouse 91 316 East 91st Street Manhattan
Written by Arpad Goncz; translated by Katharina M. and Christopher C. Wilson; directed by Andre de Szekely and Laszlo Vamos; set by Bob Barnett; costumes by Pamela Scofield; lighting by Stephen J. Backo; music composed and arranged by Tommy Vig; production stage manager, Matthew G. Marholin.
WITH: Lisbeth Bartlett, Bruce Edward Barton, Mikel Borden, Peter Brown, Maureen Clarke, Dan Daily, Garry Goodrow, Brian Keane, David Lipman, Christopher Mixon, James Ryan, Richard Thomsen, Alice White and Mark Young.
Prison is the proper place for a poet of indifferent talents, Arpad Goncz seems to be saying in "Iron Bars." And he makes his point in a series of scenes filled with wry humor and irony.


Devlieg-Bullard Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Defense Suggests Kahane Was Killed by a Follower
Rabbi Meir Kahane was assassinated last year not by the Egyptian-born Muslim immigrant on trial, but by someone within his own militant, anti-Arab movement, a defense lawyer suggested to the jury yesterday in his opening statement.
Prosecutors in Manhattan Supreme Court argued that, in a bloody spree in a public area, the defendant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, left "one man dead, two wounded and many others shaken up." The lead prosecutor, William Greenbaum, did not attribute a motive to Mr.
Nosair.


Proffitt's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


VSE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bullets Sign Sampson
RALPH SAMPSON, a former All-Star who has had three knee operations, signed a one-year contract with the Washington Bullets yesterday.
No terms were disclosed.
Sampson was waived by the Sacramento Kings before the season began. (AP)


Corrections
A list of credits with a film review last Wednesday about "Beauty and the Beast," an animated feature from Walt Disney Pictures, omitted the art director.
He is Brian P. McEntee.


Mestek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bidding System For Treasuries
The Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve will set up the first part of a two- part automated bidding system for Treasury securities early next year, an official of the Public Securities Association said.
The automated system, made public yesterday, will replace the system now used in which bids for government securities are made in paper transactions, said Lee H. Olesky, assistant general counsel for the association.


Young and the Restless Exchange Greetings
The phones were quiet at the Giants' offices today.
Why not?
There was nothing to complain about.
"I have not written to you in several years because the Giants have been doing well," began a letter to General Manager George Young after the team lost two straight games recently.


Shevardnadze Returns as Soviet Foreign Minister
Eleven months after he resigned with a dramatic warning that a dictatorship was approaching, Eduard A. Shevardnadze returned today to head the Foreign Ministry as it prepared for a major reorganization and reduction.
Neither Mr.
Shevardnadze nor President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, who reappointed the Foreign Minister, made any immediate comment.
But a major move had been rumored after Russia and several other republics decided earlier this month to retain a Ministry of External Affairs as part of a sharply curtailed central government.


OVERRIDE BID FAILS
President Bush today vetoed legislation that would have allowed doctors and counselors in federally financed family planning clinics to discuss abortion with pregnant women.
Despite intense Democratic efforts, the House failed by 12 votes to override the veto.
The resulting vote, 276 to 156, was not only a victory for anti-abortion forces and Mr.
Bush but also a defeat for House Democratic leaders.
They had worked hard to persuade their rank and file to vote for the bill, both to sting Mr.
Bush with his first override and to maintain the party's alliance with abortion rights forces in the nation.


BUSINESS DIGEST
MARKETS
Stocks dropped steadily, until late buy orders trimmed the losses.
The Dow Jones industrial average, down as much as 78 points at one stage, closed off 41.15 points at 2,931.57.
The decline followed a tumble in the London market.  [ D1. ]
Credit markets were roiled by a sharp upward revision in the size of New York State's budget deficit.
It sent prices of the state's outstanding bond issues down sharply, and created a logjam in new municipal offerings.
New York City delayed an issue.  [ D16. ]
Yields on certificates of deposit dropped in the last week, with some below 4 percent.  [ D7. ]
The dollar tumbled against most major currencies, as traders responded to the slide in stock prices.  [ D18. ]
Precious metal futures rallied, with gold for December delivery up $2.90 a troy ounce to settle at $364.40 on the Comex.  [ D18. ] THE ECONOMY
A streamlined banking bill was reported out of the House Banking Committee, as President Bush lobbied the Senate for passage of broader banking legislation.
The House measure would provide billions of dollars in taxpayer loans to insure bank deposits.  [ D1. ]
The merchandise trade deficit widened to $6.79 billion in September, the biggest in eight months, the Commerce Department said.
That was 4 percent above August's revised $6.53 billion.  [ D2. ]
The oil industry will face costs of $15 billion to $23 billion a year by the late 1990's, as a result of new Federal regulations meant to reduce air pollution, oil spills and contamination of underground water supplies, the American Petroleum Institute predicted.  [ D2. ] COMPANIES
A $1 billion Government computer contract, one of the richest ever, has gone to two small companies, Compuadd of Austin, Tex., and Sysorex Information Systems of Falls Church, Va.  [ D1. ]
McDonnell Douglas announced a preliminary agreement to sell 40 percent of its commercial aircraft to Taiwan Aerospace for $2 billion.  [ D1. ]
Cray Research introduced its most powerful supercomputer yet.
It can compute at four times the speed of the company's most powerful present systems.  [ D6. ]
A loan to one of the late Robert Maxwell's companies, is under investigation by Britain's Serious Fraud Office.
That news and a negative credit development depressed shares of both Maxwell Communication and Maxwell's banking creditors.  [ D4. ]
British Airways is negotiating a takeover of KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, a Dutch transport workers union said.  [ D4. ]
BellSouth said it won Australian rights for telecommunications services.
It was part of a three-nation consortium that includes Cable and Wireless of Britain.
The group bid $640 million.  [ D4. ] TECHNOLOGY
M.I.T. and private industry are in partnership to put traffic-management theories to work for America's 135 million cars.
Congress is paying for highway-automation research.  [ D1. ]
Comnetix Computer Systems of Canada has given police on-screen mug shots that match a suspect's description.  [ D9. ] TODAY'S COLUMNS
Insurance price controls are masking the core problem of rising accident insurance costs, delaying action by policy makers, a Princeton consultant argues.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Creditors of the bankrupt companies that own A.&amp;S., Rich's and Bloomingdale's will get 80.6 million shares in a new Federated Department Stores.
The value is disputed.
Market Place.  [ D10. ]
Whittle Communications is said to be considering introducing an elementary school version of Channel One, its controversial advertising-supported daily news program for high schools.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D22. ]


Nymagic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


All American Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Germans Decrease Bottle Size For Wine
IN a new effort to stem sliding sales of German wines in the United States, six major German producers have turned to smaller bottles in hopes of appealing to American's concerns about health.
The producers have shipped to the East Coast seven white wines from the highly touted 1990 vintage in 500-milliliter bottles.
These bottles hold nearly 17 ounces of wine as against the 25.4 in standard 750-milliliter bottles, and are being sold at reduced prices.
They give two people two glasses of wine each.


Coho Resources Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Maynard Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kenya Leader Ousts Aide Tied to Killing
Under pressure from democracy advocates at home and aid donors abroad, President Daniel arap Moi today dismissed his closest colleague, Industry Minister Nicholas Biwott, who on Monday was identified in a judicial inquiry here as a prime suspect in the slaying of Kenya's Foreign Minister last year.
Mr.
Biwott, who has long been linked with corruption, had built an aura of invincibility and fear around him that made most Kenyans believe he was untouchable.
But the accusations of corruption against him and his identification as a murder suspect by a British detective made his dismissal essential for Mr.
Moi's own political survival, Kenyan politicians and foreign diplomats said.


New Supercomputer From Cray Research
Even as Cray Research Inc. introduced its most powerful supercomputer yet yesterday, industry executives and scientists said the machine marked the end of an era for a class of computers pioneered in the 1970's by the company's founder, Seymour Cray.
The newest Cray Research supercomputer, the Y-MP C90, uses up to 16 processors and can compute at four times the speed of the most powerful systems now marketed by the Eagan, Minn., company.


Tenney Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Indiana Financial Investors reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


M.D.C. Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lebanese Army Enters Zone In South Held by U.N. Force
The Lebanese Army widened its deployment in southern Lebanon today by sending troops into a village within the zone of operations of the United Nations force, a move thath brought it closer to the lines held by Israel.


DRUG LEADER TELLS OF NORIEGA PACT
The only founding member of the Medellin drug cartel ever to be convicted in an American court took the witness stand today in the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.
He testified that the former Panamanian leader sold the cartel the use of his country in return for a share of the profits from every pound of cocaine shipped from Panama and of every dollar laundered there.
Amid heavy security, the witness, Carlos Lehder Rivas, who in 1988 was convicted of 11 counts of drug smuggling and sentenced to a prison term of life plus 135 years, said General Noriega first presented the cartel with an offer to "build a cocaine pipeline to the United States" early in 1982, when he was head of intelligence and narcotics enforcement for the Panamanian armed forces.
Mr.
Lehder said the agreement that was soon reached was essential to the success of the Medellin group, which had just been formed.


Tom Brown Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ezcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Worldwide Computer Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charter Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quotation of the Day
"People always walk by and say, 'A black square -- isn't that stupid? I could do that.' Many times I've brought them back and showed them why they couldn't." -- JOSE RAFAEL HEREDIA, a guard at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City.  [ B1:2. ]


Rounding Up the Usual Suspects, on a Screen
A Canadian computer company has given police detectives a new way to crack their toughest cases.
As depicted in the movies, a bewildered victim can spend hours poring over mug books in an effort to identify a criminal.
Now Comnetix Computer Systems of Mississauga, Ontario, has replaced the mug book with a Next Computer Inc. work station and custom software.


Hughes Supply reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Auto-Trol Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A University Offers Food For Thought
AN ardent new suitor has been pounding on the doors of academia at Boston University.
But the question being asked is this: Can a marriage between food and traditional academic scholarship really work?


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
The other afternoon I spotted Vic Damone and Diahann Carroll on West End Avenue and 86th Street.
I was excited about seeing these two stars but there was no one around to share it with.
Finally, a 30-ish woman passed them and when we came face to face I said, "Do you know who those two people are?"


Herley Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Stocks Drop Again; Dow Loses 41 Points
Stock prices took another buffeting yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrials skidding 78 points before regaining some ground.
At the close, the average was 2,931.57, off 41.15, or 1.4 percent.
In contrast to Friday's 120- point plunge, yesterday's decline came with most large professional traders on the sidelines.


Bonray Drilling reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bankers Trust Fills Private Banking Post
As the American population grows older and the number of wealthy individuals increases, bankers across the country are betting that their "private banking" services will become more important, and, it is hoped, more profitable.
At the Bankers Trust Company, the New York bank, the anticipation of future opportunities led to the hiring of Mary B. Lehman, an experienced private banker who was named head of the domestic private bank and senior vice president.
Ms.
Lehman, who is 45 years old, will report to Neal F. Finnegan, head of the private banking group, which currently manages more than $23 billion of assets.


Kiddie Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


At a Tax Auction on Long Island, Opportunity and Anguish
The auctioneer, Roger Munz, pounded his hammer on the podium beneath the mirrors and chandeliers of the Grand Salon of the Radisson Hotel here, and a buzz went through the crowd of speculators and homebuyers as Suffolk County's hard-pressed treasury racked up yet another $55,000 sale.
But as bidding paddles floated merrily above the crowd, Richard McFarland sat a hundred miles away outside the battered, white frame house he built four decades ago on a wooded back road in East Hampton, wondering where he might live next.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about indictments of officials of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International referred incorrectly to the American Government's relations with Pakistan.
There is an extradition treaty, though it is seldom used.
Robert S. Mueller 3d, a Justice Department official who was quoted as saying there was no such treaty, misspoke, his spokesman said yesterday.


7-Alarm Fire Closes Highway in Philadelphia


Rauch Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Date Rape Hysteria
In classrooms and journals, in lectures and coffee shops, academics everywhere are talking about rape.
Although it wears a fashionable leftist mask, this is a neo-puritan preoccupation.
While real women get battered, while real mothers need day care, certain feminists are busy turning rape into fiction.
Every time one Henry James character seizes the hand of another Henry James character, someone is calling it rape.
At a certain point the metaphor gets paranoid.
An overused word, like an over-painted sunset, becomes a cliche, drained of specificity and meaning.
With every new article on rape imagery, we threaten to confirm the vision of that 18th-century patriarch, Henry Fielding, when he wrote, "These words of exclamation (murder! robbery! rape!) are used by ladies in a fright, as fa la la . . . are in music, only as vehicles of sound and without any fixed idea."


Two Small Companies Win Big Federal Computer Bid
Two lesser-known, privately held computer companies have been awarded one of the richest Government computer contracts ever, estimated to be worth at least $1 billion.
The award is for a three-year order to supply the Department of Defense with as many as 300,000 high-powered desktop computers and related software and services.
The Compuadd Corporation of Austin and Sysorex Information Systems Inc. of Falls Church, Va., will share the contract, known as Desktop IV.
Twenty-two companies, most of them far larger and better known, had bid on the lucrative project.
The contract was awarded Nov. 15 by the Air Force Standard Systems Center at Gunter Air Force Base, Ala., but not reported until Monday.


Glamis Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CUOMO AIDES SEE DOUBLING OF GAP IN ALBANY BUDGET
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's budget office said today that the gap in the coming state budget may rise to $3.6 billion, double its previous estimate, or more than 10 percent of total projected spending.
Officials said they based the new figure on forecasts that the state and national economies would take still another turn for the worse, depressing tax collections and increasing spending on social services.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  REPUBLICS BACK SOVIET DEBT
As hopes for emergency aid snagged on an internal dispute over past Soviet debt, eight Soviet republics were reported in agreement that they would shoulder the entire Soviet debt if necessary to protect their remaining credibility.
Page A1


Israelis Worry That Their Troops Missing in Action Will Be Ignored
Senior Israeli officials said today that they were counting on an ultimate Middle East hostage deal to include the return of Israeli servicemen missing in Lebanon, or at least information on their whereabouts.
Their remarks suggested that some concern had set in here that the missing Israelis might get lost in the shuffle as hopes rise for a swift release of the remaining Western hostages in Lebanon.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 15
Nov. 8
Nov. 16
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
6.8
6.7
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
2.8
Gasoline stocks
197.4
200.2
217.3
Distillate stocks
136.1
133.5
134.6
Crude imports, daily
5.6
5.8
5.2
Product imports, daily
2.2
1.9
1.3
Crude stocks
352.5
346.5
341.2
Crude production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
82.3
81.5
83.2
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Europa Cruises Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Soviet Junkets to U.S.: Embassy Loses Track
The chandeliers glittered and the long black limousines were double-parked at the Soviet Embassy the other night.
It might have been any Moscow-style official reception -- except for the priests and nuns, and the resplendant figure in white and gold robes at the head of the receiving line.
The Soviet Embassy was honoring Aleksy II, Patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church and critic of the failed August coup.
In this new atmosphere, the American Orthodox clergy had come to pay homage to the Patriarch's political independence.


60-Minute Gourmet
THIS time of year, collective culinary heads strain for new angles to the Thanksgiving celebration, particularly as it applies to the turkey.
Fortunately, turkey meat is highly adaptable to all kinds of recipes.
It can be substituted for veal scallopine, chicken breast and can even be used in some recipes that call for pork or red meat.
One of the more compelling uses of turkey is Mexican in origin.
It is essentially a pie made from layers of soft corn tortillas, turkey meat and green peppers, then more tortillas, and so on.
An earthy pepper sauce binds it all.


Robert Newbegin, 86, A Former Ambassador
Robert Newbegin, a retired Foreign Service officer and former United States Ambassador to Honduras and Haiti, died Friday at his home in Jaffrey Center, N.H.
Mr.
Newbegin, who also lived in Washington, was 86 years old.
Born in Bangor, Me., he grew up in Cambridge, Mass., and graduated from Yale University in 1927.
He entered the Foreign Service in 1929 and served in Berlin, Montevideo, Mexico City, Istanbul, Ankara, Ciudad Trujillo, Bogota and Paris, as well as Washington.


Launching of Shuttle Postponed for Up to a Week
The planned launching of the space shuttle Atlantis today was postponed for up to a week because of a faulty navigational unit on a rocket that will be carried aloft to propel a satellite into orbit.
Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration called off the flight this morning, shortly before technicians were to start loading fuel into the shuttle's external tank for a planned evening flight carrying a military watchdog satellite.


Defender, Critic, Watcher: All in One at the Modern
The standard college textbook H. W. Janson's "History of Art" defines a masterpiece as a work that "can bear the closest scrutiny and withstand the test of time." This is a difficult test to use for modern art, which by definition has not been around for long, but there is one group of arbiters singularly qualified to apply it.
The guards at the Museum of Modern Art calmly scrutinize all day long while everyone else wanders by in states of rapture, confusion and fatigue.
They stand there patiently listening to all the critics, to the experts who come through giving guided tours as well as to the parents who keep muttering about similarities between what is on the museum wall and what is on the refrigerator back home.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL PLAYER RELATIONS COMMITTEE
Named Richard Ravitch president and chief executive officer. National League
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Named Tom Spencer third base coach.
Asked waivers on Jim Corsi and Dwayne Henry, pitchers; Jose Tolentino, infielder; and Javier Ortiz, outfielder; for the purpose of giving them their unconditional releases.
NEW YORK METS -- Added Julian Vasquez and Joe Vitko, pitchers; Brook Fordyce, catcher; Tito Navarro, infielder; and Patrick Howell, outfielder; to the 40-man roster.
Sent Blaine Beatty, pitcher, and Chuck Carr, outfielder, outright to Tidewater of the International League.
Named Rafael Landestoy, minor league infield and base-running instructor; Tom Romenesko, scout; and Jim Duquette administrative assistant for the minor leagues.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Signed Luc Longley, center, to a 4-year contract.
Continental Basketball Association
ALBANY PATROONS -- Signed Royce Jeffries, forward. Waived Kevin McDuffie, center.
GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Signed James Sanders, guard. Waived Darryl Odom, guard.


A Big, Shiny Red Sled Built to Deliver Medals
Advice to overseas travelers wishing to ship a 550-pound, four-man bobsled by air: It's cheaper to do it from Montreal instead of New York.
That's one of the many facts that Jerry Malinowsky learned about American Olympic life since he decided in 1984 to build a bobsled to help his countrymen to go faster in the Olympics.


CHRONICLE
Quite a crew of former editors of Mademoiselle magazine turned out for an unusual reunion last evening at the Royalton Hotel in Manhattan.
Among them were four publishers, an editor in chief, managing editors and people from all rungs of the masthead from 1935 to 1980.


Serv-Tech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Federated Stock: Dispute on Value
IN these bleak times for traditional department stores, a large stock offering by such a retailer is unlikely to set off a stampede of investors.
But early next year, some investors are likely to receive 80.6 million new shares in the company that owns Abraham &amp; Straus, Rich's and Bloomingdale's.
They do not have any choice.
These reluctant shareholders are the creditors of the Federated and Allied department store chains, which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in January 1990 after their costly acquisition by the Campeau Corporation.


CMS/Data Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dawn Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kinder-Care Learning Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 4


China, Too, Needs an Independent Judiciary
To the Editor:
As a native of Beijing, who will have the honor of serving a one-year clerkship for a Federal district judge upon graduation from law school in 1992, I could not agree more with the farsighted viewpoint outlined by Judge Stephen Breyer in "Russian Judges Want Real Justice" (Op-Ed, Oct. 30).
He calls for the United States to help create an independent Russian judiciary.


Income Opportunity Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Digital Metcom reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


General Magnaplate reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Oil Industry Says Regulations Will Cost Up to $23 Billion
New Federal regulations meant to reduce air pollution, oil spills and contamination of underground water supplies will cost the oil industry $15 billion to $23 billion a year by the late 1990's, the American Petroleum Institute predicted today.
It is not clear how these estimated costs would be divided among gasoline, diesel fuel and other products made from oil.
If they were spread evenly, the higher figure represents a cost of about 10 cents a gallon, said Michael E. Canes, the institute's vice president of statistics, analysis and information systems.
At a news conference at the institute's annual meeting here, Mr.
Canes called the $23 billion figure high, but "not a number completely out of historic context."


Centennial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Transportation Workers Putting Pressure on the Transit Authority


Kenwin Shops Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


In Surprise, Victim Testifies Miller's Work Was 'Great'
A real-estate investor portrayed by prosecutors as a victim of fraud instead testified yesterday that he was quite satisfied with the purchase of 114 cooperative apartments that Mel Miller negotiated for him, adding that he would be willing to hire Mr.
Miller as a lawyer today.
Charges that the investor was defrauded are central to the trial of Mr.
Miller, the Speaker of the New York State Assembly, and his law partner, Jay Adolf, in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Thanksgiving Blessing for the Cook: Takeout, With Seconds on Tradition
THANKSGIVING dinner must taste sweet, rich, spicy and above all homemade.
But today, many Americans proudly spread an array of old-fashioned home-style dishes on the holiday table without doing all the cooking themselves.
"I like to do enough to feel I've created the dinner, but I'm not willing to submerge myself in it for the days and weeks it takes to do it all," said Marcia Stein, the associate executive director of the 92d Street Y, who serves a big family Thanksgiving dinner every other year at her house in Huntington, L.I.
"I usually buy prepared stuffing and some of the desserts."


Two Sides in Salvador Trade Charges on Fighting
The Salvadoran Army and the rebel Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front accused each other today of responsibility for the scattered resurgence of combat since a truce went into effect on Saturday.
The army reported one fatal clash in which four soldiers and two guerrillas died on Sunday, while the guerrilla radio asserted that rebels had also killed a soldier on Saturday morning.


Motor Club of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Epitope Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ravitch Will Now Take The Train to a New Game
Richard Ravitch, a lawyer widely known in New York business, civic and political circles, became the No. 1 labor executive for baseball's club owners yesterday.
His appointment, which had been expected, raised questions on two fronts.
*Given that he was hired at a salary said to be $750,000, which would be $100,000 more than Commissioner Fay Vincent's salary, were the owners sending the commissioner a message that he should stay out of labor relations?


New York State's Bonds Plunge
A sharp upward revision in the size of New York State's budget deficit for the current and coming fiscal years sent prices of the state's outstanding bond issues sharply lower yesterday.
The effect of the new figures helped to create a logjam in what had been expected to be a record week of new offerings in the tax-exempt municipal bond market.


Dow Loses 41.15 After Skid Slows
Steady selling carved as much as 78 points from the Dow Jones industrial average yesterday, before buyers stepped in late in the day to stem the decline.
The Dow ended the session down 41.15 points, to 2,931.57.
The decline was marked by a grim but orderly retreat in contrast to the hectic tumble on Friday, as the big professional traders stayed largely on the sidelines.


2 Senators Seek to Revive Plan to Divert Pentagon Funds to Soviets
In an effort to break a political impasse, two senior Senators said today that they had agreed to urge bipartisan revival of a plan to use up to $1 billion from the defense budget to aid the Soviet Union.
"Let's take the pledge" to avoid injecting the issue into the 1992 campaign, David L. Boren, an Oklahoma Democrat and a senior member of the Senate Agriculture Committee, said in outlining the initiative.
"It matters too much for any of us to take cheap shots and make it a campaign issue."


How a Soviet Group Lured Opportunity
Last November, the Soviet violinist Vladimir Spivakov and his chamber orchestra, the Moscow Virtuosi, began an experiment that would have been unthinkable when the ensemble was formed in 1979.
The 26 musicians, along with 125 relatives and 6 teachers from the Moscow Conservatory, moved to Oviedo in northwestern Spain.
They did not emigrate.
The ensemble, which Mr.
Spivakov is conducting tonight at Carnegie Hall, has kept its Russian name.
Its players are still Soviet citizens, and they returned to their country for performances in the spring.


Books of The Times; Changing Race Relations In a Georgia County
Praying for Sheetrock  A Work of Nonfiction  By Melissa Fay Greene  337 pages.
Addison-Wesley. $21.95
The title page of "Praying for Sheetrock" by Melissa Fay Greene includes the line "A Work of Nonfiction" for good reason.
The personalities in this remarkable book are like Faulknerian characters.
The lost cause of the Confederacy is still alive in one of the Deep South backwaters of apartheid that hasn't caught up with Federal civil rights laws.
Despite what seems remote in time and place, the stories of the characters strike the core of racial prejudice that Gunnar Myrdal called "An American Dilemma" more than half a century ago.


Navigators Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


When a Man Became Head of Bryn Mawr
To the Editor:
Harris Wofford, winner of the election for the Senate in Pennsylvania over Dick Thornburgh, was not, as you report (profile, Nov. 6), "the first male president of Bryn Mawr College since its inception."


Abortion Doctor Charged


DEAD SEA SCROLLS TO BE PUBLISHED
Through a covert operation that could be straight out of a spy novel, two biblical scholars have gained access to photographs of what they believe are all the remaining unpublished Dead Sea Scrolls, ancient documents that bear on the formative years of Christianity and modern Judaism.
They announced yesterday that the 1,787 photographs of the precious documents would be published in a two-volume work by the Biblical Archeology Society.
The books are being bound and should be available in two weeks.


Lineman For Lions Is Paralyzed Below Chest
Mike Utley of the Detroit Lions will be paralyzed from the chest down, his doctors said yesterday, but should retain the major use of his hands and arms.
"It's really too early to tell, but he should be able to lead a full, productive life," said Dr.
Phillip Mayer, the chief of spinal injuries at Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit.
He operated on Utley on Monday, a day after the 6-foot-6-inch, 290-pound guard fractured a vertebra and suffered a severe spinal-cord injury when his head slammed into the artificial turf in the Pontiac Silverdome during a game against the Los Angeles Rams.


Offering a Jeweled Hand To Remorseful Thieves
IT seems like a situation comedy nobody would believe.
The heroine is a rich, sophisticated woman oddly dedicated to helping prisoners.
She visits them in her limousine, brings chefs from the fanciest restaurants to teach them the mysteries of souffles, sends them postcards from her hideaway in the South of France.
But Barbara Margolis has come to realize that too many prisoners revert to crime almost upon release.
They then end up back in jail in a ceaseless pattern.
What to do but found Jail Anonymous?


Study Says Drug Reduces Fat Deposits in Arteries
A major new study of a cholesterol-lowering drug has found that it can shrink the fatty deposits in coronary arteries that are linked to heart attacks.
The findings, in a study of the drug lovastatin, hold the promise that significant progress can ultimately be made in reducing the toll from heart disease, the leading killer in the United States and most developed countries.


Everest &amp; Jennings International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


China, Too, Needs an Independent Judiciary; Keep Up the Pressure
To the Editor:
Robert L. Bernstein asserts in "China Needs Human Rights Pressure" (letter, Oct. 31) that various forms of pressure on China to improve human rights conditions are advisable and have begun to prove effective.
He is, however, wrong to dismiss the suggestion that imposing economic sanctions against China could have a negative effect on China's strongholds of economic reform.


Progroup Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Alton Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
Action Against Cranston
Ending a long inquiry on Senator Alan Cranston, the Senate Ethics Committee agreed to rebuke him for his aid to the savings and loan executive Charles H. Keating Jr.
Page A22.
House Panel Backs Bank Bill
A streamlined banking bill was approved by a House committee to provide billions of dollars in taxpayer loans to the F.D.I.C.
Page D1.
The Lure of Catholic Schools
Research confirms what many inner-city parents believe: their children will do better in Catholic schools than in public school.
Education, page B8.
In the Eye of the Beholder
Nobody spends more time looking at paintings than the guards at the Museum of Modern Art, where locker-room talk turns to Dali.
Page B1.


On the Past and Future of a Politician: Was Duke Made for TV, or Made by It?
"Take it from someone who has spent most of his adult life working in this medium," said Ted Koppel at the beginning of the ABC News program "Nightline" on Friday night.
"Television and David Duke were made for each other."
The words, coming as Mr.
Duke got a half-hour of free time on the eve of the election for Louisiana governor, may be truer than he meant them to be.
Despite his railing against "the liberal media," Mr.
Duke's evolution from a lifetime at the fringes of racial politics to a new life as an aspiring national politician is largely the result of his symbiotic relationship with broadcast journalism.
And, some analysts say, his future in politics may depend in good measure on how television continues to treat him.


Met Museum Planning Center for Its Textiles
The Metropolitan Museum of Art is planning to construct the world's largest and most sophisticated textile conservation center, able to handle weavings dating from 4000 B.C. to the present, the museum's director, Philippe de Montebello, announced this week.
The 23,000-square-foot center, which Mr. de Montebello said would enable the Met to use its textile collections "to their fullest potential," is to cost $10 million and is to be completed in 1995.
It will be named the Antonio Ratti Textile Center after its principal benefactor, the 76-year-old founder and president of the Ratti Group of Como, Italy, the world's largest producer of printed silk fabrics.


The 3 Networks Vie for Wednesday Supremacy
CBS's decision this week to acquire "Davis Rules," a series previously owned by ABC, is the latest indication of the lengths network programmers are going to as they try to tune up their schedules.
It is also evidence of how much attention all three networks are paying to Wednesday night, the only night that is, as Peter Tortorici of CBS put it, "a jump ball": not dominated by one network.
Mr.
Tortorici, CBS's executive vice president for programming and the person in charge of the network's prime-time scheduling, is one of the players looking to grab the ball and run with it.


2 Florida-Bound Jets Bump at La Guardia
Two airplanes bound for Florida bumped wings on the runway of La Guardia Airport last night, causing no injuries but forcing the cancellation of both flights, a Port Authority spokesman said.
The right wing tip of a Delta 767 wide-body jet, flight 1162 to Orlando, and the left stabilizer of a smaller 757 American Airlines jet, flight 711 to Miami, bumped at 6:15 P.M. as the Delta plane was taxiing out, said the spokesman, Tom Middlemis.


Dayton Hudson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


SALVADOR OFFICERS DENY SLAYING ROLE
El Salvador's two top military men today denied the allegation of a panel of United States Congressional Democrats that they took part in planning the killing of six Jesuit priests in 1989.
"We energetically reject these imputations, which are based on speculation that lacks any evidence," Gen.
Rene Emilio Ponce, the Defense Minister, said in a statement he read on behalf of himself and his deputy minister, Gen.
Juan Orlando Zepeda.


Thousands Flee Croat City Captured by Yugoslav Army


Beijing Journal; Writer, Scolded, Plays His Ace With a Lawsuit
Purges in China used to be simple: the Communist Party pounced on a "rightist," denounced him and forced humiliating confessions from him, and then either imprisoned him or else hacked out his dignity and left him cowering silently.
So these days, much of Beijing's intellectual and cultural world is transfixed by the remarkable spectacle of a victim fighting back, particularly because he is one of China's most celebrated writers and a former Minister of Culture.
The battle is being fought with the subtle gestures of a Beijing opera, but there is little doubt that what is fundamentally at stake is the amount of cultural freedom that the Government will allow.


Sour-Shooting Knicks Keep On Stumbling
It took a 17-point deficit and almost three quarters of basketball to awaken the Knicks tonight.
By then, it was much too late.
Unfazed by New York's second-half rally, the Houston Rockets cruised to a 90-79 victory at the Summit.
It was the Knicks' third straight loss and kept them without a victory on the road (0-5) this season.
And they still have two games remaining on this five-game road trip.
It was New York's lowest point total since April 12, 1986, when the Knicks lost by 116-78 in Milwaukee against the Bucks.


Evaluation for Johnson
MAGIC JOHNSON has undergone an initial medical evaluation that revealed no signs or symptoms of AIDS, his agent, LON ROSEN, said yesterday.


C.D.'s and Bank Funds Fall
Yields on deposit accounts ended lower in the last week, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest rate publication.
Robert K. Heady, the publisher, said yesterday that he thought the current down cycle in savings yields "still has four to six weeks to go before playing itself out."


Environmental Control Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Stingley's Message To Utley
SILENCE. The scene is always surrounded at first by a hush, then by silence.
Down on the football field a player isn't moving.
He's stretched out with doctors and trainers kneeling, talking to him.
He's not moving.
That's when the hush turns into silence because the spectators know that it's not just another torn knee or busted shoulder.
They know it's football's most dreaded injury.
They know it's a damaged neck.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about a live-poultry market in the East New York section of Brooklyn misidentified a nearby housing project.
It is the Van Dyke Houses.
In addition, a picture caption misidentified a clerk at the store.
He is Pablo Gomez.


Famous Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 6


CHRONICLE
It was to have been a busy week for ALEXANDRA DANILOVA, the legendary former ballerina -- the opening night gala at the New York City Ballet last night, a celebration of her birthday with friends in a restaurant tonight, and a birthday party on Saturday for 65 guests at the home of JOHN and ANNE BELLE.


Astrosystems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Genovese Drug Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 8


El Paso Refinery L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.68
4.75
7.56
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.54
4.59
7.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.57
4.63
7.06
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.96
6.94
8.18
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.91
7.84
8.45
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
8.85
9.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.87
6.85
7.49
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Delay in Bush Re-election Bid Sets Off White House Tussle
Despite nudging from fellow Republicans, President Bush still has not named his re-election team, and the delay is feeding a vitriolic struggle for control of the campaign as well as a new round of backstage attacks on John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff.
Mr.
Bush's inaction in the face of steadily bad economic news has underscored the absence of the strong team that guided his 1988 campaign, as well as the growing problem of building a team around Mr.
Sununu, whose brusque style has alienated much of the Cabinet, many of the President's political associates and even members of Mr.
Bush's family.
Two Advisers Concerned
Mr.
Sununu has heightened the political tension by spreading the word that he will run the 1992 campaign from the White House, alarming Robert M. Teeter and Fred Malek, two close advisers who expect to be named co-managers of the re-election campaign, Republican strategists and Administration officials say.


Court Approves Heileman's Plan
A Federal Bankruptcy Court judge approved a reorganization plan for the G. Heileman Brewery Company, whose labels include Colt 45, Black Label and Blatz.
Heileman, based in La Crosse, Wis., filed for Chapter 11 protection from creditors in January.


Berkshire Hathaway Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Earth Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


After 2 Years, Couple Can Give New York a School
A wealthy couple who have tried for two years to give the threadbare New York City school system a new school will finally get to do so.
Joseph H. Reich, an investment banker, and his wife, Carol, came before the Board of Education yesterday and were showered with gratitude, the kind of reaction they rarely got from lower-level bureaucrats who kept looking their gift horse -- a school building in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and a $1 million investment -- in the mouth.


All Rooms Here Are A Stage
WHAT happens when a fashion designer designs a room?
The answer is theater, as evidenced by the exhibition "Decoration -- Haute Couture" at the Design and Decoration Building in the Pimlico district here.
The show, which opened on Nov. 13 with a benefit for Crusaid, a London charity that works with people with AIDS, will be on view through Dec. 20.


Phillips Chief to Head Petroleum Institute
When the American Petroleum Institute met earlier this week in Houston, its directors elected C. J. Silas, the chairman and chief executive of the Phillips Petroleum Company, as its next chairman.
But given the problems that the oil industry faces, new regulations under the Clean Air Act and a recent defeat in gaining access to the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska chief among them, Mr.
Silas said jokingly that he was tempted to demand a recount.
On Jan. 1, Mr.
Silas will succeed Allen E. Murray, the chairman of the Mobil Corporation.
The American Petroleum Institute is the industry's leading trade association, and its chairman is usually the head of a large oil company.


Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Cascade International's board met in an emergency session and stunned its big investors by announcing that its chairman and chief executive, Victor G. Incendy, had vanished -- leaving investors with red ink and red faces all along Wall Street.  [ Page A1. ]


Shevardnadze Fears a Revival of Dictatorship
Eduard A. Shevardnadze, reappointed as Foreign Minister of what he himself terms "the former Soviet Union," said today that the danger of a return to totalitarian dictatorship was even greater today than at the time of the failed Kremlin coup in August.
"I would say the threat is greater today than before the putsch," Mr.
Shevardnadze declared in an interview with French television.
He cited the worsening of economic and political conditions as well as the persistence of hard-line hopes for the revival of dictatorship.


New-Home Building Up by 7.3%
In one of the few recent bits of upbeat figures on the economy, builders broke ground for new homes last month at the fastest pace in nearly a year and 7.3 percent above that of September, the Government reported today.
Permits for future construction, moreover, posted their second straight solid advance, suggesting that starts will continue what until now has been a slow but persistent rise and reinvigorate a feeble recovery.


Hawkins Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Moleculon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mylex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Barr Is Confirmed on Voice Vote As 77th Attorney General of U.S.
The Senate today confirmed William P. Barr as the country's 77th Attorney General in a voice vote after lawmakers in both political parties praised his appointment to head the Justice Department.
Mr.
Barr, a 41-year-old career lawyer from New York City, who has been Acting Attorney General since August, glided through his confirmation hearings, defending the Justice Department's heavily criticized investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
He also said he would step up the department's anti-drug activities, vigorously attack violent crime and intensify enforcement of civil rights laws.


EXECUTIVES
*
BOC Health Care Inc., Murray Hill, N.J., a medical equipment and pharmaceuticals unit of BOC Group P.L.C., named Dr.
Roger G. Stoll president and chief executive. *
Dorf &amp; Stanton Communications Inc., New York, a unit of Shandwick P.L.C., the public relations consultants, named Alex Stanton chief executive.
He also remains president.


Journey's End Corp. reports earnings for Year to July 31


Review/Opera; Monteverdi's 'Poppea,' In English
When a relatively new, small opera company established to provide a forum for aspiring performers mounts a large, complex and stylistically problematic work, some amateurism is to be expected.
But in the current production of Monteverdi's "Coronation of Poppea" by the Hell's Kitchen Opera at St.
Mary the Virgin Church, the good efforts of a few talented youngsters are compromised chiefly by the inexplicable laissez-faire approach of Timothy Vernon, an opera conductor of some experience.
Or at least they were at the second performance, on Saturday evening.
Mr.
Vernon, who shared the extensive harpsichord accompaniments with Connie Prener, spent much of the remaining time sitting idle, with his head buried in the score, as stoical as the onstage Seneca.
The singers, meanwhile, repeatedly tumbled off pitch or out of synch with one another and with the instruments (six strings in addition to the harpsichords).


Reflectone Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Comarco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3


Avalon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Gay Citizens, Unexpected Justice
Denis Taska leaned over the horseshoe bar in the Magic Touch in Jackson Heights yesterday afternoon and with the bartender, Tom Grimaldi, rattled off the names of men they knew who had been beaten for no other reason than that they were gay.
Billy. Little Bobby. Julio Rivera.


Money, Money and More Money
The Yankees, once the perennial leader in the salary standing, have become so cost conscious that during this past season -- from its opening to its close -- they dropped out of the historic group of teams that broke the million-dollar barrier.
On opening day, the Yankees were one of nine teams that had average salaries of more than $1 million.
As the season progressed, though, the Yankees shuffled their pitching staff, shedding Andy Hawkins and his $1,533,333 salary and adding three minimum-salaried rookies.
Their average wound up $933,897, which is 10th highest and just ahead of the Minnesota Twins, who won the World Series.


Corrections
A poster pictured last Friday, circulated in Jackson Heights, Queens, by a gay rights group in connection with the murder of Julio Rivera incorporated a photo provided to the group erroneously by the New York City Police Department.
The photo, at the right on the poster, showed Claudio Toribio, who has no connection with the Rivera case; it was not Esat Bici, a defendant.


Knicks Finally Get Victory On the Road
Patrick Ewing had been in this situation at least 100 times before.
The game was on the line.
The ball was in his hands.
And he was expected to deliver.
Tonight, Ewing came through with an exclamation point.
His game-winning 4-foot hook shot with 6.1 seconds remaining lifted the Knicks to an important 92-89 victory over the Dallas Mavericks at Reunion Arena.
After Ewing's basket, John Starks made a key defensive play, partially blocking a 24-foot jump shot by Rolando Blackman (25 points) with 2.5 seconds left.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE truths we tell our children are punctuated with lies.
We insist that their drawings are beautiful or that we are not really upset.
We tell them lies to protect them or to protect ourselves.
And we deceive them about Santa Claus and the Tooth Fairy so that we can enjoy their childhood a little more.
Most of the deceptions are benign and have few if any long-lasting consequences.
Yet children learn a great deal from the lies they are told by their parents and others who are important to them.
What they learn often depends upon how they interpret the act of lying, rather than the lie itself.


What Did Quayle Mean When He Said 'Mario'?
What's in a name? Apparently political fireworks when the name is Mario M. Cuomo.
In radio and newspaper interviews during the last two days, the New York Governor has suggested without saying so explicitly that White House officials are playing to ethnic prejudices by referring to him by his first name.


U.S. Transfers Haitians to Base in Cuba
The Coast Guard today began transferring hundreds of Haitian refugees from its cutters patrolling the Caribbean onto a large troop ship anchored at the United States Navy base at Guantanamo, Cuba.
The shift, made for what the Navy and the Coast Guard called humanitarian reasons, means that up to 800 or so of the nearly 1,800 recently rescued Haitian boat people now crammed into 15 cutters can be kept in more hospitable accommodations.
The amphibious landing ship Tortuga is equipped with extensive medical installations and sleeping berths.


Kirschner Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Miscellany
*
Reese Communications Companies and Targeted Communications Corporation, direct marketing firms in Washington owned by the WPP Group, have been combined to form the RTC Group.
Michael N. Graham, who had been Reese's president and chief executive, will hold the same positions at the new firm. *
The Publishers Information Bureau has reported that in October, magazine advertising pages fell 9.85 percent from October 1990, to 15,982.6.
Total pages for the first 10 months of 1991 declined 9.97 percent from the period in 1990, to 125,243.4.


Enstar Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


At 20, a Nonprofit Theater That Has Endured
It may be remarkable for any nonprofit theater company to survive to its 20th anniversary, but it is positively a miracle when two of the founders are still speaking to each another.
Yet there they were, Curt Dempster and Arthur Giron, sitting amid the comfortable clutter of the Ensemble Studio Theater in Manhattan, hammering out the production of the play that will be inaugurating "In Pursuit of America," the Ensemble's 50-event, yearlong celebration of its 2 decades of existence.
"Here's what I think," said Mr.
Dempster, the theater company's artistic director, preparing to impart his insights about "A Dream of Wealth," Mr.
Giron's play, which opens today in the Ensemble Mainstage at 549 West 52d Street.
"I was up all night
thinking
about it."


American Network Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
Billy Bragg  The Ritz
David Duke was at the top of Billy Bragg's list of political targets at the Ritz on Saturday night, but George Bush, the lack of free health care, the National Rifle Association, "infotainment" and Bryan Adams weren't far behind.
Mr.
Bragg, a British folk-punk protest singer with a dense Cockney accent, has never been shy about his political beliefs.
Introducing "The Marching Song of the Covert Battalions," from his 1990 mini-album "The Internationale," he explained to the audience that the singalong chorus, "We're making the world safe for capitalism," was meant with irony.
The Democratic Socialists of America were handing out fliers at the door.


Croatian Cityscape: Stray Dogs, Rows of Wounded, Piles of Dead
After 86 days of shelling, aerial bombardment and house-to-house combat, Vukovar is a wasteland of gutted homes and churches, burning storefronts and bloated, bullet-riddled bodies littering the streets.
Today, a day after the last Croatian snipers abandoned the city to the victorious Yugoslav Army, civilian survivors of the siege continued to emerge from the basement shelters where they have survived three months with little water, food and medicine, and without electricity and heat, to seek the relative comfort of refugee camps.
This afternoon, about 450 wounded men, women and children, including a dozen newborn babies, were evacuated from the basement corridors and fallout shelters of the town's hospital.


Cuomo's Point Man Plays by Intuition
Given what happened at the 1982 State Democratic Convention, where the party gave its gubernatorial endorsement to Edward I. Koch over Mario M. Cuomo, it is a credit to John A. Marino that he survived to become chairman of the State Democratic Committee and unofficial keeper of the Cuomo flame.
Mr.
Marino swears he was simply following orders by the state party chairman at the time, Dominick J. Baranello, who wanted to fill empty seats on the floor of the Syracuse Civic Center by clearing guests out of the balcony.


Connecticut Water Service reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


Strawberry Stirs Up One of His Teammates
The Straw is stirring up the pot again, and this time DARRYL STRAWBERRY's words have brought Strawberry's Los Angeles Dodger teammate KAL DANIELS to a boil.
Strawberry thinks Daniels should be traded; Daniels thinks Strawberry has "a mental problem."
Strawberry, who led the Dodgers with 29 homers and 99 runs batted in this season, said Daniels complains too much about injuries.


Ranger Oil Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allied Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Television; Tuning In on Those TV Evangelists
If you thought the fall of Jim and Tammy Bakker put the fear of God, or at least of the Internal Revenue Service, into kindred televangelists, tonight's edition of "Prime Time Live" should correct the impression.
The investigation, at 10 on ABC, of three prominent practitioners -- W. V. Grant, Larry Lea and Robert Tilton -- finds them flourishing.
Diane Sawyer, the evening's correspondent, uses hidden cameras to show how Mr.
Grant performs his feats of healing; his blessed touch seems to work best on people who weren't ailing in the first place.
Ms.
Sawyer also discovers on a visit to Haiti that only a minute fraction of the millions of dollars Mr.
Grant has raised for the country's orphanages has reached the purported beneficiaries.


Crop Genetics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Hot Stock Crashes and the Chief Vanishes
The future seemed bright for Cascade International, a fast-growing chain of women's clothing shops and cosmetic centers whose stock had been praised, and purchased, by a number of professional investors and mutual fund managers since January.
Sales at the company's boutiques -- including the Diana Shops, scattered throughout the South, and Allison's Place, in California and Texas -- seemed to be soaring and the company reported steady profits.
The company was also about to open a chain of Oleg Cassini boutiques under an exclusive licensing agreement with the designer.


7 More Patients Accuse Doctor of Botching Their Abortions
The Lower East Side doctor who the police say severed the right arm of a fetus while performing an illegal abortion was accused by seven patients yesterday of botching their abortions, authorities said.
In addition, the obstetrician, Dr.
Abu Hayat, was the subject of a civil malpractice suit earlier this year in which a judgment was found against him.
The other seven cases were reported by women who called a police hot line after they heard of Dr.
Hayat's arrest on Tuesday, the police said.


Production Operators Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tax Forms Will Be Later In Nod to Holiday Spirit
The Internal Revenue Service has decided not to spoil the Christmas holiday this year, as it has for more than a decade by delivering income tax forms on the day after Christmas.
Instead, the I.R.S. will spoil the New Year's holiday, by having the forms delivered on Jan. 2.


Good Child, Good China
A LONDON exhibition, "Gifts for Good Children, The History of Children's China 1790-1990," sounds suitably stuffy for Victorians as well as historians.
But the pottery and porcelain objects in this show, which runs from Dec. 10 to 21, captures the small and big moments in children's lives.
A knitting needle's holder, for example, or a Christmas alphabet bowl that could have held David Copperfield's pudding were presents for the jolly good child.


A LEBANESE GROUP SHIFTS ON CAPTIVES
In remarks suggesting a further shift in policy by the kidnappers of Western hostages in Lebanon, the leader of the Party of God said today that the fate of the hostages is now separate from that of Arab prisoners held by Israel.
The leader of the fundamentalist Lebanese group, Sheik Abbas Musawi, said at a news conference here that he believed that the question of Western captives will be resolved within days or weeks at the latest.
His statements coincided with reports from Iran and elsewhere that more hostage releases are likely by the end of next week.


ARCO's Surprising Stance in Air Debate
California, with the nation's worst air, will open hearings today to develop standards for cleaner-burning gasoline.
Not suprisingly, most oil companies hate the idea.
But one, ARCO, is arguing vigorously that the standards state engineers have proposed are too lax.
The argument among the brethren of the oil fraternity adds a curious twist to a complicated debate over clean air.
For while the battleground is ostensibly California, the stakes are much larger: smog-control strategies all over the United States.
ARCO's antagonists fear that as California goes, so goes the nation, and that strict California regulations would be copied by other states.


It's Never Too Early to Pick N.H.L. Spring Lineup
The National Hockey League season reaches the quarter pole this late-autumn week with an intriguing tease of distant spring.
With the Washington Capitals surprisingly the best team in the East and Vancouver Canucks surprisingly the best in the West, there exists the dreamy prospect of an international, bi-coastal Stanley Cup final between Canada's version of San Francisco and America's blend of cherry blossoms and marble monuments.


Why We Might Regret Grain Generosity
To the Editor:  For some time, voices have been raised in the United States favoring massive food aid to the Soviet Union, most notably the voice of Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan.
True, Mr.
Madigan's voice has been muted lately.
But he has a large constituency in favor of massive shipments of wheat, corn and soy beans.
The legislation for such is already in existence.


Pendleton Edges Bonds to Win M.V.P. Award
After sparking his new team to a worst-to-first National League pennant, Terry Pendleton yesterday completed his personal worst-to-first journey, winning the National League most-valuable-player award.
Pendleton, who signed with the Atlanta Braves as a free agent last winter, edged last year's most valuable player, Barry Bonds of Pittsburgh, by only 15 points, 274 to 259, in the closest voting in 12 years.
Bobby Bonilla of the Pirates, who finished second to Bonds a year ago, was third with 191 points.


Pratt Hotel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tyson's Turkey Giveaway
Evander Holyfield's hometown was the first stop today of a turkey giveaway sponsored by Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion, and his promoter, Don King.
Tyson and King handed out 2,500 turkeys at various locations here as part of a multicity campaign during which they intend to donate 25,000 turkeys to families in need between now and Christmas.


Chemical and Hanover Reach Accord With Community Group
The Chemical Bank and the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company have agreed with a New York community group to increase local lending.
In return, the group promised not to file a protest that could have delayed the planned year-end merger of the two banks.
Under the agreement with Acorn, as the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now is known, the merged bank, which will operate under the Chemical name, would lend $750 million over the next five years.
Carol Parry, managing director at Manufacturers Hanover, said the $750 million would be "a significant increase over what the two banks have been lending."


Hillsborough Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cables Cited in Tower Fire
A fire that forced the evacuation of several floors at One World Trade Center on Tuesday night was caused by overheated electrical cables on the 93d floor, the Fire Department said yesterday.
Tom Kelly, the deputy commissioner for public information, said the cables could have caught fire because of an electrical overload or because they had rubbed against each other.
The cables ran through a closet opposite the elevators and provided power for lighting.
Most of the building was empty when the fire was discovered.
Windows on the World, the restaurant on the 107th floor, closed early because of the blaze, although diners inside when the fire broke out were not told that there was a problem.


Pinnacle Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sea Containers Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Personal Computer Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Phone Companies Plan New Service
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company and GTE Mobile Communications Inc. of Atlanta said they would jointly provide cellular-mobile telephone service.
The combined services will allow customers nationwide to buy cellular phones at A.T.&amp; T.'s 73 phone stores in GTE's 67 markets.
Customers can then sign up for GTE's local cellular carrier service, which A.T.&amp; T. is prohibited by law from providing.


Capriati, Bejeweled And Braided, Advances in Slims
It was the narrowest of escapes for the youngest competitor at the $3 million Virginia Slims Championships last night at Madison Square Garden.
Jennifer Capriati plaited a French braid into her hair, fastened a handful of gold earrings into her lobes, and then encased her right thigh in a brace meant to help her forget the groin strain that's nagged her for the past two weeks.
She looked polished but felt worried, played scared in the opening set, lost it, and then got so angry with herself for taking the conservative approach that she actually did forget her injury.


Frank D. Williams; Financial Manager, 84
Frank D. Williams, a retired manager of philanthropic finances, died on Sunday at his home in Boca Raton, Fla., after a long illness.
He was 84 years old.
For more than 30 years Mr.
Williams coordinated the charitable activities of the William Rosenwald family.
He was a board member of the American Philanthropic Fund and the William Rosenwald Family Fund from 1972 until this year.
From 1952 until 1977 he was also a director and treasurer of the American Securities Corporation, New York investment bankers, of which Mr.
Rosenwald was chairman.


Laser Photonics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


McCaffrey Losing Top Creative Executive
MCCAFFREY &amp; MCCALL Inc. has had two of its most prominent accounts, Mercedes-Benz of North America and Bacardi Imports, put into review.
And yesterday the New York agency got another blow when John Doig, its top creative executive, said he was leaving in January to join Earle Palmer Brown Advertising in Bethesda, Md.
In separate telephone interviews, Mr.
Doig, who has helped to craft subtly understated campaigns for Mercedes-Benz, and Robert Cherins, chairman and chief executive of McCaffrey, squeezed hard to turn the lemons into lemonade.


Maple Leaf Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


British Social History, Told in Knickers
ROSEMARY HAWTHORNE, the wife of a vicar, is something of a expert on what the British call knickers.
Out of the vintage suitcases she drags from lecture hall to lecture hall, she can produce anything from a pair of trapdoor knickers with patched knees worn by a Victorian servant to a pair of 1940's khaki bloomers (dubbed passion-killers by their wearers) to a pair of 1970's nylon briefs emblazoned with the grinning face of Donny Osmond.


George H. Haley Jr., Executive Recruiter, 76
George H. Haley Jr., founder of Haley Associates Inc., an executive recruitment concern, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old.
He died of a stroke, his family said.


Vast Africa Defies Easy Generalizations
To the Editor:
"Zambia Retires Its Liberator" (editorial, Nov. 5) and Milton Allimadi's "In Africa, Tide Turns Against Despotism" (letter, Nov. 6) are both enlightening but show overreaction and overgeneralizations.


Choices Entertainment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


House Calls for Plants
Sydney Rice
(718) 857-5189.
Sydney Rice has a stethoscope and a leafy plant printed on her little green business cards.
"I'm a plant doctor," Ms.
Rice said.
And the doctor makes house calls.


Altex Industries reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Home Video
Hollywood is making fewer movies these days, especially big movies, and that worries many in the video business.
By late 1992, supplies of hot new titles that took in $50 million or more at the box office could begin to thin out.
Perhaps most alarming from video dealers' point of view is a projected shortage of the huge blockbusters that bring out customers by the horde.


From Kitchen Waste Springs Garden Gold
GARBAGE consciousness is a highly tuned state.
You know you have it when it hurts to put a banana peel in the trash can at work, when you carry it home to your compost pile in the backyard or to your worm bin in the kitchen.
Or when you recite figures about M.S.W., Municipal Solid Waste, as others do about the G.N.P.: "Yard waste makes up 20 percent of the waste stream. Food waste is 8.5 percent. Paper, 34 percent!"


Autodesk Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Feud in Capitol Endangers Crime Bill Passage
Eleventh-hour partisan feuding over gun control and civil liberties is jeopardizing enactment of an anti-crime bill this year, although both houses of Congress have passed similar versions of the legislation.
But after three weeks of maneuvering, Senate leaders tonight had still not managed to appoint members to a House-Senate conference to iron out a final bill.


Talks Stall on Cuomo Budget Proposal
Negotiations over a multiyear plan to help attack the state's persistent budget gaps appeared to have stalled tonight.
Both Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the Senate Majority Leader, Ralph J. Marino, used ominous language in suggesting the talks were dead, although each man insisted that a deal was still possible if only the other would cooperate.


People
*
Bob Neuman has been named senior vice president and senior creative director at FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York.
He had previously been senior vice president and creative director at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.


Richer's Third Goal Conquers Capitals in Overtime
The Devils have had difficulty motivating themselves against teams in the National Hockey League's lower echelons, but they seem to be in sync against the league's elite.
After losses to the Islanders and the Winnipeg Jets, the Devils played their best game in a while tonight in achieving a 6-5 overtime triumph over the Washington Capitals at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
It was the first Patrick Division defeat for Washington this season after nine victories in nine games.


Long Island Congressman Announces Senate Candidacy


Science Dynamics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gold Reserve Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jones Intercable Investors LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jersey Turnpike Issue Is Rated A
Moody's Investors Services yesterday confirmed its A rating on the New Jersey Turnpike Authority's revenue bond issue that is expected to be negotiated this week with underwriters.
The issue totals $1.3 billlion of serial refunding bonds.


New York City Sale Goes Well
A $1.27 billion offering of New York City bonds was warmly received by investors yesterday, but the securities were sold at higher interest rates than had been anticipated late last week.
The negotiated sale produced yields that range from 4.50 percent on securities maturing in 1992, 7 percent on bonds maturing in 1996, 7.60 percent in 2001 and 7 7/8 percent on securities maturing from 2010 through 2015.


Books of The Times; First a Murder, Then a Playful Sort of Metaphysics
Murther and Walking Spirits By Robertson Davies 357 pages. Viking. $21.95.
In the first paragraph of this novel, the protagonist describes how he was murdered.


Raven Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Business and the Law; B.C.C.I. Outcome Races the Clock
THE fall of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the largest bank fraud in history, has prompted a global effort to try to limit the losses suffered by the bank's 1.2 million depositors.
The man in charge, Brian Smouha of Touche Ross &amp; Company in London, is a veteran asset hunter.
As the liquidator for Banco Ambrosiano, the Vatican bank that collapsed in 1982, he eventually recovered for creditors roughly $800 million of losses placed at $1.3 billion.
But the Banco Ambrosiano case pales next to B.C.C.I. in terms of size and legal complexity.
Moreover, Mr.
Smouha and his team of provisional liquidators are facing a Dec. 2 court deadline in London for drawing up a worldwide settlement plan.
"It will be a cliffhanger," said one person involved in the negotiations.


Soviet Fiber-Optic Deal Challenges U.S. Policy
A German manufacturer has sold high-speed fiber-optic cable to the Soviet Union by using a loophole in Western trade restrictions, American industry executives said yesterday.
The sale represents a challenge to American and British attempts to limit modernization of the Soviet telephone system for national security reasons.


Natural Alternatives International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Smucker (J.M.) Co.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Coke's World View -- A special report.; For Coke, World Is Its Oyster
For many companies, globalization proves to be a concept as empty as that other corporate buzzword, synergy.
But for the Coca-Cola Company, the process of going global is now so extreme and rapid that its business in the United States has become secondary.
Indeed, because profit margins, sales growth and untapped potential are all much greater overseas than at home -- and competition from Pepsico Inc. is milder -- the decline in the relative importance of the United States to Coke seems irreversible.
Thus, by the end of the decade, the United States may account for no more than 10 percent of the profits of this quintessentially American company, several analysts say.


STORMY RELATIONS FOR U.S. AND KENYA
At his first July 4th party as the United States Ambassador here, Smith Hempstone invited both Kenyan Government officials and critics of President Daniel arap Moi.
Last year, only one senior Government man turned up for hot dogs and the playing of "The Star-Spangled Banner" on the sweeping backyard lawn of the embassy residence.


High Plains Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Council Speaker Attacks The Mayor's Shelter Plan
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday passionately defended his embattled plan to place 24 homeless shelters in middle-class neighborhoods, even as City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone told the Mayor's commission on the homeless that the plan ignored "a fundamental part of the American dream, the right to a stable neighborhood."
Citing the packed meetings of angry neighborhood residents who oppose the shelters, Mr.
Vallone declared: "It is nothing short of outrageous to brand all these people as heartless, or racist, or simply Nimby."


ABC Finds K.G.B. Fickle on Oswald
Until about a month ago, ABC News was convinced it had a chance to provide some stunning and exclusive information about the greatest unresolved story of the 20th century: the assassination of John F. Kennedy.
Thanks to a commitment from Vadim V. Bakatin, the new chairman of the Soviet secret police, the K.G.B., ABC was to have been granted access to the secret K.G.B. file on Lee Harvey Oswald.


Giants at Home on the Road In Return to Tampa Stadium
The last time the Giants played in Tampa Stadium was in January, when they beat the Buffalo Bills, 20-19, in Super Bowl XXV.
On Sunday, they will return to play the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, a 2-9 team that has played tough defense at times and horribly at other times.
This game, like the four games that follow, is important for the Giants (6-5) as they struggle for a wild-card berth in the National Football League playoffs.


Fed Merging Data Centers
The Federal Reserve said yesterday that it was consolidating its 12 data centers into three locations and would move its "Fed wire" electronic funds-transfer operation from New York City to East Rutherford, N.J.
The data centers, which maintain accounts for the United States Treasury and depository institutions and process electronic payments, will be consolidated in Dallas, East Rutherford and Richmond.


BRIEFS
*
American Home Products Corp., New York, entered an agreement with Alza Corp., Palo Alto, Calif., to develop and market pharmaceutical products. *
America West Airlines, Phoenix, and Northwest Airlines, St.
Paul, asked the Transportation Department to transfer the Honolulu to Nagoya, Japan, route authority from America West to Northwest.
America West is seeking to sell the route to Northwest for $15 million.


The Day the Expediters Needed Some Expediters
Expediters are supposed to be able to fix things.
That's certainly the role they play at the New York City Building Department, where they process building-permit applications in behalf of clients who have neither the skills nor the time to navigate the city's cumbersome building code.
But this week it looked as though the expediters themselves needed expediters.


Capriati Advances at Virginia Slims


Stocks Mixed as Dow Slips 1.56, to 2,930.01
Taking a respite from three days of frenzied activity, stock prices closed mixed yesterday with blue-chip issues getting help from the strength of Merck &amp; Company.
By the end of the trading session, the Dow was off 1.56 points, closing at 2,930.01.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange slackened, with 196.2 million shares traded compared with 241.4 million on Tuesday.
Losing issues narrowly outpaced gainers, 892 to 791.


Decom Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


6 Youths Arrested In Scuffle at School
More than 30 youths descended on Valley Stream North High School on Tuesday, attacking students in the parking lot and slightly injuring a school official who tried to intervene, the Nassau County police said.
Six youths were arrested in the episode, which Det.
Sgt.
William Edward of the police department's Fifth Squad said was a result of feuding between rival groups at schools in the area.
"It's a longstanding, occasional flareup between groups in high schools that call themselves fraternities," he said.


In Big Pact, the Stones Switch Labels
The Rolling Stones have signed a recording contract with Virgin Records, the company announced yesterday.
Neither the group nor Virgin would disclose figures, but people in the recording business estimate the contract to be worth $40 million to $45 million.
Under the contract, which is to begin in 1993, the band will record 3 new albums for the label and Virgin will have the rights to the 17 albums the band released from 1971 to 1990, beginning with "Sticky Fingers" and "Exile on Main Street." "Flashpoint," the band's most recent live album, was the final one covered by the band's contract with Columbia Records.


Dr. Leonard D. Kurtz; Radiologist, 76
Dr.
Leonard D. Kurtz, a radiologist and former executive, died Sunday in his home on the East Side of Manhattan.
He was 76 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Eagle Hit With Fine
ANDRE WATERS of the Philadelphia Eagles was fined $7,500 by the National Football League yesterday for his attack on wide receiver ERIC MARTIN of New Orleans after the Saints' 13-6 victory in Philadelphia Oct. 13.
It was the second straight year Waters had been fined by the league.
Last season, he paid $10,000 for a hit on Minnesota quarterback RICH GANNON. . . .
GREG COX, the former Giants and 49ers safety, was charged yesterday with rape and false imprisonment in Monterey, Calif.
He was released the day before by San Francisco.
The 49ers said that waiving Cox was "a football decision, period." . . .
The Green Bay Packers, seeking a new direction and a strong football person who comes from a winning background, dismissed their operations vice president, TOM BRAATZ, who oversaw four losing seasons during his five years with the team.
Green Bay decided not to renew Braatz's contract, which expires at the end of January, said the team president, BOB HARLAN. (AP)


Jaco Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Congressional Roundup; Lawmakers Pare Agenda for a Push
Congress continued to struggle tonight toward its goal of a pre-Thanksgiving adjournment, acting on extended unemployment benefits and preparing for crucial battles over continued financing for the depleted bank insurance fund and the savings and loan bailout.
Leaders from both parties met tonight and agreed on a short list of bills they considered essential, and the first test of their list will come on Thursday when the House votes on putting more money into the nearly insolvent bank insurance fund.


Pilgrim's Pride reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


International Murex Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Big Board Ending 'Basket'
The New York Stock Exchange said it would discontinue a stock-trading product it introduced in the aftermath of the 1987 stock market crash.
The product, known as Exchange Stock Portfolios, was meant to allow investors to trade "baskets" of stocks.
It has failed to attract interest and could be suspended as early as Dec. 1 upon approval by the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Dollar Up in Light Trading; Gold Prices Mostly Higher
The dollar advanced on world currency markets yesterday, but trading was light as dealers turned their attention to Wall Street.
Gold prices were mostly higher.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold bullion for current delivery settled at $364.30 a troy ounce, up 40 cents from Tuesday.
The Republic National Bank said gold rose 75 cents an ounce, to a late bid price of $363.65.


U.S. Planning $1.5 Billion in Food Aid To Soviet Peoples Through Moscow
Amid rising concern about possible hunger and civil unrest in the Soviet Union this winter, the Bush Administration announced today that it would send about $1.5 billion worth of food aid, most of which would be channeled through the central Government in Moscow.
The announcement, which followed weeks of delay, included the first large-scale American shipments of free food to the Soviet Union in seven decades.


Rolling Stone Creator Plans Men's Adventure Magazine
Straight Arrow Publishers, the company that publishes Rolling Stone and US, is starting a magazine for men that will emphasize adventure, travel and participatory sports.
Jann S. Wenner, the chairman of Straight Arrow, described the new magazine, which will be called Men's Journal, as "Hemingwayesque." He said it would cover sports like backpacking, scuba diving, skiiing, golf, tennis and other outdoor activities that men like to do on vacations and weekends.


Police Dept. Has Questions to Answer About New 911 Plan
To the Editor:
You, like all New Yorkers, are for "enhanced 911, enhanced safety" (editorial, Oct. 27), and you urge the City Council "not to delay a project that would save more lives and control more crime." Although the Police Department has released to the City Council its technical consultant firm's study, completed last March 15, the department has not offered an operating plan for the proposed new police communications system.


Facelifters Home Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quotations of the Day
"Senator Cranston's improper conduct deserves the fullest, strongest and most severe sanction which the committee has the authority to impose." -- SENATE ETHICS COMMITTEE.  [ D21:1. ]
"You are in jeopardy if you ever do anything at any time to help a contributor." -- SENATOR ALAN CRANSTON.  [ A1:5. ]
"Everybody doesn't do it." -- SENATOR WARREN B. RUDMAN.  [ D21:1. ]


Review/Music; Looking for the Center In Gilbert and Sullivan
Gilbert and Sullivan grows with difficulty in New York City, but not for lack of gardeners.
There are always people like Albert Bergeret to cast, direct, conduct, raise money and generally create productions out of thin air.
There is an audience, full and faithful.
Singers -- from aspiring or marginal professionals to after-work amateurs -- clamor for parts.
But the money and the center have never been there.
Gilbert and Sullivan companies rise and fall, occasionally triumph or else creak through jerry-built productions.
The ranks have been particularly thinned in the last few years, but "Princess Ida" and "Patience" have seen the light of day at different ends of town.


CRANSTON REBUKED BY ETHICS PANEL
Closing a wrenching two-year battle that has destroyed his political career, Senator Alan Cranston rose before his colleagues on the Senate floor today and "with deep remorse in my heart," accepted a rebuke from the Senate Select Committee on Ethics but insisted that his conduct was no different from that of most lawmakers.
In a two-hour proceeding that seemed to put the Senate itself on trial, Mr.
Cranston, a California Democrat, sat in silence as Senator Howell Heflin recited the panel's conclusion that Mr.
Cranston's behavior was "improper and repugnant" in raising nearly $1 million from Charles H. Keating Jr., the savings and loan executive, at the same time that the Senator was intervening with Federal regulators to save Mr.
Keating's California-based Lincoln Federal Savings and Loan Association from collapse.
Mr.
Heflin, an Alabama Democrat, was chairman of the Ethics Committee's inquiry.
A Riveting Half-Hour Speech
Speaking from his desk in a half-hour speech that riveted his colleagues, Senator Cranston portrayed himself as being unduly singled out and warned them: "You are in jeopardy if you ever do anything at any time to help a contributor -- no matter how worthy the cause, no matter how proper the need for help and no matter how proper the help you render. I stand before you as an illustration of that jeopardy."


The Sins of a Single Tree Are Visited on 99 Others
CALL it man versus nature, or perhaps 90's landscaping versus Newton's Law.
The story is still the same: When a large piece of fruit fell from a tree here last month, breaking the windshield of a passing car, town officials responded by sawing down that tree and 99 others like it.
Many people in this undeniably well-manicured Hartford suburb were appalled by the swift and blunt action against the trees, a species known as the Osage orange.
The trees produce pale green globe-shaped fruit with skin puckered like the casing of a hand grenade.
The fruit, which can weigh up to two or three pounds, hardens as it ripens and that is when the problems begin.


Lack of Brown Paint Puts Color Into Gift Wrapping
SEVEN-YEAR-OLD Nicole Ripley chose yellow and pink paint for her bears, above, because "there wasn't any brown paint, and I thought yellow was better," she explained.
Nicole's wrapping paper is part of a joint venture between Smith &amp; Hawken, a garden supply company in Mill Valley, Calif., and the Mill Valley Schools Community Foundation, which raises money for art education, to have local children paint designs for Christmas wrapping paper.


King World Productions Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Equitable Real Estate reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rag Shops Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Witness Says Suspect in Kahane Case Had a Gun
A college student testified yesterday that the man accused of killing Rabbi Meir Kahane at a Manhattan hotel last year was armed that night with a gun.
The student, Michael Djunaedi, said he was walking by the hotel when a man he identified as the defendant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, lept from a cab with a gun in his hand and ran in his direction.
Moments earlier, the prosecution says, Mr.
Nosair had shot Rabbi Kahane, the founder of the Jewish Defense League.
Moments later, it says, he shot and wounded a postal officer and was himself wounded.


Toys Take Over Craft Museum
THOUGH Crispina Ffrench describes the recycled-wool stuffed toy she made, above, as a "ragamuffin," others might see a multicolored fish, iguana or a sleeping companion.
"I call it a ragamuffin because it's made out of sweater rags, but it's really a dinosaur," Ms.
Ffrench said.
The $40 toy is part of "Toymakers, A Family Affair," an exhibition at the American Craft Museum in New York that runs from Tuesday to Dec. 1, with a benefit preview this Monday.
Forty-five craftspeople were invited to exhibit their handcrafted children's wares at this second annual show, which will include doll-pigs, harlequin circus pull-puppets, a dog-with-bones chair, a cat-with-fish chair, Miss Pig and Miss Rabbit chairs, and a sequined jack-in-the-box.


Environmental Power Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gain for McDonnell Douglas Raises Fears of U.S. Loss
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation's agreement to sell a large interest in its commercial jetliner business to Taiwan will help the company survive, but it has already revived fears in Congress and elsewhere that the aerospace industry in the United States is mortgaging its future to budding Asian rivals.
After months of negotiations, McDonnell Douglas said late Tuesday that it had reached a preliminary agreement to sell 40 percent of its commercial aircraft division to the Taiwan Aerospace Corporation, a new venture partly owned by the Taiwan Government, for $2 billion.


Former Smuggler Ties Top Officials Of Cuba and Nicaragua to Drug Ring
Senior Cuban and Nicaraguan officials, including the brother of Fidel Castro, helped the Medellin cartel smuggle cocaine into the United States during the mid-1980's, a founding member of the Colombian drug group testified here today.
In his second day of testimony at the Federal Court trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the witness, Carlos Lehder Rivas, said he met twice in Havana with Gen.
Raul Castro, Cuba's Minister of Defense, to gain permission for cocaine shipments to fly over Cuban territory on their way to Florida.


KMC Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cedric Sandiford, 41, a Victim Of 1986 Howard Beach Attack
Cedric Sandiford, a victim of the 1986 racial attack in Howard Beach, Queens -- one of the most explosive racial crimes in New York City in recent years -- died on Tuesday at the Veterans Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 41 years old and lived in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.
He had been gravely ill with AIDS.
But a spokeswoman for the hospital, E. J. Stapler, said yesterday that she could not give the cause of death without permission from Mr.
Sandiford's family.
Mr.
Sandiford's wife, Jean Griffith Sandiford, said she was seeking to determine if Mr.
Sandiford's death resulted from the AIDS or some other cause.


Ros Muc Journal; On Europe's Edge, Irish Fear Being Left to Drift
The people in this wind-whipped village on the bleak western rim of Europe are used to the hard life.
They wrestle existence out of a place where big rocks seem to grow overnight in the fields and the soil is thin and poor, the sheep scrawny.
A few miles out along an inlet, the Atlantic Ocean yields seaweed and mackerel for the few who have boats.
Until the last year or so, things seemed to be improving.
Emigrants sent back money from Britain and the United States, the Government dole provided about $75 a week, the European Community sent millions in subsidies to farmers in western Ireland, and an increase in industry in nearby cities absorbed many of the people leaving rural areas like Ros Muc.


Review/Film; Maurice Schwartz in Yiddish Drama
Slow, deliberate and dapper, he inspires respect in some and fear in others.
As the most conspicuously rich and powerful member of an immigrant community in New York City, he enjoys all the obeisance that his status demands.
Sound familiar?
It is, but only up to a point.
"Uncle Moses," the newly restored 1932 Yiddish drama opening today at the Film Forum, is the story of a Jewish godfather, and as such it has its own distinctive flavor.
So in the obligatory big wedding scene, there are seltzer bottles on the celebrants' tables.
And a young man professing love for his sweetheart is able to do so while drying dishes and speaking of Karl Marx.
When the title character, a widower turned ladies' man, describes his dream of being reproached by his deceased wife, his nephew's most pertinent question is, "Did she speak Yiddish or English?" "Fifty-fifty," Uncle Moses replies.


Masur, as Just Plain Kurt, Gives His Audience Some Answers
"I want to be presented not as a kind of a star, but as just a citizen, like you are," Kurt Masur told the 600 listeners who turned up for the first Philharmonic Forum at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday evening.
And for nearly an hour, Mr.
Masur responded to questions, complaints, suggestions and observations, and showed how accessible and genial the music director of one of the world's great orchestras could be.
Ever since he accepted the directorship of the Philharmonic, Mr.
Masur has sought ways to make connections with his New York audience, much as he has done in Leipzig, Germany, where he directs the Gewandhaus Orchestra.
An approach that occurred to him early on was to hold occasional town meetings, at which he could answer his audience's questions, and perhaps pose a few of his own.
Tuesday's Forum was his first attempt to do that, and seems to have been the first such meeting in the Philharmonic's 149-year history.


Delrina Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


J. G. Heiges, 77, Dies; Executive With Pfizer
Jesse G. Heiges, a retired executive of Pfizer Inc., died Saturday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 77 years old and had residences in Palm Beach and East Hampton, N.Y.
He died of cancer, a Pfizer spokesman said.


New Man at U.N.L.V.
JIM WEAVER, associate athletic director at the University of Florida, was named yesterday to take charge of the University of Nevada-Las Vegas athletic program, which has been rocked by internal bickering and continuing problems with the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
"My No. 1 goal is not to ever compromise the integrity of U.N.L.V.," said the school's new athletic director, who received a five-year contract calling for an annual salary of $105,000,


U.S. Bank Action Ordered on Brazil's Debt
Federal regulators have ordered that the nation's banks set aside more money to cover possible losses in loans to Brazil, the biggest third world debtor, bankers said yesterday.
The regulators -- the Federal Reserve, the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation -- also upgraded Mexico's creditworthiness, the bankers said.


U.S. AIDE DEFENDS LOCKERBIE STAND
At a tense and emotional meeting today with families of victims in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, the No. 2 official at the State Department angrily defended the Bush Administration's insistence that investigators have unearthed no evidence linking Syria and Iran to the downing of the airliner, several family members said.
In a heated response to one question, Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the Deputy Secretary of State, expressed displeasure with the comments of some of the victims' family members suggesting that President Bush and others in the Administration had lied in comments that absolved Syria of complicity in the bombing.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Carl Winter, a Communist Party leader who was convicted of conspiracy against the United States Government, misidentified his daughter.
Her first name is Michele.


A Coloring Book Fit for an Artist
"JUST ADD COLOR," a new children's coloring book of 36 original drawings donated by artists like Eric Fischl and Elizabeth Murray, should please both youngsters and collecting-minded parents (you might have to buy two).
The book was conceived and published by the Homeward Bound Project Inc., a nonprofit group in New York that aids the mentally handicapped.
"I wanted children to interact with contemporary art," said Maura Albers, who co-edited the book with Thomas Cvikota.
The large black-and-white drawings skip from the figurative (a still life by Donald Sultan) to the minimalist (Sol LeWitt's intersecting shapes).


Celerex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; A Backwater's Quiet Rewards
DISTRIBUTORS of semiconductors and other electronic components, long regarded on Wall Street as a backwater of the electronics sector, have been quietly rewarding investors this year.
Avnet Inc., the longtime industry leader, has failed to hang on to most of its sharp gain early in the year, but several of its competitors, led by Arrow Electronics Inc., have fared far better.


Toll at 31 in Train Accident
Rescuers continued to search for bodies today under the tangled wreckage of a freight train as the death toll in the accident reached at least 31, the police said.
The train jumped the tracks on Tuesday after a brake failure, crushing people in buses, cars and buildings on the outskirts of this central Mexican town.
The Red Cross put the death toll at 38, while the Mexican railroad said it was 36.


INSIDE
Cuba, Nicaragua and Drugs
In testimony at the Noriega trial, top Cuban and Nicaraguan officials were accused of helping smuggle cocaine into the United States.
Page A20.
Korea Withdrawal Put Off
Defense Secretary Cheney said the Washington would put off troop cuts in Korea until the nuclear threat from North Korea ends.
Page A6.
Dissent on Pan Am Case
Israeli officials say they are unconvinced by Washington's exoneration of Syria in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103.
Page A14.
A New Title for Sihanouk
Prince Norodom Sihanouk was declared Cambodian President in a move intended to foil Khmer Rouge hopes of regaining power.
Page A12.
McDonnell Sale to Taiwan
McDonnell Douglas sold part of its jetliner business to Taiwan, reviving fears that American aerospace is mortgaging its future.
Page D1.


CHRONICLE
Ordinarily, when someone steps before the curtain in a theater to announce the replacement of the star by an understudy, there is a collective sigh of disappointment.
On Tuesday, the audience cheered when TONY RANDALL, founder of the new National Actors Theater, a repertory company, stepped forth at the performance of "The Crucible" at the Belasco Theater to announce: "Tonight, the role of Judge Danforth will be played by Tony Randall. But unfortunately, Tony Randall doesn't know the part."
" 'So read it!' " the audience yelled," Mr. Randall said yesterday.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY 2 ARE CONVICTED IN GAY MAN'S KILLING
In a case that enraged and galvanized homosexuals in New York City, two men were convicted of murder in the Queens killing of a gay man who was beaten with a hammer and stabbed to death in what prosecutors termed a savage gay-bashing spree.
Page A1.
AFTER THE VERDICTS, ELATION
The unequivocal verdicts in the Queens murder case stunned and elated gay men and women across New York City.
Page B4.
SHELTER PLAN: DINKINS VS.
VALLONE
Mayor Dinkins passionately defended his embattled plan to place 24 homeless shelters in middle-class areas, even as Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone argued that the plan ignored "a fundamental part of the American dream, the right to a stable neighborhood." Page B3.
SOME THINGS ARE NEVER EASY
Expediters are supposed to be able to fix things.
That's certainly the role they play at the Buildings Department, where they help clients negotiate the city's cumbersome building code.
But now the expediters themselves appear to need expediters.
Page B5.
IT'S BETTER TO GIVE ...
A wealthy couple who have tried for more than two years to give the perennially impoverished New York City school system a school will finally get to do so.
Page B3.
Defendant was armed on night of Kahane killing, witness testifies. Page B2.
Jeweler ambushed on highway. Page B3.
City Council takes on the Mayor's office over credit cards.
Page B3.
REGION A DEADLOCK IN BUDGET TALKS
Talks stalled over an unprecedented multiyear deal to help attack New York State's persistent budget woes -- an accord that could be the linchpin to a Cuomo Presidential campaign.
Page B8.
CUOMO'S CHEERLEADER
As Governor Cuomo weighs running for President, the state Democratic chairman, John A. Marino, has assumed an increasingly prominent and complex role -- cheerleader, ambassador and occasionally reliable cryptanalyst of Mr.
Cuomo's thinking.
Page B9.
REALPOLITIK IN NEW JERSEY
What's going on in New Jersey is not exactly the picture of government that was painted in civics class.
But then the tidy diagrams showing a system of checks and balances did not hint at the political pushing and shoving that has been going on since the Legislature changed hands in the November election.
Page B7.
LEGACY OF A TEACHERS' STRIKE
In Little Ferry, N.J., a teachers' strike has produced more than the usual bitterness.
The superintendent wants to dismiss 37 teachers, but a judge has barred the school board from acting until the school year is over.
Page B6.
THE BURDEN OF DESEGREGATION
The Maloney School in Waterbury, Conn., built in 1898, is a place out of a past century.
But it finds itself at the center of a decidedly 20th century debate.
Page B7.
Auto insurers agree to refunds. Page B5.
Nassau Republicans in disarray. Page B7.
Taking it out on the trees. West Hartford Journal, page B11.


Peoples Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Denning Mobile Robotics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Saatchi Pep Rally With a Dose of Values
The work force of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York met outside the office yesterday morning for "Vision Day," which combined a rededication to corporate values with a pep rally.
"We've emerged from some tough emotional and financial times," Joseph P. Mack, the chairman and chief executive, told about 1,200 employees at the special meeting in the Puck Building.


Pratt &amp; Lambert reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
CAROL THATCHER would have you believe that interviewing her "Mum" is just like interviewing anyone else.
But it's not.
Her mother is MARGARET THATCHER, the former British Prime Minister.
Several months ago, the staff of "Now It Can Be Told," the Geraldo Rivera television talk show for which Ms.
Thatcher is the London correspondent, suggested that she do something to mark the first anniversary of her mother's resignation, which is tomorrow.
The program goes on the air tonight at 7:30 P.M. on Channel 11 in New York.


The Keating One Hundred
Two years after five Senators were caught red-handed browbeating Federal regulators on behalf of Charles Keating, a big political giver, the Senate administered a flogging yesterday to the most guilty of the Keating Five.
Alan Cranston, the California Democrat, went to the floor and accepted, though not gracefully, the Ethics Committee's rebuke for "improper and repugnant" dealings with the failed savings and loan operator.
This mixed conclusion to the scandal brought to 100 -- the full Senate membership -- the number of senators tainted by the exposure of wretched ethical standards and subservience to big money.
The Senate's refusal to reform campaign financing haunted the disciplinary proceedings from the first and gave Mr.
Cranston the closest thing to a defense against the charges.


A Skirmish in a Tax War In an Unlikely Location
What's going on in New Jersey is not exactly the picture of government that used to be painted in civics class.
But then, civics books never portrayed legislators and city leaders convening in a city known for its slot machines and floor shows.
And the tidy diagrams showing a system of checks and balances did not hint at the political pushing and shoving that has been going on since control of the Legislature changed hands in the Nov. 5 election.


Sympathy From From Giants for Lions' Utley
When football players are severely injured, compassion runs high among teammates and opponents alike.
Such compassion was evident today in the Giants' locker room when players talked about Mike Utley, the Detroit Lions' offensive guard.
Utley suffered a severe spinal-cord injury Sunday against the Los Angeles Rams, and doctors told him Tuesday he would be paralyzed from the chest down.


Israelis Remain Convinced Syrians Downed Flight 103
Israeli officials say their intelligence analysts remain convinced that Palestinian terrorists based in Syria -- and not Libyan agents, as charged last week by the United States -- bore primary responsibility for the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
A senior official said that in the days that have passed since the United States indicted two Libyans and cleared Syria and Iran, Israel informed the Americans that it continues to hold a different view of who was behind the attack, which killed 270 people.


Don't Celebrate War On Veterans Day
To the Editor:
I was deeply dismayed by "For Veterans, a Prouder Time" (editorial, Nov. 11), your commentary for Veterans Day.


FFP Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


GORBACHEV SEEKS EMERGENCY FUNDS, BUT RUSSIANS BALK
Armed with ever-gloomier details about the country's economic situation, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev appealed to a shrunken Soviet Parliament today to spend money it does not have to get through the winter.
But his plea for an emergency three-month appropriation, which would widen the total Soviet deficit to 300 billion rubles, was rejected by the Russian republic, which has already stopped most of its payments to the Kremlin budget as it gets ready to strike off on its own path of economic reform.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Kenny Loggins  Town Hall
Early in his Town Hall concert on Tuesday evening, Kenny Loggins offered an alternative name for what he described as a recent midlife crisis.
"I'd call it temporary sanity," said the veteran folk-pop singer and songwriter who, at 43, still radiates a boyish, gee-whiz ingenuousness.


Jacob I. Hartstein, 80, Is Dead; A Leader of Yeshiva's Expansion
Jacob I. Hartstein, a leader in the expansion of Yeshiva College to a university and later the founding president of Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old.
Mr. Hartstein died of a heart attack, his family said.


In the Nation; Another Such Victory
"I have a strong conviction that my ideas, these principles that I keep outlining . . . are what the American people want," President Bush told reporters the other day.
It was not readily apparent to some of us that Mr. Bush had
any
"principles," much less "a strong conviction." But, ever obliging, this kinder, gentler distributor of a thousand points of light quickly demonstrated that he really is a man of principle.
To wit: He is absolutely, firmly, unalterably convinced that no doctor working in a federally financed clinic should have the right even to discuss abortion with a woman.


Gantos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Abortion Tearing Bush; Battle Looms Over Party's Stand on an Issue That Will Test Ability to Hold Both Sides
President Bush won a victory this week on abortion, but it was only the beginning of a season of political conflict on an issue that clearly torments him.
He faces a battle over the Republican platform next summer that will test the White House's theory that it can finesse the issue's divisive effect by declaring the party a "big tent" where both sides can feel at home, although the President remains firmly anti-abortion.


Knicks Aren't Eyeing Tucker
Although the Knicks need outside shooting, they have decided they don't need Trent Tucker.
And while the Knicks would love to have Rolando Blackman, it appears unlikely they will get him soon, if at all.
The Knicks' president, Dave Checketts, said today that New York had decided not to pursue Tucker, the former Knick guard who was waived by the Phoenix Suns last week.
Despite Tucker's long-range shooting ability, Checketts reasoned that adding Tucker would take playing time from John Starks, a younger shooting guard the Knicks are trying to develop.


The Everest of Rock Gardens
AS he clambers over the rocky terrain in his acre-and-a-half garden, Harold Epstein ticks off the date and place of origin of each plant he passes.
Keeping up with him isn't easy.
Yet when he pauses, even momentarily, to recall the genus of yet another uncommon species, an apology quickly follows: "I'm 89, you know, and my memory isn't quite what it was."
For more than 50 years Mr.
Epstein has been putting uncommon trees, shrubs and perennials into crevices in the boulders on his woodland site.
Here are the jewels collected on travels with his wife, Esta, to thousands of gardens and nurseries.


FERTILITY DOCTOR ACCUSED OF FRAUD
A doctor who operated a fertility clinic in a Virginia suburb has been indicted by a Federal grand jury on 53 counts of fraud and perjury on charges of using his own sperm to inseminate at least seven of his patients.
The indictment charges that women whose husbands were unable to father children would go to the doctor, Cecil B. Jacobson, in search of a sperm donor and he would tell them his clinic had an extensive, carefully regulated donor program although he was the only donor.


Cosmo Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Pop; High-Tech Toys Make Old-Fashioned Show Biz
The big pop-music spectacle has become a theatrical form of its own, a song-and-dance extravaganza unburdened by narrative but hipper than Las Vegas revues.
Some performances, such as M. C. Hammer's shows, celebrate stamina; others, like recent tours by Madonna or the Pet Shop Boys, proffer enigmas on the border of performance art.
And some, like the Paula Abdul show here at the Brendan Byrne Arena tonight, use new high-tech toys for old-fashioned show business.
It's hard work made to look easy, entertainment without pretensions of depth: wholesome fun for an audience of small children and teen-agers with parents in tow.
Ms.
Abdul owes her multi-million-selling albums to diligence and modern electronics as well as catchy songs.
Diligence and skill turned a short, rounded (but trim) cheerleader for the Los Angeles Lakers into an influential pop choreographer; studio electronics bolstered a small voice on her albums and glamorized her video image with quick cuts and careful camera angles.
Ms.
Abdul's fans are so accustomed to her televised image that there was a wave of happy squeals when the video screens onstage lighted up.


La-Z-Boy Chair Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Fetus-to-Fetus Transplant Blocks Deadly Genetic Defect, Researchers Say
A fetus-to-fetus tissue transplant appears to have relieved a deadly genetic defect, and the initial success in a baby now a year old means the technique may have wide application in hundreds of genetic disorders, researchers said today.
The achievement is moving the technique from theory to practice, they said, and will undoubtedly increase the frustration over Administration regulations, backed by opponents of abortion rights, that bar the use of Federal money for research involving fetal tissue transplants.


Advanced Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Emerald Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Book Awards for Poetry, 'Freedom' and 'Mating'
Philip Levine's poetic tribute to the American working class, "What Work Is" (Alfred A. Knopf) won the 1991 National Book Award for poetry last night, as the poetry award was revived after an eight-year hiatus.
A fellow Knopf author, Norman Rush, won the fiction award for "Mating," a novel about a woman who searches for love and spirituality on a socialist commune in Botswana.
Orlando Patterson, a professor of sociology at Harvard University, won the nonfiction prize for "Freedom" (Basic Books/HarperCollins), a study of the Western passion for freedom despite, or even because of, its history of slavery.


Astrex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dodd Navigates Political Shoals
When Senator Christopher J. Dodd came here in October to talk to high school students, he was peppered with questions about the new state income tax.
Recent dinners have been little more than quick bites between more angry questions.
"You couldn't get out of your car without people coming up," he says.
"If you said 'I'm a U.S. Senator and have no view on this,' they would have torn your head off."


Accounts
*
Cole-Haan Inc., Yarmouth, Me., to Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, New York, from Cipriani-Kremer, Boston.
The review for the shoe company's $4.5 million wholesale account included Bozell Inc., Deutsch Inc. and McCaffrey &amp; McCall Inc., all of New York.


Fannie Mae Issue
The Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae, yesterday announced its first real estate mortgage investment conduits, or Remics, backed by relocation mortgages.
The $168 million in mortgages were originated by Prudential Home Mortgage, under its relocation mortgage program for companies that transfer employees.
The transaction is being handled by Goldman, Sachs, which is currently structuring the offering's price and yield.


A Parody of Banking Reform
Sadly, the only question remaining is how irresponsible the Congressional effort to reform the banking system will become.
Committees in both houses have rejected the Administration's wise plan.
Now they are littering flawed bills with one ugly amendment after another.
The best outcome would be for Congress to stop the farce.
That means passing a simple bill pumping $150 billion into funds that pay off depositors at failed savings and loans and commercial banks -- and leaving comprehensive reform as the first order of business next year.


'Autumn Leaves'
To the Editor:
"The Singer and His Song" (Topics of The Times, Nov. 12), your editorial tribute to Yves Montand, refers inaccurately to his most famous song as "Les Feuilles d'Automne." The true name is "Les Feuilles Mortes," and the song was written by Montand's favorite songwriter, Jacques Prevert.


Review/Dance; Martins In Fugal Mode
The New York City Ballet is a world unto itself.
Molded by George Balanchine's view that choreography comes first, it does not cater to audiences through familiar ballet conventions.
You do not go to see this company for its star turns, narrative values and production effects.
If you are not fascinated by ballet steps or their relationship to music, then the City Ballet is not for you.
If, however, you cotton up to the purity of the classical dance idiom and to fabulous dancing, the validity of Balanchine's esthetic is self-evident.


Limping to the End of the Road After Long Detour to Nowhere
One of the biggest basketball names of the 1980's, a decade now spiritually dead, refuses to leave the arena, despite the fact that his time has passed.
Ralph Sampson signed with the Washington Bullets on Tuesday, played seven minutes that night against the Seattle SuperSonics, missed his only shot, grabbed a rebound, blocked two shots and retreated to the trainer's room to nurse his knees.
Those knees are hopelessly gone, arthritic after three major operations and too many drainings of cartilage and fluid.
At 7 feet 4 inches, once a picture of elongated grace, Sampson now is almost a man playing on stilts, a former All-Star reduced to the role, at the career prime age of 31, of stiff-kneed scrub.


Amerifax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


S.&amp;P. Downgrades Zale's Debt Rating
The Zale Corporation's debt and that of its Zale Credit Corporation unit have been downgraded by Standard &amp; Poor's.
Senior debt of both have been lowered to CCC- from B+ and subordinated debt to C from B-.
In all, the revisions affect $850 million of debt.


Swiss Bank Is Demanding Maxwell Loan Repayment
The Swiss Bank Corporation said today that it was demanding repayment of a loan of $:55 million, or about $98.8 million, to a private company controlled by the family of the late Robert Maxwell.
Similar demands for repayment by other lenders could have a domino effect and cause the Maxwell empire to crash.
But the main British lenders to the heavily indebted publishing empire indicated today that an effort was under way to come up with a plan to defuse the overall crisis.


Republic Capital Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


S&amp;K Famous Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


GB Foods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section yesterday about sources for freshly killed poultry misstated the telephone number for Ottomanelli Brothers at 1549 York Avenue (81st Street).
The number is (212) 772-7900.


Beck's Counts Itself Among German Gems
Beck's, the nation's best-selling imported German beer, is adding an ingredient to its advertising: levity.
In television commercials to begin appearing next week, Della Femina, McNamee Inc., Beck's agency since 1973, uses humor to sell the brand to drinkers aged 25 to 35.


Ehrlich Bober Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mutual Risk Management reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30





Texas Instruments To Work With Hitachi
Texas Instruments Inc. and Hitachi Ltd. said today that they would combine efforts over the next 10 years to design advanced computer memory chips.
The companies said they would form a research team at Texas Instruments' subsidiary in Miho, Japan, to design a 64-megabit chip, which can store the equivalent of 2,800 pages of printed text and significantly extend the prowess of computers from today's most advanced levels.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.62
4.68
7.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.49
4.54
7.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.55
4.57
6.98
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.96
6.96
8.12
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.89
7.91
8.41
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
8.90
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.88
6.87
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Times Sq. District Appoints President
The Times Square Business Improvement District, a self-assessing association of commercial interests in the area, named its first president yesterday.
She is Gretchen Dykstra, director of National Video Resources, a Rockefeller Foundation project that concentrates on the distribution of independent works on videocassettes.
The appointment was announced by Arthur Sulzberger Jr., the chairman of the group and the deputy publisher of The New York Times.
The group, one of 17 business improvement districts in the city, was set up in July to improve the quality of life in the Times Square area.
It plans to supplement city services there, providing additional security, sanitation, social services and tourist information.
The area covers 41st to 53d Streets between the Avenue of the Americas and Eighth Avenue.


Nortankers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rebounding From Criticism on Economy, Bush Seeks More Stable Ground
President Bush sought today to strike a cautious new balance in his public remarks about the economy, apparently mindful of recent statements that experts say helped send a key barometer of the stock market skidding by more than 160 points in two sessions of trading over the last five days.
In a brief interview with reporters for six NBC-owned television stations, the President called the economy "sluggish," but declined to emphasize either its best or worst aspects.


EMI Music Publishing Fills Chairman's Post
EMI Music Publishing Worldwide, the world's largest music publisher, said yesterday that its vice chairman, Martin N. Bandier, had been named chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Bandier had also been president and chief operating officer of the SBK Records Group, a record label that EMI operates with its parent, Thorn EMI P.L.C. of London.


19th-Century School Raises 20th-Century Issue of Burden of Racial Balance
The sooty hulk of Maloney School, built in 1889, sits on a hill above South Main Street, as forbidding as a haunted castle.
Every weekday more than 300 children enter it to study in classrooms out of a past century.
Even the Irish name is out of date at a school where 79 percent of the pupils are Hispanic.
But the school is at the center of a debate that is very much part of the 20th century: Who should bear the burden of racial balance?


Offshore Logistics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bleep-Blip Animation
BLEEPING and blipping, Sony's new video "Animation Computer" encourages younger children to make simple computer-graphic drawings on a television screen.
And the program, part of the "My First Sony" series, dares older children to try animation by choosing among 42 geometric shapes and 14 natural shapes (including sunshine, clouds, rain and waves) that can be placed anywhere on the screen.


Essay; Absorbing The Outsiders
Sarmite Elerte, 34, strikes me as the most fascinating woman in the former Soviet union.
In the dangerous early days of breakup, she was a key agitator for the Latvian Popular Front; in the recent period of new independence, she took time out to have a baby; in the sobering time of building a nation, she is becoming managing editor of Diena, the most adamantly independent major new daily among the nations of post-Soviet Europe.


Who Asked a Favor? Who Wrote the Law?
In 1989, two Philadelphia Inquirer reporters won a Pulitzer Prize for analyzing the sources of tax breaks in the 1986 Tax Reform Act.
They dug to find the story behind every loophole -- why it was there, who wanted it, who benefited.
Lawmaking in Congress is a lingering bastion of undisclosed public business.
The source and author of every provision in every law should be disclosed.
Every provision is there because someone wanted it there.
While the cast of characters changes from committee to committee and bill to bill, some members of Congress and Congressional staffers know the history of every provision -- who asked for what.


Bridge
At the end of a tournament there are always players with sad stories to tell, looking for a sympathetic ear.
The diagramed deal, ranking high in that class, was reported by Frank Stewart of Fayette, Ala., and the victim, he says, was a certain Jones, who held the South cards in a Swiss Teams.
The silver lining for Jones was that he had a captive audience during a long car ride home.
The North-South hands represent a bidding problem for anyone.
One would expect good bidders to reach either five clubs or four spades, but as it happens both those plausible contracts must fail.


Longs Drug Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Skywest Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cato Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Eastco Industrial Safety reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Health System Falls Short of Canada's; Pap Smears
To the Editor:
"Ringing: The Health Care Alarm" (editorial, Nov. 8) contains a statement that is both inaccurate and likely to alarm.


Citizens Utilities Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Famous Foreheads In Fortune Campaign
When Fortune magazine introduces a reincarnated version of its "Inside the Mind of Management" trade advertising campaign, the focus will be on foreheads.
In one print ad created by Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, the crowned head of Queen Elizabeth II is shown from the eyebrows up.
"Is anyone really born to manage?" the headline asks.
Two others feature the foreheads of Albert Einstein and Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


U.S. May Study, Not Cap, Rates
Abandoning the idea of a cap on credit card interest rates, House leaders agreed tonight on a measure that would force a Government study to determine whether the rates are too high.
If any measure on credit cards becomes law this year, it is likely to this one.


Koger Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jets' Mersereau Is Hobbling
Will defensive tackle Scott Mersereau ask for an interception bonus clause in his next contract with the Jets?
And next year, will he purposely sprain both of his ankles earlier in the season, perhaps in training camp.
The 6-foot-3-inch, 275-pound nose tackle out of Southern Connecticut smiled today at the tongue-in-cheek suggestions.
Mersereau has been hampered by sprains to both since he first got hurt in the fourth game of the season in Chicago.


Sports of The Times; Magic, Quayle and A Message
WHEN Vice President Dan Quayle recently criticized Magic Johnson for advocating "safe sex" as the primary way to help beat the AIDS epidemic, and suggested instead "abstinence" for unmarried couples, he met with numerous critics, including Dr.
Janet Taylor.
"He's off his rocker if he thinks most people would really abstain," she said.
Taylor is a psychiatrist and could certainly have found a more medically applicable metaphor than "off his rocker," but it expressed aptly, if colloquially, what she had in mind.


Device Is Found to Reduce Air's Drag on Jet Wings
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration has achieved a goal long sought by aeronautical engineers: the elimination of drag-inducing turbulence from air flowing over the wings of an airplane flying faster than sound.
The achievement could lead to greatly reduced fuel consumption by future supersonic airliners.
According to an announcement this week by NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards, Calif., "laminar" air flow, which lacks the usual thin layer of turbulence that hugs the wings of conventional airplanes, was achieved in a specially modified F-16XL fighter.
The experiment resulted in significant drag reduction at speeds well above that of sound, NASA officials said.


On Visit to U.S., Shamir to Find
When Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel addresses a gathering of American Jews in Baltimore on Thursday, he will be talking to philanthropic and community leaders who generally favor territorial compromise in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, a freeze on Jewish settlements and even the eventual creation of a Palestinian state.
All of these are ideas Mr.
Shamir categorically rejects.
Members of the Council of Jewish Federations, before whom Mr.
Shamir is to appear, will almost certainly applaud the Israeli leader, as they usually do.
But a new poll indicates that most of the officers of the council, an assembly of the leaders of Jewish federations nationwide, disagree strongly with his Government's hard-line policies.


Disputed Statue Sells for $275,000
A highly stylized terra-cotta sculpture of a sheep, used in religious ceremonies in West Africa 500 to 1,000 years ago, was sold at Sotheby's to an unidentified buyer for $275,000 yesterday despite a claim of ownership by the Government of Mali.


Egghead Discount Software reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 12


Mulroney Warns Quebec on Division
When Prime Minister Brian Mulroney visited rural Quebec last week he appeared to be testing out a new, blunter approach to the challenge of Quebec separatism, one that many prominent Canadians say may be necessary to stem pressure in the French-speaking province for a vote on independence as early as the fall of 1992.
In place of past efforts to placate and even strike alliances with leaders of the independence movement, Mr.
Mulroney chose a visit to his home region of Charlevoix, east of Quebec City, to align himself with what an increasing number of prominent figures elsewhere in Canada have been telling Quebec: that if it chooses to separate, the rest of Canada would insure that the divorce would inflict serious economic and other losses.


AFP Imaging Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Homecall Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


November, Where Is Thy Sting?


Walkout By Teachers Leaves Rift
Illegal walkouts by public schoolteachers often leave behind bitter feelings.
But here in Little Ferry, a working-class borough of 10,000 residents, a strike has produced more than bitterness.
The school superintendent wants to dismiss 37 teachers on the ground that their two-week strike in September has made them unfit to instruct children.
But a state judge has barred the Little Ferry School Board from acting on the case until June, when clasess end for the summer.


Oneita Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Helm Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


General Parcel Service Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


USAir-Midway
The USAir Group Inc. said it agreed to pay Midway Airlines Inc. $16.7 million for 12 jet takeoff and landing slots at LaGuardia Airport in New York and 10 others at Washington National Airport.
USAir said most of the slots would be used to operate new flights to Midway Airport in Chicago, replacing service that was lost when Midway Airlines ceased operations last week.
The agreement is subject to approval by the Justice and Transportation Departments, as well as the Federal bankruptcy judge overseeing the Midway case.


Too Hasty, Too Harsh on Haitians
At least temporarily, a Federal judge has rightly forbidden the United States to forcibly send hundreds of boat people back to Haiti.
Many of them may not have a legitimate long-term claim to safe haven.
But as long as that bone-poor island country goes on without a legitimate government, forcing them back constitutes cruel haste.
The United States has good reason to monitor and regulate the flow of Haitians into this country.
Past experience teaches that it doesn't take much to turn this flow into a flood.
But that's no justification for Washington to panic.


Macy's Payments Still Guaranteed
Heller Financial Inc., one of the nation's largest factoring companies, continues to guarantee payment for shipments of merchandise to R. H. Macy &amp; Company on a limited basis, though Heller told its clients last week that it was suspending credit lines to the department store operator.


In the Window, Sophia, Madonna, Norman et al.
Since Simon Doonan started decorating the Christmas windows at Barneys New York a few years ago, they have become for adults what the holiday windows at Lord &amp; Taylor have long been for children.
This year 18 windows at the main store, at Seventh Avenue and 17th Street in Chelsea, will once again explore pop celebrity, fashion and politics, this time with larger-than-life papier-mache caricatures of people featured in Vanity Fair magazine during 1991.
At 6:30 tonight, the store and magazine will hold a private party to unveil the windows; tomorrow, when the store opens, the windows go on view to the public through Jan. 1.


In Albany, Budget Troubles Linked to Years of 'One Shots'
On paper, there is a simple explanation for why New York State, for the third year in a row, is staring at a huge gap in its budget: the economy is in even worse shape than policy makers here thought it would be when the budget was approved.
Tax collections are down, demands for social services are up, and the budget is no longer in balance.
But aside from the obvious argument that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders erred on the side of optimism, there is perhaps an even more fundamental problem at work, many analysts say, and that has to do with how the budgets have been put together to begin with.


TIS Mortgage Investment Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Near Deal To Settle Claims By the Iranians
The United States and Iran are nearing final agreement on compensation of about $275 million to Teheran for undelivered Iranian-owned, American-made military equipment dating from before Iran's 1979 revolution, State Department officials said today.
The accord, which follows the release of two Western hostages by Iranian-backed groups in Lebanon on Monday, represents a small but important step toward resolving financial differences between the two countries stemming from the settlement of Iran's 1979 seizure of the American Embassy in Teheran.


Milton Kestenberg, 79, Lawyer Who Won Holocaust Reparations
Milton Kestenberg, a lawyer and real-estate manager who helped win reparations for victims of the Holocaust and who organized aid for children who survived it, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and lived in Sands Point, N.Y.
He died of cancer, his family said.


U.S. Health System Falls Short of Canada's
To the Editor:
Editorial opinion is not obliged to adhere closely to fact, but the sweeping allegations about Canadian health care in "Ringing: The Health Care Alarm" (editorial, Nov. 8) goes well beyond the norm of editorial license.
What are the facts?


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-18 WINTER STRAINS SOVIET BUDGET
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev appealed to a shrunken Soviet Parliament to spend money it does not have to get through the winter.
The Russian republic refused.
Page A1 The United States promised Moscow $1.5 billion worth of food aid.
A18


In Shift, Sihanouk Is Named Cambodian President
Prince Norodom Sihanouk was declared Cambodia's President today in a move that was clearly intended to foil the Khmer Rouge in its hopes of returning to power.
The unexpected announcement by the Vietnamese-installed Cambodian Government came less than a week after Prince Sihanouk, the former head of state and rebel leader, returned home after spending most of the last 20 years in exile.


Perkin-Elmer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Calendar: Sales to Fairs, And Antiques to Toys
Four Days  Piers 88, 90 and 92, 12th Avenue between 48th and 55th Streets; (201) 384-0010.


McDonnell Challenge To Boeing
For the Boeing Company, the agreement between McDonnell Douglas and Taiwan Aerospace raises the threat that both of the Seattle aircraft builder's competitors would be government subsidized.
Boeing has long complained that Airbus Industrie, a European consortium, can discount its jetliners heavily because of these subsidies.
"The fact that the Taiwan Goverment is a major holder in the Taiwan Aerospace Corporation makes you wonder what effect that will have on commercial decision making," Roy Phillips, Boeing's director of international joint programs development, said in a telephone interview.
"We would like to see that sort of thing stopped."


3-Week-Old Baby Abandoned in Brooklyn
A 3-week-old baby was abandoned in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, on Tuesday night by a man who stepped out of a cab and handed the child to a woman, the police said.
"This little boy is in good health, clean, no signs of abuse," said Sgt.
Craig Griffin of the 79th Precinct detectives.
The detectives' unit and the Missing Persons Squad are trying to identify the child.


BUSH TO ORDER END OF RULES ALLOWING RACE-BASED HIRING
President Bush is expected Thursday to direct all Federal agencies to phase out regulations authorizing the use of racial preferences and quotas in hiring and promotions when he signs the civil rights bill recently passed by Congress.
The regulations affect all companies as well as Federal agencies.
A senior Administration official said tonight that the President's action, which is spelled out in a statement prepared for release on Thursday, is intended to underscore his opposition to affirmative action programs that give "unfair preferences" to minorities or women.
Conservative Pressure
The directive, which reverses Federal regulatory policies that date from 1965, comes as he signs a bill in which he reached a compromise with Congress on job discrimination.


Thomas E. Hanigan Jr.; Executive, 69
Thomas E. Hanigan Jr. a retired executive vice president of W. R. Grace &amp; Company, a diversified chemicals concern, died on Sunday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 69 years old and lived in Rye, N.Y.
He died of pneumonia, said a Grace spokesman, Fred Bona.


Citing North Korea Atom Threat, U.S. to Delay Troop Cuts in South
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said today that the United States will indefinitely postpone planned troop cuts in South Korea because of the threat posed by North Korea's suspected development of nuclear weapons.
The postponement will affect the second phase of a troop reduction that had been planned to reduce numbers by about 6,000 to 30,000 between 1993 and 1995.
The first phase has already cut American troop numbers to about 39,000 and is due to reduce those numbers to 36,000 by the end of next year.
Condemning what he said were North Korea's 40 years of terrorism and aggression, Mr.
Cheney said troop cuts planned to take effect after 1992 would not be considered until Pyongyang submitted its nuclear program to international inspection.
South Korean and American officials say North Korean plans to build a nuclear bomb are the gravest threat to regional security.
The North says its nuclear plants are for peaceful purposes only.
The Defense Secretary spoke at a news conference after two days of miltary strategy talks with South Korean defense officials.
Defense Minister Lee Jong Koo said both nations would apply diplomatic pressure on North Korea before considering strong measures to force an end to Pyongyang's nuclear development.
President Bush, who has rescheduled for Jan. 5-7 his postponed visit to South Korea, announced in September that the United States would eliminate its ground-launched and seaborne tactical nuclear weapons worldwide.
The reduction was expected to include about 100 nuclear weapons in South Korea.
Washington has refused to deny or confirm the presence of nuclear arms in South Korea.
Early this month the South Korean President, Roh Tae Woo, pledged that South Korea would not manufacture, possess or deploy nuclear weapons and challenged North Korea to do the same.
North Korea has previously refused to accept international inspection until American nuclear arms are withdrawn from the South.
The Koreas are still technically at war following their 1950-53 conflict.
--------------------
U.S. Stepped Up Warnings
SEOUL, South Korea, Nov. 20 (Special to The New York Times) -- American and South Korean defense officials stepped up their warnings to North Korea today, declaring after a day of high-level talks that Pyongyang's "nuclear arms program must be stopped in advance without fail."
Though accurate intelligence is sketchy, Defense Department experts say they believe the North is probably two to five years away from producing a crude nuclear weapon.
Nonetheless, the United States, Japan and South Korea have become increasingly vocal about their fears that the unpredictable Government of President Kim Il Sung could soon have access to nuclear weapons, and a concerted effort has begun to force Mr.
Kim to abandon the effort.
The North's nuclear effort has been the focus of the talks here.
The statement today also appeared part of a broader campaign by the Bush Administration in recent weeks to counter assertions that the United States has neglected Asia and is eager to vastly reduce the number of troops it stations in the region.


American Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BE Avionics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27


Somalia Hospitals Crowded As Rebels Battle for Control
Hundreds of people are filling hospitals in Somalia's capital as forces loyal to a rebel military commander battle to take control of the seaside city, aid workers said today.
"The humanitarian situation is catastrophic," said an aid worker in touch with the city of Mogadishu, where fierce fighting between factions of the United Somali Congress has shaken the country for months.


Enviropact Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Accomplices Guilty of Murder In 'Gay Bashing' Case in Queens
In a case that galvanized gay people in New York City, two young men were convicted of murder yesterday in the killing of a man who was beaten with a hammer and stabbed with a knife because, prosecutors said, he was gay.
A jury in State Supreme Court in Queens delivered the verdicts after a three-week trial in which the two defendants were accused of taking part in what the prosecutors called a savage "gay bashing" spree.
The two were convicted not of having inflicted the single fatal stab wound but of having "acted in concert" with a friend who did.


It's Still a Scramble For Bucs' Testaverde To Fulfill Potential
Could there still be a place for Vinny Testaverde in Canton, Ohio?
A more pressing question: Is there still be a place for him in Tampa Bay?


Dev-Tech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sony Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


HOME IMPROVEMENT
ATTACHING wood to concrete or other masonry can be the most challenging part of remodeling a basement or applying paneling over brick.
Once you have the right fastener, however, the difficulty ebbs.
Several types of fastener are made for the purpose.
For many jobs, like mounting furring strips (1-by-3-inch boards for supporting paneling) or 2-by-4s, masonry nails, cut nails or concrete screws are adequate.


Yields of Money Funds Are Down in Week
Yields on tax-exempt and taxable money market funds fell moderately in the week that ended yesterday, according to IBC/Donoghue's, which monitors them and publishes The Money Fund Report.
"There were some postponements of large municipal offerings, which affected the supply and tended to lower interest rates," Walter S. Frank, the chief economist for IBC/ Donoghue's, said concerning the yields on tax-exempt funds.
"We will see a heavy supply soon, which will probably bolster yields."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Jean Emilien  S.O.B.'s
Jean Emilien is a one-man band from Madagascar, singing, playing harmonica and strumming a kabosy, a miniature six-stringed guitar akin to the Brazilian cavaquinho.
Last Thursday night at S.O.B.'s, however, he wasn't exactly alone.
A circle of people, presumably from Madagascar, filled the dance floor, throwing their hands in the air and dancing quick steps to go with Mr.
Emilien's ebullient songs.


Bush and the Abortion Issue
The President won another battle with Congress over abortion this week, but in the coming year that issue will pose many tests for him.
News analysis, page A22.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Michael Bolton  The Paramount Seventh Avenue at 33d Street Through Saturday
Michael Bolton knows how to make every woman in the audience feel special.
At the Paramount on Tuesday night, opening a four-night run that continues tomorrow night and concludes on Saturday, this pop-soul singer did not turn an idle ear to the shrieks, screams and pleas of his fans.
During some between-song patter, in which he tried to educate his audience about the intense soul-searching he goes through every time he writes one of his mega-hits, he was interrupted so many times by hysterical demands to "take your jacket off!" that he at last relented and let the offending garment drip seductively off his shoulder.


Polish Farmers Join Vanguard of Political Apathy
Eugeniusz Macikowski, a 59-year-old farmer with a weather-beaten face and gnawing fears about the future, belongs to the most popular political group in Poland's recent elections: He didn't vote.
"I was frustrated because things are getting worse," Mr.
Macikowski said of the Oct. 27 parliamentary elections.
"We've been forgotten. The small farms are collapsing. Soon, the entire village is going be bought up by some speculator who's made his money in trade. Then it will be just like prewar Poland."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Demonstrators Interrupt Match  More than 40 demonstrators threw sand and seeds onto a court and shouted anti-apartheid slogans yesterday, temporarily halting play on opening day of the Association of Tennis Professionals World doubles final in Johannesburg, South Africa.
A police spokeswoman, Capt.
Henriette Bester, said 41 people were arrested and released after paying fines of $18 each.
Americans Patrick Galbraith and Todd Witsken were in the final set of a match with Canadians Grant Connell and Glenn Michibata when the demonstrators began blowing whistles and throwing bags of sand and seeds onto the court.
Play resumed after a half-hour delay, and Connell and Michibata won, 6-3, 3-6, 7-5. (AP) BOXING  McClellan Defeats Mugabi  Gerald McClellan of Freeport, Ill., knocked down John (the Beast) Mugabi three times in the first round last night in London to win the vacant World Boxing Organization middleweight title.
McClellan needed just two minutes to defeat the former World Boxing Council light-middleweight champion, recording his 21st knockout in 25 fights. (AP)


Securities Panel Inquiry on Aca Joe
Aca Joe Inc., the clothing retailer based in Brisbane, Calif., said the Securities and Exchange Commission had sent it a letter of inquiry into possible securities law violations.
The company said it had responded to the agency's October letter by providing requested documents on its contractual relationship with United Trend Holdings, a Hong Kong-based company that owns 85 percent of Aca Joe's outstanding shares.


For Tennis Prodigies, Camp Becomes Job
It began as a four-day tryout and look-see at the esteemed Harry Hopman tennis academy.
But Fonia Humphries, shopping around for a tennis program for her 13-year-old son, Scott, liked what she found so much that she left her son behind.
Putting him in a total tennis environment suddenly seemed the right thing to do; Scott, she was informed, was ripe for Hopman's tennis think tank.
In the middle of her flight home, she placed a queasy telephone call to her husband to break the news that there was going to be one fewer son around the house.


CHRONICLE
The bells of the carillon will ring at St.
Malachy's Roman Catholic Church on West 49th Street this afternoon, for the first time since 1983, at a memorial service for the Rev.
George W. Moore, the pastor, who died in June.
The carillon was broken, so VICTOR POTAMKIN, the automobile dealer, and THOMAS LEAHY, senior vice president of the CBS Broadcast Group, had it restored as a tribute to the priest.
It will play its familiar "There's No Business Like Show Business" at the service, as it used to during matinee hours.
Hardly a funereal tune.


Council Considers Banning Personal Charges on City Credit Cards
Two months after Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch drew fire for charging personal expenses on city credit cards, the City Council has pounced on the issue, holding hearings yesterday on legislation that would make the practice a crime.
The legislation was introduced by Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone and is seen by many Dinkins administration officials as a largely symbolic move intended to embarrass Mayor David N. Dinkins and his top staff.


Mike Scott Retires
MIKE SCOTT, whose pitching helped Houston win the National League West title in 1986, when he won the league's Cy Young Award, told the Astros yesterday that he was retiring.
The 36-year-old right-hander had surgery last winter on his right shoulder to repair a tear.
He made two starts, going 0-2 and pitching seven innings, and then went on the disabled list with a sore shoulder.
His record for a career that began in 1979 with the Mets was 124-108, including 18-10 in 1986, when he struck out 306 batters and led the league with an earned run average of 2.22.


Petition Filed On Insurer
The Insurance Commissioner of California said today that he had filed a petition with the California Supreme Court to overturn a lower court's decision last week giving holders of municipal guarantee contracts in the failed Executive Life Insurance Company the same status as insurance policyholders.
The decision has created uncertainty over plans to revive Executive Life.
Unless the ruling is reversed, policyholders could receive less money so that the holders of municipal guarantee contracts could be accommodated.


Odetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


B.C.C.I. Unit's Deposits Fall
Deposits fell by $540 million in the third quarter at First American Bankshares, the banking company in Washington that was discovered to have ties to the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Paul G. Adams, First American's chief operating officer, said depositors began withdrawing money from First American after bank regulators seized B.C.C.I. in July.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Denver Board of Water Commissioners priced $58.9 million in certificates of participation through Goldman, Sachs at a range of 5.30 percent for the 1995 maturity to 6.35 percent for the 2003 maturity.


A Hastily Called Budget Hearing, Minus One Executive
When the Republican leader of the Nassau County Board of Supervisors convened a budget hearing today to excoriate the county administration for proposing a 25 percent property tax increase, the chief witness, the Republican county executive, never showed up.
Instead, the executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, issued a news release withdrawing his plan for another tax increase -- intended to raise $47 million through a sales tax on heating oil -- which he had proposed only a week before, and challenged the supervisors to find the money to balance the budget some other way.


Players International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dawson Geophysical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Events: Orchids and Asian Plants
Graceful Blooms  Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue (off Eastern Parkway), Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.


Votes Seen For House Banking Bill
The logjam in Congress over banking legislation appeared close to breaking today, as Republicans and Democrats in the House of Representatives confidently predicted passage of a stripped-down measure on Thursday.
Lawmakers in the Senate predicted that broader banking legislation there would be abandoned in favor of the House bill.
"Substantial progress has been made on a narrower version of the banking bill," the Senate Democratic Leader, George Mitchell, said tonight after conferring with Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady and with the Senate Banking Committee's Democratic chairman and ranking Republican.


Calprop Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tears for East Timor
East what?
That's how many Americans might react to the massacres in East Timor, a former Portuguese colony that Indonesia invaded in 1975, then annexed.
At least 19 demonstrators were killed there last week in a bloody confrontation with Indonesian troops.
The victims were reportedly among 3,500 Roman Catholics who sought to lay flowers on the grave of a youth killed by soldiers on Oct. 28.
Strife in East Timor usually goes unreported, since access is restricted by Jakarta's military rulers.
This time two American journalists, Allan Nairn and Amy Goodman, not only witnessed the killings but were mauled as well.
Creditably, Portugal calls for an international inquiry, and rejects as a farce Indonesia's promised investigation.


Energy Conversion Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
There have been thousands of hands shaken, kisses and hugs bestowed, congratulations accepted; it was a week of pageantry and celebration for L. JAY OLIVA, who was installed yesterday as the 14th president of New York University.
He succeeds JOHN BRADEMAS, who announced his resignation in July 1990.
Dr.
Oliva came to the school, the largest private university in the nation, 32 years ago and rose through the ranks to become provost and, most recently, chancellor and executive vice president.
All week long he has been on a merry-go-round of receptions, luncheons and dinners with students, deans, faculty members, trustees, alumni, government figures and the heads of such diverse institutions as the University of Ghana, Moscow State University and the University of Sao Paulo.
Dr.
Oliva was clearly reveling in the moment on Wednesday at a black-tie dinner given by the trustees for 200 people in the university's Elmer Holmes Bobst Library.
It was a group he called "family." A film that documented his life was shown: there were shots of him playing the bagpipe and working out in a school gym.
Dr.
Oliva said his familiarity with all the constituencies of the institution helped him get through the whirlwind schedule.
"I don't need a speech writer to tell me, 'Say this and don't say that,' " he said.
"I know the loves and hates of every group that I meet."
But it was an emotional week.
"Everything catches me by the throat," he said.
"For example, since 1960 I've taught 9,772 students" about Russian history.
"There is at least one student from each class here," he went on.
"It's quite an experience to see people who are doctors and lawyers, to see my first Rhodes scholar again. This is like living my entire life over again emotionally."
But he said he wasn't losing his perspective.
"Two weeks ago," he said, "I called one of the deans and a student answered. 'Who is calling?' I was asked. 'The chancellor,' I answered. 'The chancellor of what?' came the response."


House Leaders Decide Against Vote on S.&amp; L. Bailout Bill
House Speaker Thomas S. Foley said today that the pay-as-you go means of providing new money for the savings and loan bailout would probably not be permitted to go to the full House because it stood little chance of passage.
Such a plan, approved by the House Banking Committee, 27 to 25, on Wednesday night, would provide $20 billion outright; any additional money would have to come from cuts in other programs.


135 Feared Lost As Haitian Boat Sinks Off Cuba
As many as 135 Haitian refugees are believed to have drowned off the coast of Cuba on Tuesday night, when their sailboat was wrecked in stormy seas, the Cuban press agency reported today.
It was the first such disaster to be reported since a sudden exodus of Haitians from their island began in late October.


YELTSIN HONORED ON GERMAN VISIT
Boris N. Yeltsin, the President of the Russian republic, arrived in Germany today for a three-day visit that he said would mark "the beginning of direct cooperation between the new Russia and the new Germany."
Mr.
Yeltsin was greeted with military honors that reflected his new status as a dominant figure in the fragmenting Soviet Union.
The tricolor Russian flag flew at the Cologne-Bonn airport, where he landed, and a German military band played the Russian anthem, which had never before been heard here at an official event.


RESULTS PLUS
N.I.T.
Purdue Tops Ball State  Matt Waddell, a freshman, scored 12 points and Woody Austin, a senior, scored 11 as Purdue beat Ball State, 56-48, yesterday in the preseason National Invitation Tournament in West Lafayette, Ind.
Purdue won its season opener for the 20th time in 21 years and kept Ball State (1-1) without a victory in Mackey Arena in the sixth meeting of the state rivals. (AP) Oklahoma State 86, Evansville 57: Cornell Hatcher and freshman Bryant Reeves provided surprising frontcourt scoring last night in leading Oklahoma State to victory over Evansville in a first-round game in Stillwater, Okla. (AP) N.H.L.
Nordiques Win One  Joe Sakic scored two goals and added an assist as the Quebec Nordiques ended a losing streak at six games with a 5-2 victory over the Montreal Canadiens last night in Quebec.
The victory was the first for the Nordiques under General Manager Pierre Page, who replaced Dave Chambers as coach last Sunday and was a loser in his debut Monday night. (AP) Flames 3, Canucks 2: Tim Sweeney's goal at 14:01 of the third period, his first of the season, gave Calgary a victory over visiting Vancouver.
The victory was the Flames' first in their last five home games (1-3-1). (AP) N.B.A.
Bucks Beat Bullets  Dale Ellis scored 18 points, including 7 in an 18-1 third-quarter spurt that lifted the Milwaukee Bucks to a 112-87 victory over the Washington Bullets last night in Milwaukee.
The Bucks evened their record at 6-6.
Washington (4-8) lost its third in a row. (AP) Rockets 106, Timberwolves 102: Kenny Smith scored 5 of his 19 points in the final 38 seconds and Larry Smith filled in for Hakeem Olajuwon with 10 points and 16 rebounds as Houston defeated visiting Minnesota.
The victory gives Houston an 8-2 record, matching the best start in franchise history.
Defeats Japan  Michelle Akers-Stahl scored two goals as the United States beat Japan 3-0 yesterday and finished the opening round of the first world women's soccer championship in Foshan, China, with a perfect record. (AP)


Quotation of the Day
"When I see all the killing -- a young woman dead, young kids getting shot, young woman, young kids getting killed, dogs eating people -- I said, hey, I got no choice. I've got to get out." -- GASTON JOLICOEUR, a Haitian refugee.  [ A12:3. ]


Halpin Vetoes Plan to Raise Property Taxes
With a cash crunch looming, the Suffolk County Executive today vetoed the County Legislature's plan for closing a $51 million budget gap, saying the money should come from cuts in next year's budget, not from tax increases.
The immediate losers, should the two sides be unable to agree, would be the county employees and welfare recipients due to get checks at the start of next month.


Institutional Investor Will Lead N.A.S.D.
Underscoring the growing significance of institutional investors in the marketplace, the National Association of Securities Dealers has selected the head of a mutual fund company as its chairman.
The N.A.S.D.'s selection of Charles B. Johnson, president of Franklin Distributors Inc. and its parent firm, Franklin Resources Inc., bucks a trend of many years.
The group, which oversees the Nasdaq over-the-counter trading system, has traditionally chosen executives from member brokerage firms as chairman, even though they make up only part of the N.A.S.D.'s constituency.


Review/Film; Immigrant Mice Face the Frontier
"An American Tail: Fievel Goes West" continues the saga of the Mousekewitzes, a plucky family of immigrant mice who, in the animated 1986 hit "An American Tail," made their way from Czarist Russia to America, naively believing they would find the streets paved with cheese.
The sequel finds the family living a miserable hand-to-mouth existence in a New York City tenement and longing for a better life.
Young Fievel Mousekewitz, whose voice is again supplied by Phillip Glasser in a piping boyish voice, dreams of becoming a Wild West lawman like his idol, the legendary canine Wylie Burp.
His sister, Tanya, yearns to be a singer.


U.S. Official in India to Discuss Limiting Spread of Nuclear Arms
Reginald Bartholomew, Under Secretary of State for International Security, arrived here today to discuss the Bush Administraton's concerns about India's nuclear policy and to encourage the Government to sign the treaty against the spread of nuclear weapons.
Judging from comments by Indian officials in advance of Mr.
Bartholomew's arrival, he appears unlikely to make significant progress on the issue.
India seems to be willing to offer a conciliatory gesture to Washington by not continuing discussions over the proposed sale of a 10-megawatt research reactor to Iran.


Managua Journal; Nicaraguans, Lots of Them, Are Back in Business
A motorist pulling up to a traffic light in Managua is immediately besieged by the noisy, disorderly free enterprise and grass-roots capitalism that have come to Nicaragua since the leftist Sandinista Front left power last year.
Vendors surround the car, tap the windows insistently and wave offerings that range from outdoor television antennas and tools to Chilean grapes, plastic tummy trimmers and Christmas toys.


In Eye of Economic Storm, the Port Authority Battens Down
Buffeted by the recession and humbled somewhat by the mixed results of its ambitious innovations of the last decade, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is pulling back.
It is no longer planning the incinerators, industrial parks and other economic development projects that occupied it in the 80's.
The huge agency -- the largest, most varied, most powerful port authority in the country -- is returning to basics, concentrating its money, expertise and attention on renewing its prime assets: the region's airports, trans-Hudson bridges and tunnels, the port and the PATH rail line that connects Newark, Jersey City, Hoboken and Manhattan.
And even with $1.7 billion in annual revenue, its ability to finance everything it would like to do is uncertain.
Following a Mandate
"We're in a period, and I think it will be a sustained period, of limited resources," said Stanley Brezenoff, who became the Port Authority's executive director last year and who once served as Edward I. Koch's first deputy mayor.
"Like everyone else in the region, we're experiencing the effects of the recession."


Handleman Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Before Public Theater, An Immigrant Shelter
To the Editor:
Further to "Papp Proved That Landmarks Law Works" by Frank B. Gilbert (letter, Nov. 13), on Joseph Papp's 1965 negotiation for the old Astor Library: In 1965, the building's owner was United H.I.A.S.
Service (Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society), which acquired the former library as its world headquarters and temporary shelter for Jewish refugees and immigrants to the United States in January 1920.
In the book "Visa to Freedom," Mark Wischnitzer quotes a message from President Warren G. Harding when H.I.A.S. dedicated the building: "I am informed that the new house was made possible by gifts from persons who came to America as immigrants. It seems to me there could be no more emphatic testimony to the usefulness and effectiveness of your society's work for Americanization."


Anger Against Governors Reflected in 3-State Poll
Angry about tax increases imposed in troubled economic times, residents of New Jersey and Connecticut are taking out their discontent on their Governors, giving them generally dismal approval ratings in a New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.
While only a quarter of those polled in the two states said they approved of their Governor's performance, New York's Governor, Mario M. Cuomo, received somewhat stronger support, with a 37 percent approval rating among residents of New York City and six surrounding New York counties.


Ogilvy New York Lays Off 7% of Its Staff
Two weeks after losing the creative portion of its flagship $60 million American Express green charge card account, Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York has laid off more than 7 percent of its staff.
The agency announced yesterday that 51 out of its 695 employees would be dismissed, effective immediately.
The layoffs, which had been expected after the loss of the creative account to Chiat/Day/Mojo Inc. in New York, were made across the board, a spokeswoman said.


The Art Market
"Four years ago, if someone asked me for a loan to buy a collection of baseball cards, I would have laughed," said Bruce Miller, founder of the Art Funding Corporation, a Manhattan-based business that lends collectors, gallery owners and independent dealers the money to purchase art.
"I used to only get involved with fine art, but not any longer. In this market you have to diversify."
Mr.
Miller admitted that his portfolio, which he said he values "in the mid seven figures," is tiny compared with those of the major lenders for art -- Citibank, Rosenthal &amp; Rosenthal, Sotheby's, Chase Manhattan Bank or IBJ Schroder.
But times have changed, as everyone in the business knows.
With the art market struggling to find appropriate price levels and the speculators who drove up art prices in the 80's having run far away (some of them all the way into bankruptcy), for some investors art has become more of a liability than an asset.


Review/Music; Seduction in a Pungent Baroque Mix
"I was a musician," Marc-Antoine Charpentier wrote in his epitaph, "thought to be among the good ones by the good, and among the ignorant ones by the ignorant." Anyone privileged enough to have been at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Wednesday night would have been far more generous than the composer himself.
William Christie led his historical-instruments group, Les Arts Florissants, in a stunning recital of the French Baroque composer's sacred music that inaugurated a welcome three-year relationship with the academy.
Mr.
Christie's identification with this repertory is so strong that when he founded this vocal and instrumental ensemble in 1979, he took its name from a work by Charpentier.
He has since built a worldwide reputation for the group with more than 20 distinguished recordings for Harmonia Mundi/France, championing French Baroque music; much of it has not been heard in this century; some of it is still unpublished.
In 1989, for example, Mr.
Christie presented Jean Baptiste Lully's opera "Atys" at the Brooklyn Academy.
It was hypnotically performed, seeming both thoroughly historical and distinctively modern, a balletic opera combining elements of seduction, devotion and courtly gesture.


Uncovered Short Sales Post an Increase on the Big Board
The New York Stock Exchange reported that short interest increased by 43.3 million shares in the month ended Nov. 15, rising to 762.4 million shares.
That is equal to about eight-tenths of 1 percent of all shares listed on the Big Board.
Short interest for October was 719.1 million.
In October, short interest had fallen from the September total, but the November numbers reverse that trend.
The November numbers are still below the year's high, which came in February, when there were 792.4 million shares held short.


Listen to the Silence
To Guernica, Coventry, Stalingrad and Dresden the world may now add Vukovar and Dubrovnik.
Europe thought it had finally banished the horrors of total warfare in 1945.
This photograph by Fred Conrad of The Times portrays a crueler truth.
But it need not be an inevitable truth.
To stare at this picture of unburied bodies from the siege of Vukovar in bleeding Croatia is to see the need for the world to act.
For now, the fighting is limited to Croatia, in what used to be Yugoslavia.
But unless civilized powers bestir themselves, there's no certainty it will stop there.


Roberts Pharmaceutical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


UGI Unit Bids For Petrolane
A unit of the UGI Corporation, a Pennsylvania utility and marketer of propane, offered to invest $122.5 million to help restructure the struggling Petrolane Gas Service L.P.
The cash offer to Petrolane bondholders from UGI's Amerigas unit competes with a $100 million bid made in September by Clayton &amp; Dubilier, the New York buyout firm.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday with an article about AIDS awareness at black churches misstated the date of an address by the Rev.
Dr.
Calvin O. Butts 3d of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem.
He spoke on Nov. 10, not last Sunday.


Market Place; Wall St. Still Hot On Slot Machines
DEADWOOD, S.D., has the graves of Wild Bill Hickock and Calamity Jane, 1,800 residents and about as many gambling and slot machines.
Atlantic City might be desperate, Las Vegas struggling, but the prospect of more gambling in places like Deadwood is one explanation offered for the doubling and redoubling in the stock prices of companies that make these machines.
Last week, two makers of gambling and amusement machines, WMS Electronic Games and Bally Gaming International sold new stock, squeaking in before the market's plunge on Friday.
Each issue was oversubscribed, even though WMS had lost money in three of the last five years and Bally Gaming had seen its market share collapse.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 573 money market mutual funds increased by $9.02 billion, to $478.20 billion, in the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 212 institutional funds increased by $6.84 billion, to $157.48 billion.
The assets of the 270 general-purpose funds were up by $1.27 billion, to $174.44 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds increased by $460 million, to $146.28 billion, the institute said.


U.S. Diplomat Offered Aid, Ex-Drug Smuggler Testifies
A founding member of the Medellin cocaine cartel testified today that an American diplomat once offered to let him ship drugs into the United States if he would assist a United States Government effort to supply weapons to rebels seeking the overthrow of the Sandinistas in Nicaragua.
Taking the stand for his third day of testimony at the Federal Court trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the witness, Carlos Lehder Rivas, said the proposal came during a meeting with an American vice-consul in Cali, Colombia, and another man who was introduced to him only as a higher-ranking American official.


Thumbing His Nose at Congress; Mr. Bush Signs -- and Undermines -- the Rights Bill
In a festive Rose Garden ceremony yesterday, President Bush embraced the Civil Rights Act of 1991 and signed it into law.
But he did his best, in the fine print of a formal signing statement, to undermine that law and appease its opponents.
What counts more, fortunately, is what the law says and not what the White House says it says.
The act is a signal legislative achievement, restoring and strengthening laws against job discrimination that the Supreme Court gutted with a series of recent misinterpretations.
If the Justices appointed by Presidents Reagan and Bush will read the new law's plain language and its message of reaffirmation of civil rights, there will be more justice in the workplace for minorities, women, the disabled and other victims of bias.


Kinder-Care Case Settled
The former president of Kinder-Care Learning Centers and its ex-chairman agreed yesterday to pay $650,000 to settle a Securities and Exchange Commission case over transactions with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
The settlement permanently bars the defendants, Richard Grassgreen and Perry Mendel, from serving as officers or directors of publicly traded companies.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.62
4.62
N.A.
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.44
4.49
N.A.
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.51
4.55
N.A.
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.97
6.96
N.A.
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.97
7.89
N.A.
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.95
8.90
N.A.
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.89
6.88
N.A.
N.A.- Not available because of Thanksgiving holiday.
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate
**Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer
Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Big B Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Pan Am Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scrapping 'Us Versus Them,' Industry Is Giving Workers a Say and a Stake
In times like these, the typical American company cuts costs by laying people off.
It's a quick if brutal way to face a weak economy.
But at Republic Engineered Steels Inc., one of a handful of companies in the nation owned solely by the people who work there, the workers and managers have avoided mass layoffs by collaborating to cut other costs.


Cardinals Sign Arocha
RENE AROCHA, the Cuban pitcher who defected to the United States on July 10, agreed to a minor league contract with the St.
Louis Cardinals yesterday.


Emergency Phone Services Is the Focus of Dinkins Plan
A special panel convened by Mayor David N. Dinkins announced a tentative plan yesterday to restore telephone service swiftly when accidents like the breakdowns by A.T.&amp; T. occur.
The plan, the first of its kind, could provide a model for other big American cities, as well as other global telecommunications centers.
Telecommunications and business executives who helped prepare the plan say it is an important first step, but acknowledge that it contains few detailed procedures and does not address several fundamental problems.


Reviews/Art; Lancret's Graceful Visions of 18th-Century Life
Nicolas Lancret was not Antoine Watteau.
But that did not deter Catherine II of Russia, Frederick II of Prussia and Louis XV of France from decorating their palaces with his paintings.
Few artists' work was as much in demand at the great courts and noble houses of Europe in the first half of the 18th century.
Since then, however, Lancret's reputation has suffered so much by comparison with his exalted role model that it has taken until now, nearly two and a half centuries after his death in 1743 at the age of 53, for an exhibition to be devoted exclusively to him.


Review/Art; Steadfast Crusader For Modernism
IN the last 15 years of his life, Stuart Davis made some of the greatest paintings any American has made in this century: rigorous yet casually assured concoctions of color, shape and language that infuse the modernist enterprise with an animated, streetwise American punch.
These canvases date from around 1950 to 1964, the year Davis died at the age of 72.
They have the impact of a series of extraordinarily sophisticated billboards compressed to easel-painting size.
Their skewed geometries, everyday words and symbols, saturated colors and thickly painted surfaces seem to jump off the wall.
Their visual jolts are echoed by taut, jazzy titles -- "The Paris Bit," "Colonial Cubism," "Blips and Ifs," "Something on the 8 Ball" and "Little Giant Still Life."


Pan Am Has Wider Loss
Pan American World Airways, seeking to emerge from bankruptcy as a smaller carrier that will concentrate on serving Latin America, yesterday reported a sharply wider loss in the third quarter.
Pan Am posted a $150.3 million loss in the period, compared with a loss of $29.2 million for that period last year.


Review/Film; Bette Midler as a Woman a Lot Like Bette Midler
The hardest thing Bette Midler has to do in "For the Boys," the big, sweeping multi-hanky musical in which she plays a U.S.O. entertainer named Dixie Leonard, is to pretend to be shy.
When in 1942 Dixie is first approached to tour with an established star named Eddie Sparks (James Caan), she is all butterflies.
Can she perform before a large crowd?
Will she get over her jitters?
The film may dwell on these questions, but its audience knows full well that Dixie Leonard, being a lot like Ms.
Midler, can bring down the house even if she's playing an open-air arena in a war zone.
That's the point, of course.
"For the Boys," which is opening today at the Ziegfeld, is a custom-tailored showcase for Ms.
Midler's talents, and it offers her a role in which screen character and offstage persona are powerfully intertwined.
In the 1940's, a period toward which Ms.
Midler has always shown an affinity, an actress with a personality this strong would always have fused her own larger-than-life image with that of whomever she was playing.
Today that happens less often, but Ms.
Midler has wisely taken the bull by the horns.
Acting as one of her own producers, she has seen to it that "For the Boys" offers her an appealing, frank, always pivotal leading role, one that no one else could have played.


Baker (J.) Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Olajuwon Treated For Irregular Heartbeat
A day after scoring 25 points and grabbing 14 rebounds in a victory over the Knicks in Houston on Tuesday night, Rockets center HAKEEM OLAJUWON developed a rapid irregular heartbeat that was being treated at a Houston hospital yesterday.
The episode kept him out of last night's game against the Timberwolves.


Campbell Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Washington Talk; Justices Define Limits of Own Power
The long twilight of liberalism on the Supreme Court, the two decades during which the Warren Court era faded gradually from view, was marked by the inability of either liberal or conservative Justices to achieve success on their own terms.
The Court was so closely divided on so many important issues that only by making a play for the center could either side find a majority.
With the need for compromise as a constraint, change tended to be incremental and at the margins of existing law.


Harlon B. Carter, Longtime Head Of Rifle Association, Dies at 78
Harlon B. Carter, who became the nation's foremost opponent of gun controls in leading the National Rifle Association to its greatest expansion in membership and political influence, died Tuesday at his home in rural Green Valley, Ariz.
He was 78 years old and died of lung cancer, his family said.


At the Bar; For a faltering pioneer in jury selection, the Smith case provides new inspiration.
It is bittersweet indeed to receive a lifetime achievement award at the age of 40.
This month, Cathy Bennett put aside her tasks in West Palm Beach, where she is helping William K. Smith select the six people who will decide his fate.
She went to New Orleans, where the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers honored her for her contributions to the evolving art of picking juries.


Oncor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ruling on Ash May Increase Some Cities' Disposal Costs
Opponents of incineration as a method to dispose of municipal trash won a victory this week, when a Federal appeals court ruled that incinerator ash must be treated as a hazardous waste if it fails toxicity tests.
The ruling on Tuesday by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago came in a suit by the Environmental Defense Fund, a leading advocacy group, against the City of Chicago, which operates an incinerator that generates 130,000 tons of ash a year.
The city contended that the ash was exempt from the more expensive procedures for handling hazardous waste.


Cruise America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


S.I. Youth Charged in Shooting; One Dies and 2 Are Hurt
A high school student drew a gun on a busy street near Staten Island Borough Hall yesterday morning and shot three other students, killing one, the police said.
He then tried to escape on the ferry to Manhattan.
The incident occurred shortly before 8:30 as the hilly streets of the borough's governmental and civic center were filled with people going to school and work.


Last Body Is Found Linked to Rampage
The body of a 73-year-old woman whose son went on a murderous rampage last month was found stuffed in a drainage hole in the basement of her home in Little Neck, Queens, yesterday, apparently her son's seventh victim.
The woman, Marion Brooks, had been missing since Oct. 13, when her son, Andrew T. Brooks Jr., fatally shot his father and three other men and critically wounded two neighbors.
Mr.
Brooks then fled to Long Island, where he held a couple hostage in their home for 28 hours before shooting himself to death.


Treasury Security Prices Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, as short-term issues benefited from an extremely large increase in initial unemployment claims during the week ended Nov. 9.
However, long-term bond traders were unsettled by a report by Market News Service that the Bush Administration has discussed providing tax credits to consumers who buy domestically produced automobiles.
The White House subsequently issued a denial, which was published by Reuters.
Rumors that Japanese investors were selling long-term zero coupon bonds did not help, either.


BRIEFS
*
Applied Solar Energy Corp., City of Industry, Calif., said it and its major shareholder, American Cyanamid Co., had signed an agreement for the acquisition of Applied by Westar Capital for $6 a share. *
Campbell Soup Co., Camden, N.J., said its board had approved a 2-for-1 stock split and an increase in its quarterly dividend to 35 cents a share, from 29 cents.


Vincent Sounds an Alarm on TV Revenue
Baseball Commissioner Fay Vincent has told major league officials that if new television agreements were negotiated today, teams should expect at least 30 percent less than the $1.46 billion now being paid by CBS and ESPN in four-year contracts that expire at the end of 1993.
"It was part of his report to us about a variety of things," said Lou Gorman, general manager of the Boston Red Sox.
"Nobody probed it a lot, but everybody understood it'll be a tough go. It wasn't a rosy forecast."


Art in Review
Julia Scher  Pat Hearn Gallery 31 Wooster Street SoHo Through Dec. 21
Surveillance is the subject of Julia Scher's work, so much so that she has set up her own company to install video surveillance systems.
Here she has converted the gallery into an "ultra high-tech surveillance recording zone," with video cameras lurking everywhere and video monitors suspended from the ceiling and walls.
Ms.
Scher divides the gallery into three chambers; the resulting space suggests a religious site, with ever-deeper mysteries revealed as one penetrates further toward its heart.


At the Bar; For a Faltering Pioneer in Jury Selection, The smith Case Provides New Inspiration.
It is bittersweet indeed to receive a lifetime achievement award at the age of 40.
This month, Cathy Bennett put aside her tasks in West Palm Beach, where she is helping William K. Smith select the six people who will decide his fate.
She went to New Orleans, where the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers honored her for her contributions to the evolving art of picking juries.


South Africans Set Dates for Political Talks
After intense wrangling over procedures and timetables, representatives of the ruling National Party and South Africa's two largest black organizations agreed today that a long-anticipated conference of political parties to discuss South Africa's future should now take place on Dec. 20 and 21.
The conference, which the African National Congress first proposed more than 10 months ago, would lay the foundation for negotiations on a new constitution extending full political rights to the country's black majority.


French Rower Completes Journey Across the Pacific


Books of The Times; Riddling and Rhyming From Hicks to Highbrows
The Spyglass Tree
By Albert Murray
207 pages. Pantheon Books. $21.


Corrections
Because of a production error, a front-page article yesterday about President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's speech to the Soviet Parliament carried an erroneous byline in some editions.
It was by Celestine Bohlen.


New Inquiry For Physician On Abortion
The Lower East Side doctor accused of severing the arm of a fetus during an illegal third-trimester abortion last month is being investigated for performing a botched abortion that led to a woman's death, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The woman died of septic shock after her uterus was perforated during an abortion performed by the doctor, Abu Hayat, last year, according to Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the New York City Medical Examiner's office.
After the woman, Sophie McCoy, died at Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn, Ms.
Borakove said, the Medical Examiner's office classified the death as an "accident due to a surgical complication," a finding that does not preclude the possibility of criminal culpability.
Not in Brooklyn
The report was given to the Brooklyn District Attorney's office and the state Health Department's Office of Professional Medical Conduct as a matter of routine, she said.
But a spokesman for the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, said yesterday that the office had no record of any investigation or charges in connection with Ms.
McCoy's death.
An investigation was begun by the Manhattan District Attorney's office after the Medical Examiner's office learned this week -- amid news reports about other abortions by Dr.
Hayat -- that Ms.
McCoy's abortion had been performed not at Kings County but at his Manhattan office.
A law-enforcement official said the State Department of Health is also investigating the matter, although a Health Department spokesman declined to comment.
Dr.
Hayat did not return several telephone calls to his home and office yesterday.
His lawyer, Jeffrey M. Rubin, said he would not comment on the death of Ms.
McCoy.
Mr.
Rubin said that Dr.
Hayat "categorically denies having performed or attempted to perform an abortion" on the woman whose baby was born without an arm, Rosa Rodriguez.
He refused to say whether Dr.
Hayat had examined Miss Rodriguez or whether she had ever been his patient.
Mr.
Rubin said he is not representing Dr.
Hayat in the Rodriguez case "at this time," although he said he might do so soon.
He said he is currently representing him in an investigation by the State Department of Health, but would not characterize the nature of that investigation.
More Complaints
Ms.
Borakove said that Ms.
McCoy died on Sept. 26, 1990.
According to the Medical Examiner's records, Ms.
Borakove said, Ms.
McCoy had an abortion on Sept. 18, during which her uterus was perforated, or cut.
After the abortion she developed peritonitis, an infection of the abdominal area.
That led to sepsis, a condition that results from the spread of a massive infection throughout the bloodstream.
Law-enforcement officials said yesterday that they had received a total of 15 complaints against Dr.
Hayat since he was charged on Tuesday in connection with Ms.
Rodriguez's case, including eight complaints received yesterday.
Not all those callers to a police special telephone line alleged criminal activity by Dr.
Hayat, the officials said.
Some were charges of misconduct.
One call, for instance, was from a woman who said she had had an abortion in Dr.
Hayat's clinic, realized several weeks later that she was still pregnant, had another abortion, again in Dr.
Hayat's clinic, then gave birth two days later to a stillborn baby.
A spokesman for New York Hospital said yesterday that Miss Rodriguez's baby is "improving" and expected to survive.
A fund established to pay the baby's medical and other expenses received 75 contributions yesterday, Miss Rodriguez's lawyer, Jeffrey Lichtman, said.


The Importance of Being Princeton; A Map of the Stars, Mostly Eclipsed, Is a Modest Best Seller
It was as an admiring outsider from Piscataway that Bob Wolfe took up a bar-stool bet recently that he could name more famous names associated with Princeton than anyone else could -- from Albert Einstein, always the first on anyone's list when the subject comes up around here, to Brooke Shields, the screen ingenue who took a degree in French and ceramics from Princeton University in 1987.
Moving from wager to quest, Mr.
Wolfe, a computer programmer with A.T.&amp; T., recently brought out a small monograph, "Where the Famous Lived in Princeton," with a map, a Baedeker of the great and the merely famous who once called Princeton home.


Just Like That, Tillman Is Back in the Running
One week he sits, and the next week he gains big yardage.
That is how this feast-and-famine season has gone for Lewis Tillman, the Giants' third-year running back.
Against the Cleveland Browns in the Giants' fourth game of the season, Tillman carried 14 times for 90 yards.
But the week before, against the Chicago Bears, he didn't even play on offense.


People
*
Donald L. Gould, 47 years old, has been named to the newly created position of executive vice president at Lintas Marketing Communications, Warren, Mich.
He had previously been associate creative director at Lintas Campbell-Ewald, also in Warren.


Price Is In Better Shape Than Nets
It apparently is unwise to count Mark Price out of a career, a game and even a single play.
He comes back and he brings his team, the Cleveland Cavaliers, along with him.
Kenny Anderson and the Nets found this out the hard way tonight, particularly in one key fourth-quarter sequence of a 116-112 defeat, after Price's two free throws gave the Cavaliers, who had trailed by 17 points after the first half, a 107-106 lead with 2 minutes 16 seconds left in the game.


For Children
'Christmas Spectacular'  Radio City Music Hall 1260 Avenue of the Americas (at 50th Street) Manhattan (212) 307-1000 or (212) 247-4777 Recommended for all ages Through Jan. 7
A spirit of good will permeates the annual holiday show at Radio City's gorgeous hall, which is decorated with green and red garlands and topped with a white-lighted tree at the landing of the sweeping main staircase.
Live music is performed in the lobby, the pages wear new burgundy tuxedos and the organist at the Wurlitzer plays "Santa Claus Is Coming to Town" as you file into your seat.
The 90-minute 11-scene show, with no intermission, repeats some performances from the past, but it also features new scenes, the best being "We Need a Little Christmas." In this early scene, Radio City deftly shows off its large stage, where the women are lavishly dressed in gemlike gowns and the scenery is riveting.
The stage design includes a rooftop terrace set against a silhouette backdrop of Manhattan (with such landmarks as the Chrysler Building).
The new "Christmas Carol" is a compressed adaptation that introduces the ghosts with such convincing thunder, lightning and frightening panache that younger children huddle against their parents.
The return of "A Teddy Bear's Dream," with dancing bears flitting about to "Nutcracker" music, perks up even the most tired adults and children.
So does the "Ice-Skating in the Plaza," in which two skaters literally bend over backward close to the edge of the stage.
Children and adults appreciate the orchestra's ability to rise out of the 17-foot pit (by elevator) and move back and forth across the stage.
Santa's appearance midway through makes many children giddy.
He also makes a few comments, noting that the show's disembodied narrator is a "voice without a head." In addition, there is a "Living Nativity" narrative, with camels and sheep.
But the grand numbers featuring the Rockettes, in new costumes, seem to move more slowly than the dramatizations.
But overall the production's breathtaking scenes reflect this holiday's hyperintensity.
Tickets are $25 to $37, with $17 tickets for second- and third-mezzanine seats through Nov. 27 (though only available at tomorrow's and Sunday's evening shows); good seats are available for most performances, though the orchestra seats sell first.
The ticket line tends to create a mob, so it's best to arrive early.
The food concessions (offering juice, chips and other snacks, for $1 to $2.50) close after the curtain goes up, but the merchandise concessions remain open, selling light wands, T-shirts and other paraphernalia, from $1 (for a Radio City button) to $200 (for a stuffed bear).
There are at least two shows daily.
Tickets are being sold every day at the box office; the best times to go are 11 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. and 2 to 4 P.M., a Radio City spokesman said.


Thumbing His Nose at Congress; He Defies the Majority on the Gag Rule
The "gag rule" is what critics call it, and that is a very apt description of the cruel regulations the Bush Administration has imposed to choke off any discussion of abortion by medical personnel in federally funded family planning clinics.
Even though a majority of Congress voted to abolish the gag rule, Mr.
Bush successfully vetoed the legislation, thus appeasing his conservative constituency at the expense of helpless women.
No one denies that the Administration has the right to demand that Federal funds not be used for abortions, shortsighted though that policy may be.
But the gag rule seemingly requires most personnel at the clinics -- though not always doctors -- to lie to their clients.


Graf Falls to Novotna, But Navratilova Rallies
Martina Navratilova survived an attack from an underdog, but second-seeded Steffi Graf succumbed, 6-3, 3-6, 6-1, to a carefully planned ambush from Jana Novotna of Czechoslovakia in the quarterfinals of the Virginia Slims Championships last night at Madison Square Garden.
The eighth-seeded Novotna, who mentioned that she'd been "unmercifully" defeated by Graf in 10 of their 11 previous meetings, advanced to her first semifinal in three appearances at this event.
Navratilova, a four-time champion here, will be her opponent tomorrow afternoon.
Novotna has been the 35-year-old Navratilova's victim in their four previous confrontations.


Gottschalks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Milton Kestenberg, Holocaust Litigator And a Lawyer, 79
Milton Kestenberg, a lawyer and real-estate manager who helped win reparations for victims of the Holocaust and who organized aid for children who survived it, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and lived in Sands Point, L.I.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Man's Body Found Under Burned Debris
The body of an unidentified man was found last night under a pile of charred boards by firefighters, shortly after they put out a small fire in front of a building on the West Side of Manhattan, the police said.
A police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis, said fire officials believed the fire was of suspicious origin.


Israel's Labor Party Takes Dovish Line
Israel's venerable Labor Party, struggling against diminished influence and a deep slide in opinion polls, adopted a more dovish Middle East policy today in the hope of distinguishing itself more clearly from the right-wing Likud Party, which has held power for 14 years.
Adopting a new party platform ahead of parliamentary elections next year, the country's main opposition force abandoned its longstanding objection to negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Vallone Offers Own Plan For City's Fiscal Problems
Saying Mayor David N. Dinkins's four-year plan for closing the city's budget gaps lacks specifics, the City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, yesterday offered a long-term fiscal plan of his own that calls for more job cuts and a four-year property-tax freeze.
By offering the plan, the Speaker and the Council leadership appeared to be seizing an opportunity to advance their budget priorities, taking advantage of the criticism the Mayor's plan has drawn from fiscal monitors since it was released on Sept. 6.


White House Isolation; An Image of Bush as a Captive of Top Aides Who Make Their Own Sweeping Decisions
Haunted by the image of Ronald Reagan, George Bush vowed from the beginning of his Presidency that he would never be manipulated, isolated or surprised by his staff.
But in the last few weeks, the President has appeared to Republicans and Democrats alike as a wavering leader, a captive of a few top aides who make sweeping decisions on their own and leave him to try to clean up the mess.


Cultural Affairs Department Has to Try Harder
To the Editor:
The cultural institutions and arts community of New York are vital to the very fabric of our city.
They help make New York what it is.
That is why the City Council successfully fought to restore much of the devastating 47 percent cut in city funds for the arts that Mayor David N. Dinkins imposed in last year's budget.


Medtronic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Unitog Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27


Kidnapping Isn't Yet the Law of the Land
To the Editor:
In your Nov. 14 report that indictments were imminent in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, you assert that those indicted for the bombing would have to be extradited or "kidnapped abroad, which is permitted under American law in terrorism cases."
Contrary to your statement, the law of the United States, at least for the moment, does not permit such kidnapping if carried out over the objection of the country from which the person is kidnapped.
I say "for the moment" because the case so holding has been appealed by the United States Government to the Supreme Court.


Deals by Cruise Lines To Intensify Rivalry
Two large shipping companies announced deals yesterday that would intensify competition in the cruise-ship industry.
The Overseas Shipholding Group Inc., one of the world's biggest bulk-shipping companies, signed a letter to form a venture with Kloster Cruise Ltd., a unit of the Vard Group of Norway, the parent of the Norwegian Cruise Line, the Royal Viking Line and the Royal Cruise Line.


CHRONICLE
Hundreds of teen-agers in Moscow and Centerville, Ohio, will talk to each other by satellite on Tuesday morning, thanks to TOM BROKAW and Channel One, the daily television news service provided to schools in 47 states by Whittle Communications.
"It will be a kind of town hall meeting, though not a contentious one," Mr.
Brokaw said yesterday.
He will be at Centerville High School to serve as host, while SERGEI SUPONEV will assist at Moscow School 23, which is near Gorky Park.
Mr.
Suponev has a television program for children in Moscow.
"The idea is to let them exchange views, to gain a keener appreciation of one another," said Mr.
Brokaw, the NBC news anchor.
"We will start with the Soviet children describing what it was like to go through the coup. Several of them were on the barricades, so we know that parents there worry not about such things as their driving and drinking but about their getting shot. We will also talk about teen freedom and about their place in building their country.
"The kids from the Centerville school will talk about AIDS, about discrimination, about blacks and whites getting along, about their expectations for their own lives, especially in this economy."
To help prepare, Mr.
Brokaw said he asked students at Roberto Clemente Intermediate School in Harlem what they thought he should ask.
"They said they wanted to know if kids in Moscow have electronic games and how many shoes do they own," he said.


Agent Tells Of Failures On B.C.C.I.
Seated behind a frosted-glass partition and speaking into a microphone that disguised his voice, a Federal undercover agent who played a central role in building a money-laundering case against the Bank of Credit and Commerce International told a Senate subcommittee today of his frustration that the investigation did not go further.
The Government inquiry, the agent said, failed to follow "hundreds of leads" that the foreign bank may have been involved in other cases of handling drug money, arms deals and secretly owning American banks.
Justice Department officials later defended their actions before the panel.


Hills Dept. Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Republicans Offer Plan To Replace Income Tax
Top Republican legislators, who have spent the year leading a coalition of moderates and conservatives in both parties in fighting against a tax on wages, said today they were returning to their "Republican roots."
Party leaders presented a plan today to replace the state's three-month-old income tax.
The plan's centerpiece was $300 million in spending cuts, including sweeping reductions in many social programs like welfare, job training and housing assistance for the poor that the lawmakers said Connecticut can no longer afford to finance with the generosity of the past.
The result would be the largest one-year tax cut in state history, $429 million that lawmakers said would be left in residents' pockets, to be spent, they said, reviving the economy.


Long Road Trip Gets Longer for the Rangers
The Rangers avoided a shutout tonight, but that was the only worthwhile moment of their evening.
At the bitter end, they were left with a 6-1 loss to the Los Angeles Kings at the Forum, leaving them with one victory and two losses halfway into their longest trip of the season.


FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Modest Proposal on Kicking
I DON'T know about you, but I'm getting tired of seeing the little people of football having to make amends because their gigantic brethren failed to block, tackle, run and pass.
Every time there's a close game, the coaches send out some polite little guy with no scars, no tattoos, no nicknames, and they give him instructions like, "Don't get nervous, just kick the doggone ball and let us get out of here with a victory."


Art in Review
Anton van Dalen and Luis Jimenez  The Cultural Space 336 Canal Street TriBeCa Through tomorrow
The personal, the political and the esthetic may or may not be separable, but they coexist exceptionally well in this exhibition.
Part of the Cultural Space's series Life After Post-Modernism, it has been precipitated by the 20-year friendship between Anton van Dalen, a Dutch-born artist living in New York City, and Luis Jimenez, an American sculptor of Mexican heritage living in New Mexico.


At the Bar; For a Faltering Pioneer in Jury Selection, The smith Case Provides New Inspiration.
It is bittersweet indeed to receive a lifetime achievement award at the age of 40.
This month, Cathy Bennett put aside her tasks in West Palm Beach, where she is helping William K. Smith select the six people who will decide his fate.
She went to New Orleans, where the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers honored her for her contributions to the evolving art of picking juries.


ARAB-ISRAEL TALKS MAY MOVE TO U.S.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d discussed today where to hold the next round of direct talks between Israel and its Arab neighbors, with Washington the almost certain site.
Since the Madrid talks broke up two and half weeks ago, Israel, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and the Palestinians have not been able to agree on when and where to meet again.
Mr.
Baker said that if they could not agree within two weeks, the co-sponsors, the United States and Soviet Union, would choose a compromise site and invite the parties there.


Mortgage &amp; Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tribune/Swab-Fox Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Affirmative Action Plans Are Now Part of the Normal Corporate Way of Life
When the Bush Administration seemed ready to attack programs that give preferences to minority and female job seekers, it was tampering with a bipartisan concept that has become as familiar to American businesses as tally sheets and bottom lines.
Affirmative action plans that are either mandated by Federal law or sanctioned by Supreme Court rulings are so pervasive in the American workplace that a Reagan Administration attempt in 1985 to curtail them was opposed by corporate lobbyists as well as civil rights groups.


And Still A Long Way To Go
MONICA SELES is whomping that big first serve, driving poor Julie Halard from sideline to sideline, making her crazy with those quirky angles, leaving her dumbfounded with clothesline passing shots.
It's a one-woman show, for Seles fans.
If only my eyes didn't keep getting caught on all those Virginia Slims signs around the Madison Square Garden court.
SPORTSWRITER'S WARNING: TENNIS MAY BE DANGEROUS TO YOUR HEALTH.


After Abrupt Exit, Groping for Clues
This week's disappearance of Victor G. Incendy, the chief shareholder and chief executive of Cascade International Inc., has business associates wondering about the future of the women's clothing and cosmetics chain.
"I am puzzled and disappointed by the news," said Oleg Cassini, the designer who this summer signed a deal with Cascade to create a string of specialty shops featuring his fashions and accessories.
"We are ready to go ahead if there is still a company at the other end, but they don't have a clue right now what is happening."


Police Crack Down on No-Show Suspects
For 20 years, most suspects arrested for minor crimes in New York City -- like shoplifting, farebeating and marijuana smoking -- have been quickly released through what the police call desk appearance tickets.
But skeptics have always called them disappearance tickets: almost half of those suspects fail to show up in court, as required.


Subway Riders Balk at Planned Fare Rise
Archie Johnson, an unemployed construction worker from Queens, says the proposed $1.40 bus and subway fare would be more than an inconvenience, it would be another obstacle to finding a job.
Because he takes a bus and then the subway from his home in South Jamaica to Manhattan, where he is seeking work, Mr.
Johnson said his daily round-trip fare would jump a dollar, to $5.60.


Cheney, in Korea, Orders Halt to U.S. Pullout
Responding to new estimates that North Korea will be able to produce weapons-grade plutonium within a year, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney ordered a halt to long-planned American troop reductions in South Korea today "until the dangers and uncertainties of the North Korean nuclear program have been thoroughly addressed."
Mr.
Cheney's announcement, the most concrete move yet to step up pressure on the Government of President Kim Il Sung, came at the end of two days of meetings here in which American and South Korean officials outlined initiatives to force the North to abandon its nuclear ambitions.


Rising Pressure on Maxwell Empire
Next week is shaping up as a critical one for the debt-laden publishing empire controlled by the family of the late Robert Maxwell.
A group of banks led by National Westminster Bank of Britain will meet on Monday with leaders of the family's public and private companies, who intend to submit a report on their financial situation, several bankers said today.
The Bankers Trust Company, an adviser to the Maxwells, helped to draw up the report, said the bankers, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Bankers Trust declined to comment.


Commonwealth Edison Co.  reports earnings for 12mos to Oct 31


Clothestime Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Why Did the Thanksgiving Dinner Cross the Road?


Arbor Drugs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Golfers' Right to Slice Upheld
New York State's highest court ruled today that Arthur McGovern and an unnamed friend had had a bad day on the 11th hole, but that they could not be held liable for it.
In a unanimous decision, the Court of Appeals ruled that McGovern and his fellow golfer, who both hit shots well off the fairway of an Erie County course and into an adjacent road, could not be sued by a passing motorist whose car windshield was cracked by one of the errant balls.


Starks Is Rising to Occasion With Defense and Spirit
Two years ago, John Starks was in the Continental Basketball Association, traveling by bus to places like Rapid City and Sioux Falls, S.D.
Today, Starks flew in comfort on the Knicks' charter plane, enjoying the benefits of a career that's on the rise.
Starks has been New York's most-productive bench player this season, providing defense, enthusiasm and unexpected scoring.
His latest clutch contribution came Wednesday night, when he blocked a potential game-winning shot by Rolando Blackman to secure the Knicks' 92-89 victory over the Dallas Mavericks.
The victory snapped New York's road losing streak at five games.
The Knicks will play the Detroit Pistons here Friday night before returning to New York.


Sentencing in Shooting
A baseball coach who shot at a teen-age umpire during a game in East St.
Louis on June 19 was sentenced yesterday to 12 years in prison for attempted murder.
CURTIS ROOSEVELT FAIR, 32, of East St.
Louis, was sentenced in St.
Clair County Circuit Court in Bellevile, Ill., under a plea agreement.
Judge MICHAEL J. O'MALLEY agreed to vacate an aggravated assault sentence if Fair agreed not to appeal the case, according to court records.


Despite Having No Touchdowns to Show for It, Jets' Toon Is on a Roll
Streaks in pro football are either the source of pride or a wellspring of embarrassment that forces the bearer to behave as if it's no big deal.
Jets receiver Al Toon currently possesses both types of streaks.
He has caught at least one pass in 87 consecutive games, which is a team record and places him fourth among active receivers in the National Football League.
He also has not caught a touchdown pass in 11 games this year, the longest scoreless drought in his seven-year career.
His last touchdown reception came on Dec. 2, 1990, against Indianapolis.


Official Assails College Diversity Rule
Education Secretary Lamar Alexander told a Federal advisory committee today that he supported cultural diversity as an ideal for colleges and universities but that individual institutions, rather than accrediting agencies, should define it for themselves.
In an echo of suggestions by some in the Bush Administration that affirmative action was now unnecessary to insure the inclusion of women and minorities in the workplace, Mr.
Alexander told the National Advisory Committee on Accreditation and Institutional Eligibility that the Justice Department and other legal avenues existed to protect civil rights in academia and that there was no need for "another diversity policeman."


Minnesota Resignation
After winning just 29 of 67 games in 510/11 seasons, including only 2 of the first 10 games this year, Minnesota football coach JOHN GUTEKUNST handed in his resignation yesterday, and NILS HASSELMO, the school president, welcomed it.


New Radio Prize is Doubled
The Radio Creative Fund, which is being established to honor creativity in radio advertising, has announced that the top prize it will award annually is being raised to $100,000 from $50,000.
That ties the award, to be given out for the first time next year, with the largest in advertising, the $100,000 annual Stephen E. Kelly Award from the Magazine Publishers of America.
The doubling of the prize money comes after several radio organizations joined Group W Radio, which introduced the award in September, in sponsoring the honor.


Review/Film; Kinky Sexual Comedy s Twisted and Demure
In "My Father Is Coming," a comic fantasy by the German film maker Monika Treut, New York's Lower East Side is a cheerful cornucopia of kinkiness where genders and sexual preferences aren't simply bent -- they're twisted into corkscrews.
Vicky (Shelley Kastner), the film's central character, is an out-of-work German actress who shares a Lower East Side apartment with a flamboyantly gay roommate, Ben (David Bronstein).
When her stuffy Bavarian father, Hans (Alfred Edel), arrives for a visit loaded down with a wurst and a Dustbuster, Vicki, who has written home that she is married, insists that Ben pose as her husband.
But the ruse is shattered when daddy catches Vicky in bed with Lisa (Mary Lou Graulau), the lesbian chef in the restaurant where Vicky is a waitress.
Lisa is one of two lovers Vicky juggles indecisively.
Her boyfriend, Joe (Michael Massee), is a sulkily handsome female-to-male transsexual who handles a cigarette with the intense self-consciousness of James Dean in "Rebel Without a Cause."


Chemical Bank
Chemical Bank said it would lay off 200 workers, or 20 percent of its 1,000-member corporate banking staff.
The bank said the reductions would result in savings of $350 million, according to Joyce Oberdorf, a spokeswoman.
David S. Berry, a vice president with Keefe, Bruyette &amp; Woods Inc., said Chemical and its merger partner, the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation, plan to lay off 6,200 workers within two years.
Chemical and Manufacturers scheduled an analysts' meeting for Tuesday, where they plan to discuss progress on the merger.


Net at Dell Computer Up
The Dell Computer Corporation, the personal computer maker growing rapidly amid an industry slump, said today that third- quarter net income rose by 88.4 percent.
The company, based in Austin, Tex., said third-quarter profits were $13 million, or 52 cents a share, compared with $6.9 million, or 34 cents a share, in the quarter last year.
Sales rose 67.7 percent, to $229.3 million from $136.7 million.


Diner's Journal
Thanksgiving Out
Here are some restaurants in New York City that are serving special Thanksgiving meals:


BEI Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Four Reporters Held In Contempt of Court Are Freed by Judge
A standoff between a Federal judge and four South Carolina newspaper reporters who refused to testify at a criminal trial ended yesterday when the prosecutor released them from a subpoena.
Federal District Judge Falcon Hawkins had held the reporters in contempt for their unwillingness to testify, and they could have been confined in jail until the end of the trial.


Divorce Lawyers Dismiss New TV Divorce Show
For one thing, the courtroom was spiffy, not scruffy like the one in lower Manhattan that it was modeled after.
And it was too quiet.
There were no courthouse regulars squeezing onto the hard wooden benches for a glimpse of the husband who thought he was Elvis.
Nor were there were any lawyers jumping up and shouting, "Objection!" to strike damaging testimony from the transcript.
Come to think of it, what about the transcript? There wasn't a stenographer in sight.


METRO DIGEST
TOUGH TIMES FOR GOVERNORS
Angry about tax increases imposed in troubled economic times, residents of New Jersey and Connecticut are taking out their discontents on their Governors, giving them generally dismal approval ratings in a New York Times/WCBS-TV News poll.
While only a quarter of those polled in the two states said they approved of their Governor's performance, New York's Governor, Mario M. Cuomo, received somewhat stronger support, with a 37 percent approval rating.
Page A1.
NEW YORK CITY STREETS OFFICIAL IS REASSIGNED
New York City's assistant commissioner for street reconstruction has been moved to another job amid revelations that the city may lose tens of millions of dollars in Federal highway funds because city contractors used watered-down concrete and violated safety rules on three major street repair projects.
Page A1.
DISSENSION IN THE COMMUTER RANKS
In subway stations and at bus stops around the city, the proposed 25-cent fare increase is cause for indignation.
Many straphangers and bus riders say that their wallets have already been pinched enough by the recession and that the Transit Authority should not ask them to solve its financial problems.
Page B3.
S.I.
STUDENT SHOOTS 3, KILLING ONE
Pelted by bottles, a high school student retaliated by opening fire on three other students, the police said.
One is dead.
Page B3.
A NEW LIBRARY FOR THE LIBRARY
In an unusual financing arrangement, the New York Public Library has assembled more than $70 million to buy part of the old B. Altman department store on Fifth Avenue to create a new science, industry and business library.
Page B2.
City Council offers its own budget plan. Page B3.
Police to tighten standards for misdemeanor tickets.
Page B3.
REGION  PROGRESS OR NO PROGRESS?
While Governor Cuomo and legislative leaders spoke publicly about making significant progress in their negotiations over a multiyear financial plan, their aides painted a picture of confusion and inertia in closed-door budget talks.
Page B5.
DESEGREGATION CASE: IN WHOSE COURT?
State lawyers state argued that a lawsuit attacking the de facto segregation that divides Hartford from its suburbs raises questions of social policy far too sweeping and complex for a single judge to decide.
The case, they said, should first go to the State Supreme Court.
Page B5.
RETURNING TO 'REPUBLICAN ROOTS'
Connecticut's top Republican legislators, who have spent the year leading a coalition of moderates and conservatives against a tax on wages, said they were returning to their "Republican roots." They presented a plan to replace the three-month-old income tax, with $300 million in spending cuts as its centerpiece.
Page B5.
PROPERTY TAX RISE VETOED IN SUFFOLK
The Suffolk County Executive vetoed a $51 million property tax increase adopted by the Republican-controlled County Legislature and proposed an alternative plan that he said would avoid a tax increase.
Page B5.
Our Towns B4


Gold Rises to 4-Month High After Deal on Soviet Debt
Gold prices rose yesterday after Western nations agreed to allow the Soviet Union to defer payments on its foreign debt.
Traders said the repayment delays would ease pressures on the country to sell off part of its big gold supply.


Sounds Around Town
Now, the Words
Songs of Andy Razas, St.
Peter's Lutheran Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street, Manhattan, (212) 935-2200.
Although Andy Razas wrote the lyrics to such memorable songs as "Ain't Misbehavin'," "Honeysuckle Rose," "Memories of You," "Stompin' at the Savoy" and "In the Mood," his name is not as well known as his nearly 1,000 songs, primarily because his words were written to music by performers like Fats Waller, Eubie Blake and James P. Johnson.
The focal point of this tribute will be the year 1929, when Razas's songs for the musical "Hot Chocolates of 1929" included "Ain't Misbehavin'," sung and played by Louis Armstrong.
The show started a ripple effect that carried almost everyone involved to some measure of fame.
The 86-year-old trumpeter Doc Cheatham is to perform, along with the singer Yvette Glover (mother of the young tap-dance star Savion Glover) and three members of the original cast of "Hot Chocolates." Tickets for the performance on Sunday at 7:30 P.M. are $8 in advance or $10 at the door.
Dixieland Fridays
The Canal Street Dixieland Jazz and Blues Band, Cajun, 129 Eighth Avenue, at 16th Street, Manhattan, (212) 691-6174.
The Canal Street Dixieland Jazz and Blues Band is celebrating its 10th year of Friday-night performances at Cajun, a restaurant whose menu exemplifies its name.
Although the seven-piece group's basic repertory and style draw on the New Orleans and Chicago schools of Dixieland, they also include occasional bows to Charlie Parker and Horace Silver.
In addition to the trumpeter and cornetist Don Reich, who leads the band, the musicians are Mike Christenson on trombone; Tony DiPaollo on tenor saxophone, clarinet and vibraphone; John Halsey on piano; Herb Adlerberg on banjo, guitar and harmonica; Bob Sacchi on tuba, and Lew Grassi on drums.
They play tonight from 9 to midnight.
There is no cover charge and no minimum.


Energynorth Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
NFL -- Fined Andre Waters, Philadelphia Eagles cornerback, $7,500 for his attack on Eric Martin, New Orleans wide receiver, after a game on Oct. 13.


Art in Review
James Nares  Paul Kasmin Gallery 580 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Dec. 21
In the watercolors and photographic works he has shown recently, James Nares has demonstrated a great facility with materials as well as a virtuosic command of line.
In the five paintings here, Mr.
Nares has applied sweeping, gestural strokes of oil paint onto white backgrounds, beneath which a few pentimenti can just be seen.
Using brushes he designs himself, and mixing his paint with wax and, in some cases, gold and other metallic pigments, Mr.
Nares achieves a remarkably expressive range of effects.
Various brush strokes here suggest such disparate images as a feather, a splash of water or the dried husk of an ear of corn, depending on how Mr.
Nares applies the paint.
Other marks take on a calligraphic quality, looping and squiggling across the canvas.


Unusual Threat for a Judge in a Bitter Slaying Trial
A lot of anger has been expressed here since a judge imposed a sentence of five years' probation on a store clerk who shot dead an unarmed 15-year-old customer.
But no one sounds angrier than the Los Angeles County District Attorney.
On Monday the District Attorney, Ira Reiner, denounced the judge, Joyce A. Karlin, and pledged to use an unusual California law to bar her from trying criminal cases.
"This was such a stunning miscarriage of justice that Judge Karlin cannot continue to hear criminal cases with any public credibility," he asserted.


INSIDE
Tenuous Accord on Medicaid
The White House and the nation's governors reached agreement on how to pay for health care for the poor.
But the deal faces opposition by state legislators and hospitals, and Congress may not approve it.
Page A22. 2 Banking Bills Passed


3 Marketers Are Packaging Film Tie-Ins, Kiddie-Style
SOME of the nation's largest consumer-prodct companies are choosing sides in the battle that begins today between two animated Christmas-season films, "An American Tail: Fievel Goes West" and "Beauty and the Beast."
Hoping that the appeal of the films' cartoon characters will animate sales of their products, marketing giants like Colgate-Palmolive, Nabisco Brands and Pizza Hut are spending tens of millions of dollars on elaborate promotional and advertising programs tied to the movies.


BJ Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PLAN SEEKS TO CUT DELAY AT AIRPORTS
To relieve airport congestion and reduce delays in cities where many routes intersect, like New York, the Transportation Department is proposing to let airports charge higher landing fees during rush hours, Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner said today.
Mr.
Skinner said the proposal was a natural evolution from airline deregulation; if there are problems with deregulated airways, he said, the answer is not more regulation, but less.


Russ Togs in Court
Russ Togs Inc. failed to reach an agreement with its banks on long-term financing during a bankruptcy court hearing.
Earlier this week, Judge Prudence B. Abram of the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan approved $15 million in cash-collateral financing for the New York-based apparel maker.
Another hearing on long-term financing is scheduled for tomorrow.


Datapoint Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


2,500 Turkeys and 2 Guys Crying Chicken
The other day, when the promoter Don King and his prize pugilist, Mike Tyson, turned up here to give away 2,500 Thanksgiving turkeys to families in need, there appeared to be a corollary purpose to their visit.
In an event choreographed to include the news media -- what with special buses, box lunches and motorcycle police escorts -- King and Tyson each used the occasion to assail a local hero, the undisputed heavyweight champion Evander Holyfield.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The House and the Senate passed legislation to replenish the deposit insurance fund.
But significant differences remain between the measures and reconciling them will not be easy, lawmakers and lobbyists said.  [ Page D1. ]


Applied Materials reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27


W.T.A. Drops Plans for Tour
The civil war between the Women's Tennis Association and the coalition that runs women's tennis, the Women's International Professional Tennis Council, has ended, for now, in a truce.
The W.T.A., surprised by the lack of support for its projected self-run tour for 1993, has agreed to abide by a council contract that doesn't expire until the close of 1994.


Bush and Governors Agree on How to Pay for Medicaid
After making major concessions to avoid political embarrassment, the White House and the nation's governors reached a tentative agreement today on how to pay for health care for poor people under Medicaid.
But the compromise faces stiff opposition from state legislators and from hospitals, which are concerned about losing Medicaid revenue, and it is not clear that Congress will approve the agreement.
Indeed, Congress appears likely to defer action until early next year, permitting states to continue using fund-raising devices that President Bush wants to restrict.


EXECUTIVES
*
Campbell Soup Co., Camden, N.J., named Alfred Poe president of its Vlasic Foods subsidiary and vice president of its condiments and sauces business. *
Community Bankers Association of New York State named Robert O. Lehrman president and chief executive. *
Walt Disney Co., Burbank, Calif., named Timothy V. Wolf senior vice president for human resources and administration of Euro Disney, its new French theme park and resort. *
Polygram Records Inc., New York, a subsidiary of Philips N.V., named Ed Eckstine president of its Mercury Records label. *
Society for Savings Bancorp Inc., Hartford, named Lawrence Connell president and chief executive. *
World Color Press Inc., New York, a printer of consumer magazines, named John J. Egan Jr. and Martin K. Jacobus group vice presidents.


Abroad at Home; How Freedom Died
"Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press." That great guarantee of our freedom was written into the Constitution, in the First Amendment, on Dec. 15, 1791.
But guarantees in law live only as long as they are honored in the life of a country.
And just short of its 200th anniversary the First Amendment has been so dishonored by the American President and a decisive minority of the House of Representatives that a menacing shadow has been cast on what should have been, next month, a celebration of freedom.


BRIEFS
Debt *
First Interstate Bancorp of Los Angeles, priced $100 million of senior notes, maturing in 1998, with a 9 3/8 percent coupon at 99.867, to yield 9.40 percent, through Kidder, Peabody.


Petrie Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Review/Film; The Rolling Stones: Far Bigger Than Ever
What do the Rolling Stones have in common with King Kong?
A lot, now that their likenesses can be seen blown up to superhuman scale on a movie screen 56 feet high.
Thanks to the new process called IMAX, previously used mostly for scenes of frisking animals at places like the American Museum of Natural History, the Rolling Stones can be seen in "At the Max" towering awesomely over audiences at the Beacon Theater.
From the viewer's standpoint, this is indeed an imposing spectacle, one that gives new meaning to the title World's Biggest Rock Stars.
And it's the closest the Stones' fans can get to the band without being arrested.


U.S. and Vietnam Start Talks On Establishing Normal Ties
Senior officials of the United States and Vietnam met today for the first in a series of talks aimed at establishing normal relations.


USG Acts To Avert Bankruptcy
Moving to stave off possible bankruptcy proceedings, the USG Corporation announced a plan yesterday to restructure its debt.
Its proposal, which includes a commitment of as much as $300 million in cash from outside investors, met with quick resistance from senior bank creditors.
The investors, led by Zell-Chilmark Fund L.P. and a partnership including the wealthy Pritzker family, are the centerpiece of an extremely complex plan that entails swapping most of the huge debt that is choking the company for new equity.
A reduction in debt is growing increasingly necessary for the big Chicago-based company, which makes gypsum wallboard, as the construction market continues to deteriorate.


Perles Out as Coach
Another Big Ten football coach, GEORGE PERLES, is out at Michigan State but may remain as athletic director, the university's president, JOHN DIBIAGGIO, said yesterday.
In announcing his decision to split the jobs that Perles had held for almost two years, DiBiaggio emphasized that he disapproved of one man holding both jobs.
"The jobs are separate and distinct and a mistake was made when they were joined over my objections," he said.


Two Universities Selling Securities
Two leading Midwestern universities were raising money yesterday through debt securities.
The University of Missouri priced $24 million in capital project notes through J. P. Morgan Securities, to yield 4.05 percent with a coupon of 4 5/8 percent.
The short-term notes, maturing in June 1992, have been rated MIG-1 by Moody's and SP-1 by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Dinner Left Them Hungry
Members of Congress sat on the floor eating rice with a throng of students and staff members today while a few people representing the "privileged classes" sat at nearby tables and dined on gourmet lunches.
The event was one of six celebrity "hunger banquets" being held around the country to draw attention to the work of Oxfam America, which operates antihunger projects around the world.


Review/Film; THE ADDAMS FAMILY Those Lovable Ghouls, Revived in High Style
EVEN those of us who have not forgotten the past seem condemned to repeat it, at least as far as American popular culture is concerned.
Yesterday's comic strips, television shows and B-movies simply will not die.
Historians in the future are sure to wonder why so much talent, money and energy now go into preserving artifacts that once seemed so disposable, or why the original story idea has become an endangered species.
But for the time being, making elaborate mountains out of vintage molehills is a favorite form of enterprise.
From "Dick Tracy" to "The Jetsons" to "The Brady Bunch," no sitcom or superhero is safe from remake fever.
Still, it's amazing how much originality can sometimes be brought to bear upon projects that are in no way new.
"The Addams Family," derived from the Charles Addams drawings that spawned the mid-1960's television show, is a lavish, funny revival that goes well beyond the limits of its original sources, thanks to ingenious casting, droll production design, spirited direction and dazzling camera tricks.
It also has a script filled with workable one-liners and a collection of amusing props.
All that's wrong is that "The Addams Family" was never conceived as a movie in the first place.
No amount of cleverness can change the one-note nature of the material.


No Moves Yet? No Problem, Nederlander Says
Yankees fans may be getting antsy, the Yankees' general manager, Gene Michael, may be getting frustrated, but Robert Nederlander, the general managing partner of the team, sees nothing wrong with the Yankees' slow and cautious approach to the free-agent and trade markets.
Nederlander, who will never be confused with his predecessor, George Steinbrenner, rejects the notion that the Yankees are disorganized and rudderless at a time when many teams are actively wooing free agents like Bobby Bonilla, Frank Viola, Eddie Murray and Wally Joyner.
Where others might see internal friction and a baffling vacillation, Nederlander does not.


Customs Service Inquiry
Thomas Brooks, who resigned this month as president of the Ann Taylor Stores Corporation, is under investigation by the Federal Customs Service, company said yesterday.
A company spokeswoman said Mr.
Brooks had resigned because of an incident at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York that touched off the investigation.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about regulators' legal expenses linked to bank and savings-and-loan failures listed one firm erroneously among those still facing Government lawsuits.
A suit against the First Boston Corporation was settled in July, in the firm's favor.


An Exhibition of Addams Originals
It's not hard to see why the Addams Family would translate so well from New Yorker cartoons to a long-running television show, and now to a movie, opening today.
A selection of Charles Addams's original cartoons and watercolors for The New Yorker, on display at the National Academy of Design, demonstrates that the characters who came to be known as the Addams Family -- Morticia, Gomez, Lurch, et al. -- offered a decidedly contrary picture of the folks next door.
Addams's popularity reached its peak in the 1940's and 50's, when the nuclear family was being trumpeted as the backbone of democracy and civilization.
The Addams Family, though, provided a deliciously subversive view of the matter.
What parent of battling siblings could fail to chortle at the 1944 cartoon in which, with Pugsley smirking in the background, Morticia tells a startled Wednesday: "Well, don't come whining to me. Go tell him you'll poison him right back." The Addams Family members faced typical sitcom predicaments, but used a refreshing wickedness to resolve them in unexpected ways.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about Democratic House members who responded to President Bush's veto of an abortion counseling bill referred incorrectly in some copies to the Congresswoman shown.
She was Barbara B. Kennelly of Connecticut.


Scientific Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


John N. LaCorte, 81, Champion Of Italians and Columbus Day
John N. LaCorte, a champion of Italian heritage who won a national holiday honoring Christopher Columbus and got a major bridge named for a neglected explorer, Giovanni da Verrazano, died on Wednesday at Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 81 years old and lived in Brooklyn Heights.
He died of complications from a heart attack, his family said.


Review/Dance; Embracing the Crush of Life in the City
Jennifer Muller could only be an urban choreographer.
The dances that her company, Jennifer Muller/ The Works, presented on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater bustled with the energy of busy city streets.
And the dancers in them, like many city dwellers, were sometimes sassy or even brassy and at other times plagued with jangled nerves.
In the opening solo of Ms.
Muller's "City," a work of 1988 to a taped score by David van Tieghem, Michael Jahoda was lithe and slithery one moment and tense and wary the next.
The stage filled with dancers in such constant motion that it was easy to believe that in Ms.
Muller's choreographic metropolis every hour of the day was rush hour.


Review/Theater; Listening To the Women Of Beckett
Moises Kaufman as director has had the notion of presenting an evening of four of Samuel Beckett's short plays about women, in the hope that they would form a quartet of contemplations about the loneliness of old age.
He borrows the title of his production, "Women in Beckett," from Linda Ben-Zvi's valuable anthology of essays and interviews on that subject.
To emphasize Mr.
Kaufman's point, most of the eight actresses in his cast at Theater of the New City are over the age of 65.
Drably costumed, they look like inhabitants of a Beckettian environment.
The plays are eloquent emanations, but in each case the directorial approach studiously undermines the author's intention.
Mr.
Kaufman makes characters visible when Beckett wanted to remain unseen.
Mood is sacrificed, along with intensity.
By increasing the size of the cast, the director takes the focus away from the central figure.
In "Footfalls," May paces her nine steps back and forth on a narrow path, while her mother, who should exist only in her daughter's memory, stands onstage and watches.
As a result, one is distracted from the ritual of the pacing, so important to May's painful interior journey.


Warning to Drivers


Amid Construction Problems, Street Official Is Reassigned
The New York City assistant commissioner for street reconstruction has been removed from his job amid revelations that city contractors used watered-down concrete and violated safety rules at three major street repair projects -- violations that the city was told about but did little to correct.
The violations have put the city in jeopardy of losing tens of millions of dollars in Federal highway money and have made the street work more susceptible to crumbling and possibly even unsafe.


General Host Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3


Dollar Off on Jobless Report, Then Regains Some Ground
The dollar was mixed against other currencies yesterday after a jump in initial claims for unemployment insurance provided further evidence of a weakening economy.
The Labor Department said initial claims for state unemployment insurance surged by 39,000 to just under the half-million mark in early November.
Some economists said the news was a further sign that the economic recovery had stalled.


In Albany, Confusion Clouds Multiyear Financial Plan
While Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders were boasting publicly today of making significant progress in state budget talks, their aides were conceding privately that the negotiations over a multiyear financial plan were mired in confusion.
Mr.
Cuomo, speaking to reporters in Manhattan, said it represented "a lot of progress" that the State Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, Republican of Oyster Bay, L.I., had signed on to the concept of a budget that would stretch across 15 months.
The unprecedented plan, which has been championed by Mr.
Cuomo and Assembly Speaker Mel Miller, both Democrats, is intended to close the gaps in both this year's state budget and next year's budget in one step.


In an Economic Turn, Midwest Meets Europe
To the Editor:
The trend for skyscrapers in Cleveland and Columbus, Ohio, Peoria, Ill., and Milwaukee, when viewed from a domestic real estate perspective, as in Louis Uchitelle's Nov. 5 Business Scene column ("The Last Vestiges of the 80's Boom"), may appear the tail end of a large growth in housing and office building space.
However, in a larger context of international trade, what you're seeing is a new wave of economic growth.
Since 1983 my company has been involved with European investment in the United States and United States investment in Central Europe.
Cleveland, Peoria and Milwaukee have significant manufacturing bases, which are leading the country in the weak domestic economy.
Columbus, although once a farm town, has to its credit a major manufacturing and export base of Honda Motors, less than an hour's drive away.


Dow Posts Gain of 2.68, To 2,932.69
Stocks edged up in choppy trading, as sellers and buyers ended yesterday's session in a near standoff.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 2.68 points to close at 2,932.69, and that firmness characterized the broad market as well.
Analysts said the market was reaching an oversold condition that could set the stage for a bounce, with investors likely to sell going into a rally.


Inmac Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


U.S. Gold Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Laclede Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


School Segregation Case Too Knotty, Lawyers Say
Lawyers for the state argued today that a lawsuit attacking the de facto segregation that divides Hartford from its suburbs raises questions of social policy far too sweeping and complex for a single judge to decide.
Assistant Attorney General John R. Whelan also said the state should not be held responsible for segregation that arises out of residential patterns, rather than from intentional government policies like the Jim Crow practices of the South before the 1960's.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  EGYPTIAN CHOSEN TO LEAD U.N.
The Security Council unanimously recommended that Boutros Ghali, Egypt's Deputy Prime Minister, become the next United Nations Secretary General.
Page A1
Man in the News: Boutros Ghali, the first Arab to lead the U.N.
A12  SOVIETS WIN DEBT DEFERRAL
Rescuing the Soviet Union from the brink of default, creditor nations agreed to let it defer up to $6 billion in debt payments.
A1
Russian republic's President is warmly greeted in Germany.
A10  HAITIANS DIE IN SHIPWRECK
As many as 135 Haitians are believed to have died in a shipwreck while fleeing the country, Cuba's national news agency said.
A1  WHITHER THE MIDEAST PARLEY?
With Washington still the likeliest venue, Secretary of State James Baker and Israel's Prime Minister discussed where to hold direct Mideast peace talks.
A3
Israel's Labor Party adopted a more dovish platform.
A3  FORTIFIED, BRITAIN FACES EUROPE
The House of Commons gave Prime Minister John Major a vote of confidence for his tough negotiating position on European monetary and political union.
A10  SOMALI FIGHTING CONTINUES
Hundreds of people were reported to have been killed as rival factions continued to fight for control of Mogadishu, the capital of Somalia, for a fifth day.
A9  TALKS SET IN SOUTH AFRICA
South Africa's ruling party and its two major black organizations agreed to open talks on the country's future next month.
A11  INDIA PRESSURED ON NUCLEAR ARMS
A senior Bush Administration official arrived in India to press the Government to sign a nuclear non-proliferation treaty.
The odds of success seemed remote.
A8  TROOP CUTS HALTED IN KOREA
Acting on reports that North Korea is close to producing weapons-grade plutonium, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney ordered a halt to U.S. troop cuts in South Korea.
A7
France vows to pursue charges that Libya plotted a jet bombing.  A5
Salvador government stops aerial attack in response to truce.  A6
Managua Journal: Traffic jams and grapes signal recovery.
A4  National A14-26  THE STORM ON CIVIL RIGHTS
President Bush signed the civil rights bill but found himself embroiled in a political furor over his legal counsel's continuing effort to put a conservative interpretation on the new law.
A1
Minority-preference programs are an everyday part of the workplace.
A20 A STUMBLING WHITE HOUSE
News analysis: In the last few weeks, the President has appeared to Republicans and Democrats alike to be a wavering leader, a captive of a few leading aides who make sweeping decisions on their own and leave him to try to clean up the mess.
A1 QUAYLE UNDER FIRE
Democrats stepped up their attacks on Vice President Dan Quayle's Council on Competitiveness, and one House committee announced a conflict-of-interest investigation involving his staff.
A14  ACCORD ON MEDICAID
The White House and the nation's governors reached a tentative agreement on how to pay for health care for poor people.
But the agreement faces stiff opposition from state legislators and hospitals, and it is not clear that Congress will approve it.
A22 BANKING BILLS PASSED
Both the House and the Senate approved measures to shore up the bank insurance fund, but big differences remain to be reconciled.
D1  8 TESTIMONY ON B.C.C.I.
A Federal undercover agent who helped build a money-laundering case against the Bank of Credit and Commerce International told a Senate panel of his frustration that the inquiry had not gone further.
D1  WHEN THE WORKER IS BOSS
Tough economic times face virtually all companies.
But companies that are owned by their employees have special incentives to avoid harsh measures like layoffs.
A24  THE DEALER AND THE ENVOY
A former Colombian drug dealer said at the Noriega trial that an American diplomat had offered to let him ship drugs into the United States if he would help arm the contras.
A16
A Patriarch acts to heal divisions among American Orthodox.  A14
Washington Talk: The conservatives' dawn on the Supreme Court.  A14 Law Page A28
How do divorce lawyers rate a TV show about divorce lawyers?
A Los Angeles prosecutor tries to keep a judge from judging  Metropolitan Digest, B1 STREET-REPAIR VIOLATIONS
A top official in New York City's Transportation Department has been removed from his job amid revelations that city contractors used watered-down concrete and violated safety rules at three major street repair projects.
A1  GOVERNORS IN DISFAVOR
The Governors of Connecticut and New Jersey drew generally dismal approval ratings in a New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.
The main reason: tax increases.
Governor Cuomo fared slightly better.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-32  National Book Awards.
C29  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  "Women in Beckett." C17  Film: At the Movies.
C12  "The Addams Family." C1  "For the Boys." C12  "My Father Is Coming." C12  Music: A Baroque mix of seduction and devotion.
C3  From Bobby (Blue) Bland.
C26  Art: "Modernism" antiques show.
C26  The Art Market.
C26  Word and Image: Critic's Notebook.
C1  "The Spyglass Tree," a novel.
C29  TV Weekend.
C30  Obituaries A29  Harlon B. Carter, former leader of the National Rifle Association  Sports B6-14  Baseball: Mets woo Sutcliffe and Murray B7  Basketball: Cavaliers beat Nets B10  Columns: Lipsyte on tennis and tobacco.
B7  Tennis: Graf loses, but Navratilova wins B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31  Editorials A30  Bush defies Congress.
The majority and the gag rule.
Listen to the silence.
Letters A30  Anthony Lewis: How freedom died.
A31  A. M. Rosenthal: White House rap.
A31  David Martin: Croatia's borders -- over the edge.
A31  Albert V. Casey: A bigger bucket for bailout fund.
A31


Lottery Would Gain With More Winners
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 5 article on New York State's efforts to increase lottery revenues reflects a malady common to American business, that of management having no understanding of the product or customer.
Yes, players covet monstrous jackpots, but the fantasy of unimaginable wealth is not the lure to the average person who is or might be a regular lottery ticket buyer.
The dream for most is a dramatic change in their lives, and it is the rare individual whose life would not be profoundly altered by winning $100,000.


Book Awards for Poetry, 'Mating' and 'Freedom'
Philip Levine's poetic tribute to the American working class, "What Work Is" (Alfred A. Knopf) won the 1991 National Book Award for poetry on Wednesday night as the poetry award was revived after an eight-year hiatus.
A fellow Knopf author, Norman Rush, won the fiction award for "Mating," a novel about a woman who searches for love and spirituality on a socialist commune in Botswana.
Orlando Patterson, a professor of sociology at Harvard University, won the nonfiction prize for "Freedom" (Basic Books/HarperCollins), a study of the Western passion for freedom despite or even because of its history of slavery.


TV Weekend; Repainting the Indian in the Name of Natural History
Fans of "Nature" should feel right at home with "Land of the Eagle," the eight-part natural history of North America that begins on Sunday at 8 P.M. on Channels 13 and 49 and at 10 on Channel 21.
It is filled with the handsome photographs of fauna and flora that viewers have come to expect on Sunday evenings, and there is the handsome George Page as guide.
(For a glimpse into how those remarkable pictures of the private doings of all manner of wildlife are obtained, tune in "Nature" on Dec. 8 for "Great Moments With Nature's Film Makers.")


Man in the News: Boutros Boutros Ghali; A 'Born' Secretary General
Of all the candidates for the post of Secretary General of the United Nations, none wanted the job as much, or campaigned for it as openly and as ardently, as the veteran diplomat who was chosen yesterday, Boutros Ghali, Deputy Prime Minister of Egypt for Foreign Affairs.
Mr.
Ghali, the first from the Arab world or from Africa to head the organization, traveled throughout Africa and to China, Britain and the United States, calling in long-standing chips and upon old friends to win support for his bid.
Unabashedly, he says he was "born" for this post.
The United Nations, he says, can be critical in the "new world order," a concept in which Mr.
Ghali steadfastly believes.


F.C.C. Moves to Expand Phone Service Choices
Seeking to spur the creation of new communications services, the Federal Communications Commission today approved broad new pricing policies that will allow local telephone customers to pick and choose among an array of new network features.
The move is intended to make local telephone networks more open and accessible, allowing corporate customers to combine telephone services in novel ways.
An answering service, for example, might combine Caller ID and call forwarding features to route calls originating from numbers a customer has deemed important.


Surgery for Utley
MIKE UTLEY, the paralyzed Detroit Lions' offensive lineman, had an operation to fuse three of his vertebrae to prevent further injury yesterday and was fitted with a metal halo brace to stabilize his head and neck during the initial stages of rehabilitation.


Critic's Notebook; Retro-Mania: When TV Was for Families
IN February, CBS struck oldies gold with retrospective specials on three of its most successful series: "The Ed Sullivan Show," "All in the Family" and "The Mary Tyler Moore Show." Well, in television, if it works once, you've got to try it again or start looking for a new job.
So now, happily, we have what is being billed as "CBS Classic Weekend II." Tomorrow at 8 P.M., there's "The Bob Newhart Show 19th-Anniversary Special," and Sunday at 9 P.M.
"The Very Best of 'The Ed Sullivan Show' -- II." Actually, the time-warp trip continues into Monday night, at 9:30, with "Memories of M*A*S*H." And then for the days-gone-by insatiable, there is tomorrow's "Party for Richard Pryor," at 9 P.M., crammed with wonderful clips from decades past.


Aid Voted For Deposit Insurance
Both the House of Representatives and the Senate passed legislation today to shore up the bank deposit insurance fund, prodded by the worry that the failure to act soon could cause severe runs at banks and by weariness at weeks of debate.
But significant differences remain between the measures, and reconciling them will not be easy, lawmakers and lobbyists said.


On My Mind; White House Rap
With a single short sentence, President Bush deeply damaged the credibility and significance of the inquiry into the blowing up of Pan American 103.
"The Syrians," he said, "took a bum rap on this."


Review/Art; 'Modernism' Accents More Recent Past Among Antiques Show's Innovations
"Modernism" is getting younger.
The annual antiques show, whose sixth incarnation occupies the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan through Sunday, has always been subtitled as "a century of style and design, 1860 to 1960." But it has usually been weighted toward the pre-1910 portion of its time slot.
This year's show still includes some pockets of unrepentant Victoriana -- which always helps to spell out the daunting stylistic pluralism of modern design's early years.
Also on hand are some excellent displays and isolated examples of American and English Arts and Crafts material, as well as a few gems from turn-of-the-century Vienna and Frank Lloyd Wright.
The most outstanding in the last category is an elaborate library table from Wright's 1915 house for Sherman M. Booth in Glencoe, Ill., which holds center stage at the Kelmscott display.
The architectonic orchestration of horizontals and verticals of this structure, which measures 11 feet in length, can read as a diminutive version of one of Wright's Prairie School houses.


Congressional Roundup; Lawmakers Pare Their 'Must Do' List
Congress made some progress on two major pieces of legislation today as both chambers passed measures to finance the depleted bank insurance fund and lawmakers agreed on a House-Senate conference committee to handle the much-debated crime bill.


Loan Move By Fleet
The Fleet/Norstar Financial Group, a Providence, R.I., banking company, said yesterday that it would buy about $500 million of troubled loans from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which acquired the loans after the collapse of the Bank of New England this year.


Anacomp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pop/Jazz; Bobby (Blue) Bland, Honored at Last
When the soul singer Bobby (Blue) Bland found out that he would be inducted into the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame in January, he said his first thought was that he was honored to be included among such influential figures as Louis Armstrong, Ray Charles and Little Richard.
But mixed in with that feeling, he added, was a sense of relief at finally being recognized for a lifetime of work.
Now 61 years old, Mr.
Bland has been recording since the early 1950's and has released some two dozen albums.
"I sure think that I've been in the business long enough to be chosen," he said in a recent telephone interview from Union City, N.J., where he was staying while on tour.
"I just wonder why they waited so long."


Abortion Rights Measure Wins, Barely, in Washington State
The counting of absentee votes gave a ballot measure guaranteeing abortion rights in Washington State a narrow victory, election officials said today.
Under state law, however, the narrow margin will necessitate a recount.
Critics of the measure, Initiative 120, which is intended to safeguard the right to abortion in the event the United States Supreme Court overturns Roe v.
Wade, conceded defeat yesterday, but they claimed a moral victory over their opponents.


Mets Make Contract Offers to Murray and Sutcliffe
With an aggressive second step in their pursuit of free agents, the Mets have extended contract offers to first baseman Eddie Murray and right-hander Rick Sutcliffe, according to people on both sides of the deals.
The negotiations with Murray, which began over the last several weeks with preliminary conversations between General Manager Al Harazin and the agent for the veteran first baseman, have apparently gained greater momentum in recent days as Murray's dealings with the Los Angeles Dodgers have deteriorated.


American Woodmark reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Samuel R. Sapirie, 82, Head of Atomic Plant
Samuel Ralph Sapirie, who headed the operation of the Atomic Energy Commission's giant plant in Oak Ridge, Tenn., in the 1950's and 1960's, died Monday in Englewood, Fla., at Engelwood Community Hospital.
He was 82 years old and had homes in both Oak Ridge and Englewood.
He suffered from Parkinson's disease and died after a short illness, said Jim Alexander, a spokesman for the Department of Energy, which now operates the Oak Ridge plant.


CSC Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Foote, Cone to Sell Albert Frank-Guenther
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications Inc., Chicago, yesterday announced plans to sell a wholly owned subsidiary in New York and to expand its operations in the Asia-Pacific region.
In New York, Foote, Cone is selling Albert Frank-Guenther Law, an advertising and public relations agency that it acquired in 1978, to Whitney Partners Inc., a private investment company.
Terms were not disclosed.


Brown-Forman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


A Costlier Token? Strong Views Everywhere


Latest to Depart Lotus Is Chief of Technology
The Lotus Development Corporation, whose popular 1-2-3 accounting program has long dominated sales of business software, said today that Frank King, the overseer of the company's technological strategy for nearly four years, had left the company.
The sudden departure of Mr.
King, most recently the midwife for a prolonged labor of the company's newest version of the spreadsheet program, did not surprise many industry analysts.
They said a shake-up had become likely at the Cambridge, Mass., company after the disappointing debut in September of the spreadsheet Lotus 1-2-3 for Windows.


Art in Review
Sally Larsen, Louis De Clercq and Sir John Herschel  Lowinsky Gallery 575 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Jan. 18
For its opening in an elegant new space, this photography gallery is offering a diverse group of shows.
Sally Larsen presents half a dozen photographs taken in the White Room, a Tokyo cabaret that features performances by transvestites and transsexuals.
Printed with the orotone process, in which gold leaf is applied to glass, the images feature candid shots of the performers, lighted by flash.
In one, an overweight, Buddha-like man appears in pristine makeup, his eyes half-closed; in others, performers simulate sex acts.
But for all their apparent naughtiness, several of the pictures are just hard to read and, as a result, are more puzzling than provocative.


Toro Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


France to Pursue Libyan Link to '89 Bombing
President Francois Mitterrand hardened his tone toward Libya today by pledging to pursue charges that Libyan Government agents planted a bomb on a French airliner that exploded in midair in September 1989, killing 171 people.
"I personally feel strongly that the murders of our compatriots and of other nationals should not go unpunished," Mr.
Mitterrand said at a news conference.


TransCapital Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NHI Nelson Holdings International Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Restaurants
Add to the community of dining spots that call themselves Mediterranean -- that sunny amalgam of Greek, southern Italian and North African cuisines -- the East Side spot Mimosa.
Unlike many similar restaurants, Mimosa has been hotter than harissa since opening day in September, largely because of the accomplished young chef, Marilyn Frobuccino.
Ms.
Frobuccino most recently stoked the campfires at Arizona 206, another popular establishment that packs them in daily.
The move to Mimosa allows her the freedom to expand beyond a limited regional cuisine.
Like a child set loose for summer vacation, Ms.
Frobuccino sometimes lets her ebullience get the better of her common sense.
More often than not, though, her creations sparkle with the vigorous Mediterranean flavors of olives, rosemary, garlic and tomatoes.


Sounds Around Town
Zydeco King
Rockin' Dopsie, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 727-7788.
Dubbed the King of Zydeco by the mayor of his hometown, Lafayette, La., Rockin' Dopsie is a true zydeco kook.
He can squeeze the revelry of an entire Mardi Gras parade out of his accordion, and Cajun patter twirls from his lips like party streamers.
His new major-label debut, "Louisiana Music" (Atlantic), was recorded in just two days and sounds as slapdash as an impromptu hoedown; Rockin' Dopsie revamps zydeco favorites like Clifton Chenier's "Hot Tamale Baby (Ain't That Right)," dances all over Little Richard's "Keep A-Rockin' " and turns a sultry line like "I'm in the Mood" into a go-go fiesta.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.; admission is $15.
College Rock
Anastasia Screamed and Leaving Trains, CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, Manhattan, (212) 982-4052.
These two bands come from the less self-conscious side of college-radio rock.
They plunder sources from the Rolling Stones to Husker Du without seeming cute about it; they've both written great songs about being drunk, and they probably won't make references to "The Brady Bunch." Anastasia Screamed veers from dizzy psychedelic guitar-pop to sloppy, punkified "Exile on Main Street"-style raunch.
Leaving Trains just makes a big, fast racket.
Show time is about 10 P.M.; admission is $8.


Dell Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3


Lechters Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


British Chief Wins Backing For Tough Stand on Europe
Prime Minister John Major's Great European Escape Act, as one newspaper called it, ended with a 351-to-250 vote of confidence in the House of Commons tonight for his tough negotiating position on European monetary and political union.
He will now be able to meet his 11 European Community counterparts in Maastricht, the Netherlands, on Dec. 9 and 10 with clear parliamentary backing for agreement on a treaty that would establish a single European currency in stages by the end of the century.


CREDITORS TO LET SOVIETS POSTPONE PAYING PRINCIPAL
The Soviet Union's major creditors agreed today to allow the fragmented Union to defer repayment of principal for up to a year, thus postponing up to $6 billion in payments and rescuing it from the brink of default.
The Soviet Union amassed a foreign debt estimated at $65 billion to $70 billion, and was facing what one Western official described as "an extremely grave liquidity situation" because of the breakdown of central authority since the Kremlin coup in August and a sharp slowdown in oil and gas exports and economic activity in general.


In an Economic Turn, Midwest Meets Europe; Capital Gains
To the Editor:
"Son of Kemp-Roth: Still Wrong" (editorial, Nov. 13) states: "The capital gains ideas now circulating would produce a windfall profit for rich families on
past
investment.
That couldn't possibly spur future investment." What this familiar argument for taxing capital gains as income neglects is that the "windfall" profit has already been made, and the tax is a deterrent to rolling over that investment into others that we hope would spur investment.


The Spoken Word
PANEL DISCUSSION, the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, Manhattan.
"Art and Politics: U.S. and Japan," presented in conjunction with the ongoing exhibition "Undercurrents in the Floating World: Censorship and Japanese Prints 1603-1912." Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets are $15 for members and $20 for nonmembers.
Information: (212) 288-6400.
LECTURE, Museum of the American Indian, 3753 Broadway, at 155th Street, Manhattan.
"Intertwined Roots at the American Museum of the American Indian," by Martha Kreipe and Jose Montano, Sunday at 2 P.M.
The lecture is followed by a presentation of music from Bolivia; $15 fee includes museum admission.
Information: (212) 283-2497.
GALLERY TALKS, the Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Washington Avenue, Crown Heights.
"Quattrocento: Early Italian Panel Paintings," by Betty Kahn, today at 2 P.M.; "Objects of Myth and Memory: American Indian Art at the Brooklyn Museum," by Rita Gottfried, tomorrow at 1 P.M.; "Ancient Splendors: The Figure in Pre-Columbian and South Asian Art," by Lillian Kanfer, tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "Quattrocento: Early Italian Panel Paintings," by Ms.
Kahn, Sunday at 2 P.M.
All talks free with museum admission of $4 ($2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly).
Information: (718) 638-5000.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
"American Life in American Art," by Vivian Bobka, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 and 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.


Another Rise In Filings By Jobless
In still another portrayal of economic distress, first-time claims for state jobless benefits climbed for the third straight week, to 493,000, the highest level since April, the Labor Department reported today.
The surge of 39,000 for the week ended Nov. 9 intensified concern about the sustainability of the economy's recovery, even though analysts regard claims figures with considerable suspicion.


Prelate's Visit Narrows Eastern Orthodox Rifts
When 34 bishops representing most of the major Orthodox churches in America dined in New York last week with the visiting Patriarch from Moscow, it was the first time many of them had talked with one another in years.
Though their meeting with Patriarch Aleksy II was cordial, it was also a sign of the deep divisions within Eastern Orthodoxy in the United States.
The nation's Orthodox Christians share beliefs and rituals rooted in the ancient Christianity of Greece, the Middle East and Slavic Europe; yet they are splintered among more than 20 churches that reflect their ethnic origins: Greek, Russian, Serbian and a host of smaller ones.


Quadrex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A picture in some copies yesterday with an obituary of Cedric Sandiford, a victim of the 1986 racial attack in Howard Beach, Queens, was published in error.
The man shown speaking into a microphone was James E. Turner, a professor at Cornell University.


In an Economic Turn, Midwest Meets Europe; Sensible Tax Relief
To the Editor:
I agree with "The Law That Ate the Future" (editorial, Nov. 6) on one point: there is no more pressing issue before the United States than the reworking of last year's budget agreement.
The economic recession, which has thrown millions of Americans out of work, clearly makes the case for urgent change in the law.
Congress needs the financial flexibility to respond to pressing domestic events, so last May I introduced legislation to amend the budget agreement.


Cajun Christmas Fair
St.
Luke's School, at 487 Hudson Street in Manhattan, is having its annual Christmas fair from 5 to 10 P.M. today and from noon to 5 P.M. tomorrow.
Its theme, "A Cajun Christmas," will be reflected in a Mississippi River market and a New Orleans-style bistro, and there will be games, auctions, shopping, horse-drawn carriages and hayrides.
Admission is $2.50 for adults and $1 for children and the elderly.
The fair starts with a Cajun dinner tonight, with seatings at 5, 6:30 and 8.
Information and reservations: (212) 924-5960.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the views of leading American Jews misidentified a lobbying group and described it incorrectly.
The group is the American Israel Public Affairs Committee.
It lobbies on Israel's behalf; it is not a political action committee.


Reaffirming Commitment, Bush Signs Rights Bill
President Bush today signed the 1991 Civil Rights Act, hoping to end a bruising two-year fight over job discrimination, but instead found himself embroiled in a political furor over an effort within the Administration to put a conservative interpretation on the new law.
Facing protests from civil rights leaders, lawmakers from both parties and members of his Cabinet, Mr.
Bush this morning moved to end the uproar caused when the White House Counsel, C. Boyden Gray, circulated a draft of a directive Wednesday night that would have ended the use of racial preferences and quotas in Federal Government hiring.


Gendis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SECURITY COUNCIL SELECTS EGYPTIAN FOR TOP U.N. POST
Boutros Ghali, Egypt's 69-year old Deputy Prime Minister, was unanimously recommended to become the next United Nations Secretary General by the 15 members of the Security Council tonight and appeared set to win final approval from the 166-nation General Assembly.
Mr.
Ghali would become the first Arab and the first person from Africa to hold the top post at the United Nations.
He would replace Javier Perez de Cuellar of Peru, who has said he wants to step down at the end of this year after serving two five-year terms in the post.


Critic's Choice/Dance; Street Dance Moves Up to Mainstream
The lives and visions of nine performers will be on view this weekend at Performance Space 122 in what is probably the first hip-hop production on a mainstream dance stage in New York City.
The Rhythm Technicians blend rap, dance and graffiti in a piece called "So! What Happens Now?" The piece, which will also be performed next weekend, explores the life of a young street dancer caught between two groups of friends, one involved in dreams of survival, the other in dreams of stardom.
There can be a great deal of artistry in street-dancing, or hip-hop.
Dancers learn by imitation, and then, if they are any good, are driven to be the best and the most innovative by dance as competitive as anything that happens in a ballet classroom.
Some of the stars of street dance will perform, among them Steve (Wiggles) Clemente; Richard (Crazy Legs) Colon; John (Loc-a-Tron) Christian, a founding member of the Technicians, and Leon (Mr. Twister) Chesney, who taught Mikhail Baryshnikov how to "pop" and "lock." Other hip-hop luminaries who will perform are Gabriel (Kwikstep) Dionisio, Ken (Swift) Gabbert, Jorge (Fabel) Pabon, Carlos (More 139) Rodriguez and Charles (S. K. Mystique) Sanchez.


On Stage, and Off
Lincoln Center Prognostications
Here's the scoop on Lincoln Center once Andre Bishop takes over as artistic director on Jan. 1: "Four Baboons Adoring the Sun" by John Guare will begin performances at the Vivian Beaumont Theater on Feb. 14 and Peter Hall will direct the cast of three adults and nine children.
But the play, about two American archeologists, may only have a six-week run at the Beaumont before "March of the Falsettos" and "Falsettoland," the double bill of one-act musicals by William Finn and James Lapine, follows.
It must open by April 29 to be eligible for Tony Awards.


King's Check Will Be Bigger
The next paycheck of Derek King, who leads the Islanders in goals and total points, will reflect the new, $375,000 package he agreed to last week for the current season, his agent said yesterday.
The agreement puts King near the top of the team salary list.
Only Pierre Turgeon and Uwe Krupp, both acquired from Buffalo last month in the trade of Pat LaFontaine, make more money than King, who has 13 goals and 9 assists.


Public Library Will Issue Bonds To Buy Part of Altman Building
Using an unusual financing arrangement, the New York Public Library has assembled more than $70 million of the $80 million it needs to buy part of the old B. Altman department store on Fifth Avenue and create a new science, industry and business library.
Instead of following the usual route used by nonprofit groups -- raising money for several years and then buying a building -- the library is trying to reverse the process to take advantage of low real-estate prices.


Economic Scene; Antitrust Play, And an Epilogue
BROADWAY may never get to see it, but Walter Adams, Distinguished University Professor of Economics and former president of Michigan State University, and James Brock, Moeckel Professor of Economics at Miami University in Ohio, have written a play about antitrust policy that could have everybody but economists and lawyers rolling in the aisles.
Once they are past the non-sexy title, "Antitrust Economics on Trial: A Dialogue on the New Laissez-Faire," fans of the theater of the absurd will find themselves on familiar ground.
The authors say their play exhibits "an absence of communication -- a terrifying diversity of utterances, with the actors on stage listening only to snatches and fragments of the dialogue, and responding as if they had not listened at all."


House Panel Plans Inquiry On Quayle Council's Staff
Democrats stepped up their attacks today on Vice President Dan Quayle's Council on Competitiveness, as Representative John Conyers Jr. announced that the House Government Operations Committee would begin an investigation of the council's staff.
Senator Al Gore, Democrat of Tennessee, also attacked the council on the floor of the Senate, demanding the resignation of Allan B. Hubbard, the panel's executive director, who is also a member of Mr.
Quayle's personal staff.


Haitians, Seeking Asylum, Seize Canada's Embassy in Port-au-Prince


Over Lunch, Learning Signs of Understanding
FOR most of the 11 years Darlene Sarnouski has worked at the St.
Barnabas Medical Center here, she has felt cut off from co-workers, some of whom even seemed to shun her.
Most lunch hours, while everyone was gossiping or discussing the news, Ms.
Sarnouski went off by herself to read a book.
That was safer and less complicated.
But not anymore.


At the Movies
Parents, would you be proud if your son was acting in a movie he wrote, co-producing another film based on one of his screenplays, writing yet a third script and preparing for still another of his screenplays to be filmed, by James Cameron, the director of none other than the "Terminator" movies'?
If so, take a cue from the parents of Todd Graff.


Sanctions Said to Fuel Haitian Exodus by Sea
Local and international relief workers here say that the international embargo imposed on Haiti has increased the pain of poverty in ways that are likely to lead thousands more people to set out for the United States regardless of the perils of the sea journey or the chance that they will be picked up and sent home.
In recent days, international relief organizations said that in parts of the countryside, peasants have been forced to forage for wild plants because regular food supplies have virtually disappeared.


Public &amp; Private; Don't Call Me Ishmael
Not long ago Senator Alan Simpson of Wyoming wrote a letter to the editor that appeared in The New York Times.
"I find it so very ironic," he wrote, "that while Anna crusades in her column against female stereotypes, she wants to then wrap a male stereotype around me. . . ."
What's wrong with this sentence?
Several readers wrote in with the winning answer.
One woman wrote that the Senator was employing a tactic that has "been used to belittle and demean women." A man said the Senator was "offensive to you, women in general as well as to truth."


Discounters Closing In on New York
Between the stores in New York City and its nearby suburbs, shoppers can find just about everything they want, sometimes in unlikely places like Boogies Diner, a strange new hybrid in Manhattan that sells both hamburgers and hip clothes.
Only recently, though, have bargain hunters in the area been able to roam the cavernous floors of national discount stores like the refurbished K Mart and Home Depot, the hardware store on steroids.
While commonplace in most other parts of the nation, these growing chains, with thousands of items at bargain prices, have only recently begun big efforts to open stores within striking distance of the city, especially on Long Island.


BRIEFS
*
Carolco Pictures Inc., Los Angeles, said a Federal judge had approved its settlement of a shareholder lawsuit over a 1990 stock transaction that produced an $11.5 million profit for Carolco's chairman. *
Damson Oil Corp., New York, said that as debtor-in-possession the company had filed its plan of reorganization with the U.S.
Bankruptcy Court.


METRO DIGEST
ANATOMY OF A RECESSION
Businesses in the New York region that are waiting for a national recovery to lift them out of their doldrums are looking in the wrong direction, several economists say.
The downturn, they say, has less to do with the nationwide slump than with the wrenching changes being forced on many of the industries for which the city is a center.
Banks, broadcasters, firms that specialize in accounting, law, public relations and advertising -- although these industries have already shed thousands of jobs, they may have still further to go.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  ABORTION DOCTOR WENT UNPUNISHED
State health officials said that they were aware of misconduct accusations against Dr.
Abu Hayat for more than two years -- including a report that he botched an abortion, leading to a young woman's death -- but took no action against him because they did not believe they could prove he posed an "imminent danger" to public health.
Page 27.
STATE PROBLEMS, CITY PROBLEMS
New York State's growing budget gaps will deepen New York City's fiscal problems, forcing it to cut spending even more, the Dinkins administration warned.
The warning came as the administration ordered all city agencies to draft four-year targets for cutting the work force and improving productivity.
The city Budget Director said the budget gap for the next fiscal year would be even greater than the $1.2 billion forecast just two weeks ago.
Page 27.
NEW RULES FOR ROAD CONTRACTS
Acknowledging that New York City's oversight of its vast program for street reconstruction is flawed, transportation officials say they have begun making changes to insure that contractors do what they are being paid for.
The changes come amid revelations that the city's Transportation Department failed to act after being told that contractors used faulty concrete and violated safety rules on three major projects.
Page 27.
REGION A FAILED SUIT, A $60,000 BILL
Saying that the Constitution had been debased and the court system had been ridiculed by their lawsuit, a Federal judge ordered a Westchester County couple to pay the $60,000 legal fees of the school system they sued because their son was not admitted to the honor society.
Page 28.
THE C.I.A.
IN THE GROVES OF ACADEME
After months of disclosures about a hidden relationship with the Central Intelligence Agency, the Rochester Institute of Technology is trying to decide whether there is room for secret intelligence research on a college campus.
The debate, which began when the school's president acknowledged he had secretly worked for the C.I.A., will be taken up by the trustees today.
What they decide may influence how other universities respond to the criticism that research for clandestine groups is inconsistent with academic values of open expression.
Page 28.
TOP FLORIO AIDE TO RESIGN
After weeks of denying that it would happen, Governor Florio announced that Douglas C. Berman, his former campaign manager and a leading architect of his $2.8 billion tax increase, would resign as state treasurer.
Page 28.
The Cuomo-Wachtler legal battle is back in state court. Page 28.
About New York 27
Consumer's World 48


Corrections
Tables in Business Day yesterday reflecting Thursday's American Stock Exchange trading listed a price change erroneously for Partners Preferred Yield 2, a real estate investment trust.
Thursday was its first trading day; there was no price change.


Mining Solid Gold on the Radio
Just after 9 A.M. a man in a yellow sweatshirt spins his chair around in a Manhattan studio, pulls his headphones on and shoves a tape into a cassette player.
"Hello, Luv," he booms into a microphone.
"Good morning, everybody, this is Ron Lundy at CBS-FM, and I got a song for ya. Oh, 'Baby, I Love Ya.' "
As that 60's tune fills the studio on West 52d Street, the more subdued co-anchors one floor below at WCBS-AM preach the commuter gospel -- news reports from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut peppered with traffic and weather updates.


Acme-Cleveland Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. ASKS ISRAELIS AND ARABS TO HOLD WASHINGTON TALKS
The United States announced today that it had invited Israel, the Palestinians and the Arab states to resume their peace talks in Washington on Dec. 4, even though Israel continued to maintain that the talks should be held in the Middle East.
Israeli officials said they were irritated because the invitations were sent out Thursday night, before Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir met with President Bush this morning to discuss the site issue.
Mr.
Shamir said he would respond to the invitation only after discussing the matter with his Cabinet next week.


Peru Charges Former Leader With Corruption
The Attorney General charged former President Alan Garcia today with embezzlement of Government money.
It is the first time that a former Peruvian head of state has faced trial.
The charge of "illicit enrichment" against Mr.
Garcia relates to allegations that he used $500,000 in state funds to build three houses in Lima, said Cesar Noya, a spokesman for Attorney General Pedro Mendez.


Concord Computing Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Soviet Official Wins an Ecology Fight
Nikolai N. Vorontsov, the first and last Soviet Minister for Natural Resources Management and Environmental Protection, has had reason to worry about the collapse of the Soviet Union.
For weeks, his ministry was targeted as a useless appendage of an atrophying central Government, one of dozens due to be closed in a single sweep of the capital's bureaucratic morass.
But as his ministry's fate bobbed along uncertainly, Mr.
Vorontsov, a 57-year-old biologist with a political touch, opened an energetic lobbying campaign, not just for his job but for the ecological well-being of a land mass that stretches across 18 percent of the world's surface.
With central controls lifted, he asked, what would prevent environmental protection -- still young and fragile here -- from falling between the cracks of the old Soviet empire?


Ampal-American Israel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Early Season Flu Outbreak Closes Schools in Six States
A nationwide flu outbreak, mostly among school-age children, has closed schools in six states and has confirmed warnings that this will be an unusually grim flu season, experts say.
They said this was the earliest start of the flu season in memory.
Doctors in Middle Atlantic, central and mountain states are reporting that 4 to 9 percent of the patients they see are complaining of flu-like symptoms; usually the rate in November is 1 to 4 percent, said Dr.
Walter Gunn, an epidemiologist and flu specialist at the Federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.


C.F.L. Honors Flutie
Quarterback DOUG FLUTIE, who won the Heisman Trophy seven years ago as a Boston College player, was voted the Canadian Football League player of the year Thursday night.
This season he set C.F.L. records for passing yardage (6,619), attempts (730) and completions (466) as he led the British Columbia Lions to an 11-7 record.
He received all 64 votes in balloting by Canadian football reporters. (AP)


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Waived Joe King, defensive back.
Activated John Thornton, defensive lineman, from the practice squad.


House G.O.P. Makes Late Sally on Taxes
With the blessing of the White House, Republicans in the House of Representatives tried today to embarrass Democrats by offering a broad package of popular tax cuts that stand no chance of enactment just days before Congress plans to adjourn for the year.
The initiative by the House Republicans underscores their frustration with the lack of forceful policy proposals by the Bush Administration.
But even more, it demonstrates an attempt to regain political momentum that has been lost in recent weeks because of the shaky economy, a drumbeat of attacks from Democrats and a series of misfires at the White House.


Tougher Rules On Fuel Are Set For California
The California Air Resources Board voted yesterday to adopt new standards on gasoline that will require the most significant changes in fuel since the Federal Government ordered the removal of lead from gasoline nearly 20 years ago.
The board said the new fuel would be "the world's cleanest," reducing the emissions of smog-forming chemicals by 30 percent to 40 percent compared with current blends.


Mets Mail Opening Offer to Pirate Star
The Federal Express package arrived in California yesterday, and when it was opened, the Mets had officially entered the Bobby Bonilla sweepstakes.
Already engaged on several other free-agent fronts, the Mets yesterday took what they claimed was a determined dive into the competition for Bonilla, the star outfielder-infielder for the Pittsburgh Pirates who is the most coveted commodity in the current marketplace.
The Mets mailed a contract offer to Bonilla's agent Thursday night and received confirmation yesterday that it had been received.
&lt;


Kentucky Central Life reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. AIDES RETREAT ON WETLANDS RULE
Bush Administration officials today backed away from their proposal on defining America's wetlands after Federal scientists concluded that it could open nearly half of the currently protected areas to development.
Any proposal will be revised to honor President Bush's 1988 campaign pledge that there will be no net loss of wetlands while he is President, said David Beckwith, a spokesman for Vice President Dan Quayle.
Mr.
Quayle is chairman of the Council on Competitiveness, whose staff members wrote the most recent revision of the wetlands definition.
Another Policy Shift
Critics of the Administration's environmental policies said the latest action appeared to be a setback for Mr.
Quayle's council, as its staff had revised the guidelines proposed by four Federal agencies to make it more difficult for wetlands to qualify for protection.
The aim was to help relieve the wetlands rule on industries like oil and land development.


Steeler Breaks Ankle
Tight end ERIC GREEN, the Pittsburgh Steelers' leading receiver, fractured his right ankle in practice yesterday and was expected to miss the rest of the season.
Green, who has 41 receptions for 582 yards and 6 touchdowns, broke an ankle bone in a routine passing drill as the Steelers prepared for tomorrow's game against the Houston Oilers, Coach CHUCK NOLL said. (AP)


Harmon Likes Seeing New York And Loves Playing in San Diego
Even though he'll be wearing the navy blue and gold of San Diego on Sunday in the Meadowlands, Chargers running back Ronnie Harmon is a born and bred New Yorker who will be glad to be back home.
"I have to stay with my teammates out in New Jersey, but the first thing I'm going to do when I arrive is to head for Manhattan," said Harmon, a consensus all-city football player at Bayside High School in Queens when the Commodores were a powerhouse in the late 1970's and early 1980's.
"I still live at home with my parents in Laurelton in the off season."


American-Made Cars on Comeback Road
To the Editor:
An Oct. 31 article about the morning program "Good Day, New York" on WNYW-TV, Channel 5, quotes Joachim Blunck, executive producer, saying about the United States automobile industry, "They lose lots of money because they make lousy cars." He might have been on firmer ground if he'd been speaking of Detroit's past, rather than the present.


Review/Pop; Blend of Styles and Sources From a Young Brazilian Star
Marisa Monte, a 23-year-old Brazilian pop-jazz star of unusual promise, glides lightly over conventional musical boundaries.
The singer, who appeared at Town Hall on Sunday evening, has released two albums, the first of which includes renditions of such dissimilar American standards as "I Heard It Through the Grapevine" and "Speak Low," along with Brazilian pop-jazz numbers.
"Mais," her newest release, was produced by the New York avant-gardist Arto Lindsay, who grew up in Brazil, and is a sparer, more acoustically flavored showcase for the singer, who co-wrote five of the album's songs.
Stylistically, her songwriting runs to short spicy pop sambas with upbeat messages.


Sabatini and Seles Charge Ahead to Semifinal Meeting
Jennifer Capriati appeared as if she'd been mowed down by a bulldozer disguised in crisply creased tennis whites last night as Gabriela Sabatini plowed herself a clear path to this afternoon's semifinals of the Virginia Slims Championships at Madison Square Garden.
Sabatini made a motto of one-upsmanship in her 6-1, 6-4 dismantling of the 15-year-old Capriati, who was as hampered by her opponent's unflinching attack as she was by the groin strain that has slowed her all week.
Capriati had defeated Sabatini in their last three meetings, but last night's match belonged to the Argentine.
She used a mixed palette of shotmaking to force her opponent from mere defensiveness into a state of submissiveness Capriati seldom displays.


Ruddock to Fight Page
DONOVAN (RAZOR) RUDDOCK, who lost his last two fights to MIKE TYSON, will fight GREG PAGE, a former heavyweight champion, in January in Las Vegas, Nev., the promoter MURAD MUHAMMAD said yesterday.
The date has yet to be set. (AP)


American-Made Cars on Comeback Road; Still Disenchanted
To the Editor:
Re: "Big Losses for Top 2 in Detroit" (Business Day, Oct. 23):


Group Backs Rain Forest
A group has gathered 520 signatures on a petition urging the city not to use Brazilian rain forest wood on the boardwalk, an organizer said today.
The organizer, Dan Lowden, said he wants the city to seek other options, like recycled plastic planks or pine from the Northwest.
The rain forest wood is cheap because of lower demand stemming from environmental protests, said Mr.
Lowden, a restaurant manager.
City consultants say the wood is selectively harvested and replanted to maintain the rain forest's equilibrium.
The City Council has not made a decision on what wood to use to replace boardwalk damaged in the Oct. 31 storm.
The city used lumber from the rain forest last year for boardwalk repairs.


Knicks, After Victory, Feel Like a Million
A five-game trip that began sourly for the Knicks ended sweetly tonight.
Winning their second consecutive road game, the Knicks (6-5) rolled to a 99-90 victory over the struggling Detroit Pistons (5-7) at the Palace of Auburn Hills.
Mark Jackson led the way for New York, putting together the fifth triple double of his career (12 points, 13 assists, and 10 rebounds).
And Jackson had plenty of help from Patrick Ewing (20 points), John Starks (20 points) and Charles Oakley (13 rebounds).





Boston War Zone Becomes Public Housing Dream
Only five years ago, Ruby Jaundoo lived in one of the country's most dilapidated and dangerous public housing projects.
Likened by city residents to a war zone, the Columbia Point apartments sat secluded on a peninsula jutting into Boston Harbor; even ambulance crews and firefighters would not come to the neighborhood without a police escort.
"Nobody wanted to come out here," Ms.
Jaundoo said.
"The police wouldn't patrol. The gangs were infesting our housing. I was fearful and I'd had enough."


Credit Cards: Variable Rates Don't Always Help
Congressional efforts to cap interest rates on credit cards have ground to a halt amid fears that banks might revoke millions of credit cards and drive the economy deeper into recession.
Consumers who want good deals -- low interest rates and low annual fees (or none at all) -- will have to continue shopping around.
Some will no doubt be attracted to variable-rate credit cards, which account for about 10 percent of all cards issued, according to Bankcard Holders of America, a consumer advocacy group in Herndon, Va.


Oshawa Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


With Bush's Stand Uncertain, Lawsuit Is Threatened Over New Rights Law
The confusion over President Bush's attitude toward the civil rights bill that he signed Thursday continued today, as civil rights groups threatened to go to court if the Administration did not enforce the newly enacted legislation.
The groups and their allies in Congress have accused the White House of attempting to undermine the new law by using the President's signing statement to instruct Federal agencies to ignore central provisions.
Critics also accuse the President of


A Magazine For Lawyers Is Closing
Manhattan Lawyer, a snappy four-year-old legal magazine, will cease publication with its December issue, Steven Brill, the founder of the magazine, announced in a memo to the staff yesterday.
Mr.
Brill also announced that beginning in March, The American Lawyer would include videotapes of recent trials with each issue of the magazine.
Called the Video Trial Report, the two-hour videotape, which will be mailed out with the magazine, will be produced and edited in conjunction with an article that discusses and analyzes one noteworthy trial.


DEPOSED HAITIAN MEETS WITH FOES
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's deposed President, arrived here tonight and met with opposition leaders from his country for the first time since he was overthrown in a military coup on Sept. 30.
Father Aristide's 45-minute session with 11 Haitian legislators opened a weekend of talks in which the possibility of his reinstatement will be discussed.
The meeting was also attended by delegates from the Organization of American States, who are to mediate.


Global Ocean Carriers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Leon's Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Magic Johnson Makes Us Look at HIV Stigma
To the Editor:
"Sorry, but Magic Isn't a Hero" by Dave Anderson (Sports of The Times, Nov. 14) includes two ideas, one of which I find offensive, the other actually dangerous.


MTS Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Patents; More Accurate Testing For a Virus in Blood
Genelabs Technologies Inc., a drug development company in Redwood City, Calif., patented what it said was a more accurate test to detect the presence of a lethal virus in blood supplies.
The test identifies HTLV-1, a virus that causes leukemia and a degenerative neurological disorder. (The test is not for the AIDS virus, which was once called HTLV-3.) The United States, France and Japan currently require that all blood supplies be screened for the virus, but the company said current tests could not detect the virus until it had incubated for three to six months after the blood had been infected.
In addition, they said, current tests produce a high number of results that incorrectly signal the presence of the virus.


As 'Steamtown' Grows, So Does Parks Debate
A $73- million Federal project to build a theme park meant to recreate the age of steam locomotives in a decrepit railroad yard here has touched off an extraordinary debate over the changing mission of the National Park Service.
Members of Congress, which has become more and more involved in setting priorities for the Park Service over the past decade, say the park, called the Steamtown National Historic Site, could help revive the depressed economy of this northeastern Pennsylvania region by drawing hundreds of thousands of visitors every year.


No Deal for Celtics
Free-agent guard VINNIE JOHNSON, formerly of the Detroit Pistons, has rejected an offer to play for Boston and the Celtics have withdrawn the offer, the team's senior executive vice president, DAVE GAVITT, said yesterday.
Johnson, 35, was released by Detroit this summer. (AP)


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.74
7.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.43
4.44
7.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.51
4.51
6.98
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.99
6.97
8.13
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.97
7.97
8.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.95
8.95
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.90
6.89
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Court Ruling Gives Lift to Lenders
A Federal appeals court has bolstered the rights of lenders in bankruptcy cases by preventing delinquent borrowers from adopting the increasingly common tactic of keeping control of indebted properties by investing new money into them.
Lawyers said the ruling by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit was likely to reduce the potential losses that banks, insurance companies and other big lenders might suffer from thousands of real estate bankruptcy cases now in litigation.


Rangers Get an Earful From Messier
The Rangers are in St.
Louis now, but the words that Mark Messier delivered to his teammates here late Thursday night might still be ringing in the visitors' locker room at the Forum.
Messier, a member of the Rangers for less than two months, called a closed-door, players-only meeting -- one of several he has held since joining the team from Edmonton in early October -- after New York lost, 6-1, to the Los Angeles Kings on Thursday.


Zimbabwe Can't Be Called a One-Party State
To the Editor:
"Zambia's Democratic Shock to Africa" (news analysis, Nov. 5) is outrageous in its reference to Zimbabwe as a one-party state.
The Zambian election may be an important development, but you have no right to twist facts to suit cold-war ideologies.


Massachusetts Testing Lottery by Phone
Massachusetts today became the first state in the nation to allow bettors to play the lottery by telephone.
A yearlong experiment that began this morning permits a person at least 18 years old to place bets on any of the state's four games by calling a 900 number from a residential or business touch-tone telephone from anywhere in Massachusetts.


Folks, Take My Unemployment Check (Please)
At a comedy club on Manhattan's West Side, a favorite fixture for years has been the nights when people from a given walk of life gather to tell jokes about their jobs.
Doctors, gravediggers, cabbies, ad executives, plumbers, whatever.
Nights to remember.
A bus driver once reported being asked how long will the next bus be -- a common enough, though grammatically murky expression.
He replied, "About 19 feet." A dentist said he almost flunked out of dental school because he didn't have enough hair on his arms.
Lawyers have flagellated themselves unmercifully, though not nearly enough.


For New York's Businesses, Time of Wrenching Changes
Businesses in the New York City region that are waiting for a national recovery to lift them out of their doldrums are looking in the wrong direction, several economists say.
The downturn here, they say, has less to do with the nationwide slump than with the wrenching changes being forced on many of the industries for which the city is a center.
The large New York banks have watched new competitors from both their own and other industries, often based elsewhere, come into fields they have traditionally dominated.
Television broadcasters have been hurt by deregulation, which forces them to compete against cable and other media companies for audiences and advertising dollars.


Exxon Names President Of U.S. Oil and Gas Unit
The Exxon Corporation yesterday named Harry J. Longwell president of the Exxon Company U.S.A., its subsidiary responsible for all oil and gas operations in the United States, except for exploration.
Mr.
Longwell, 50, will succeed William D. Stevens, who will retire.
The appointment is effective on Feb. 1.


System Software reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Observer; R.S.V.P. With Class
To Patrick Buchanan, Columnist
Dear Pat:
Pardon the informality, but as your faithful reader, I feel we are old pals.
Anyhow, I saw where you might run against Bush for the Republican nomination because you're vexed about him letting down the conservatives.
This made me take a good hard look at myself, and I was startled to see what an old stick-in-the-mud I've become.


Israel Decides Not to Charge Palestinian With P.L.O. Ties
Israel's Attorney General has decided not to press criminal charges against the Palestinian leader Hanan Ashrawi for supposedly defying an Israeli law that prohibits contact with the Palestine Liberation Organization, the state radio reported today.
Although a Justice Ministry spokeswoman denied that a conclusion had been reached, the Israeli radio said Attorney General Yosef Harish had already told associates that he was persuaded to close the Ashrawi file because of insufficient evidence and because an indictment would harm Israel's interests in the Middle East peace process.


INSIDE
In Senate Bank Bill, Love Letters Home Tucked away in the complex banking bill approved by a handful of senators on Thursday are a host of provisions written with specific home-state constituents in mind, many inserted minutes before the vote.
Page 35.
Ewing + Bonilla = Zillions
The Knicks and Patrick Ewing signed a deal that will make Ewing the highest-paid player in team sports, while the Mets made a multiyear offer to free agent Bobby Bonilla.
Page 29.


Politics 1, Tax Cuts 0
With White House approval, Republican lawmakers proposed tax cuts that, just days before adjournment, have no chance of enactment.
Page 9.


City Hall Tells Agencies to Cut As Deficit Rises
New York State's growing budget gaps will deepen New York City's fiscal problems, forcing it to cut spending even more, the Dinkins administration warned yesterday.
At the same time, City Hall ordered all city agencies to draft new four-year targets for cutting the work force and improving productivity.
The city Budget Director, Philip R. Michael, said the gap between projected revenues and spending for the fiscal year that starts July 1 would be even greater than the $1.2 billion forecast just two weeks ago in the administration's four-year financial plan.
The city's fiscal picture has changed, he said, mostly because estimates of the state's budget gap have as much as doubled recently, to $3.6 billion.


Despite Stock Fall, Bonds Don't Rally
The slide in stock prices failed to ignite any sort of rally in the Government securities market yesterday, and prices of Treasury notes and bonds were narrowly mixed in slow trading.
Once again, prices on short-term securities remained firm while long-term bond prices fell.


In Seconds, 6 Are Killed In Queens Fire
Five children and their grandfather were killed last night in a fire that roared "within seconds" through the ground floor of a two-story frame house in South Ozone Park, Queens, fire officials and witnesses said.
A 12-year-old boy who had escaped the blaze but ran back inside to rescue his brothers and sisters was among those who died, said Tom Kelly, the Fire Department deputy commissioner for public information.


Posturing on the Homeless
Critics of Mayor David Dinkins's plan for New York City's homeless, in hopes of avoiding responsibility for siting new residences, issue loud challenges that misrepresent the Mayor's concept.
That's cheap and destructive posturing on an issue that demands statesmanship and good-faith negotiation.
The Mayor proposes spending $200 million on 24 new residences offering secure, structured programs for up to 150 people each.
They would replace the huge armories that now house thousands of the homeless each night.
Closing the big shelters, where room and board cost the city $40 per person per night, would free ample money for programs dealing with substance abuse, mental illness and other needs of homeless adults.


Seiyun Journal; Awaiting Oil Boom, Bedouins Discover Car Theft
The man from the French Total oil company broke into a wide grin as he glanced at a convoy of cars making their way toward Sana, the Yemeni capital.
"Smuggled, perhaps recycled," he said with satisfaction, confirming his suspicion that none of the vehicles had genuine license plates.


Congressional Roundup; Two Financing Bills Stall Lawmakers
Congress moved toward clearing a few of its pre-adjournment problems today, but made no visible progress on two of the toughest: financing for the savings and loan bailout and for the nearly insolvent bank insurance fund.
House and Senate conferees on the transportation bill believed they had settled their biggest dispute, how to allocate money among the states, and there was steady progress on appropriations bills.
But conferees on crime legislation held only informal meetings, and no progress was made on settling disputes over trade provisions or the extended unemployment benefits measure.


Letter: On New York City; Showing Private Business How to Help
To the Editor:
As chairman of the Mayor's Committee for Public-Private Partnerships, I read with great interest "The Business of Business" (editorial, Nov. 2).
You correctly state that "individual corporations already provide much direct financial and volunteer aid" to New York City.
However, you conclude by saying that many business people "feel they are talking to deaf ears," and that business partners can only help if there is a mutual willingness to hear and act.


It's a Big Day for Old Rivalries, And a Last Chance for Bowl Bids
Old rivalries, the resolution of open bowl bids and a farewell to the sport for hundreds of senior athletes mark the college football scene today.
The traditional rivalries will be found in places like New Haven; Bethlehem, Pa.; Ann Arbor, Mich., and Palo Alto, Calif.


Magic Johnson Makes Us Look at HIV Stigma; Urge Abstinence
To the Editor:
Magic Johnson has athletic skill, grace and courage.
It remains to be seen whether he is also wise.
I believe he will not be if he follows the advice of those who urge him to preach "safe" sex to teen-agers.
This well-meant effort will actually put many more teen-agers at risk of infection.


Moog Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Patents; Ozone Method to Purify Polluted Bodies of Water
Medsonics Inc. of Farmingdale, L.I., a company that makes air pollution control equipment, has patented a machine to purify water with ozone that officials said could be used to bring polluted lakes and rivers back to life.
Ozone, a highly unstable molecule consisting of three atoms of oxygen, has long been known to be useful in killing bacteria and neutralizing organic compounds that cause unpleasant odors.


Patents; A New Sweet Pepper Designed as Snack Food
The DNA Plant Technology Corporation of Cinnaminson, N.J., a small company that has used novel plant breeding techniques to develop tomatoes and carrots that stay crispy longer, this week patented a new variety of sweet pepper.
The company says its new peppers taste like a large bell pepper but are as small as jalapeno peppers and are intended to be a new snack food.
Developed through a joint venture with E.I. du Pont de Nemours, the peppers are bright red, have high concentrations of vitamin C and can be eaten in two bites.
Test-marketing is under way.


How U.N. Nominee Won: 4 Switched
The United States had expected the Security Council to deadlock again on Thursday night in its search for a new Secretary General of the United Nations, apparently hoping that such a stalemate would allow it to push what it considered a more dynamic character into the post than either of the two front-running candidates.
But France, which had backed Deputy Prime Minister Boutros Ghali of Egypt from the start, exploited apprehension about Washington's tactics and persuaded enough Council members to switch their allegiance to secure victory for its candidate, diplomats said.


Datapoint Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Lori Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHARGES DISMISSED IN TEMPLE KILLINGS
Judges today dismissed charges against four men who had been jailed for more than two months as suspects in the killing of nine people at a Buddhist temple near here last August.
The dismissal was at the request of prosecutors, who conceded at a hearing that they had no evidence against the four men other than their confessions, which were later recanted.
The defendants' lawyers had contended that the confessions had been coerced by sheriff's deputies.


Some China Dissidents May Soon Be Released
China says it plans to free a jailed student leader and to drop charges against a labor militant, reports a businessman who has successfully lobbied for releases.
The businessman, John Kamm, a former vice president of Occidental Chemical Far East in Hong Kong, said officials also indicated to him that the Government planned to release other dissidents before the end of the year.
He was not told specifically how many.


Magic Johnson Makes Us Look at HIV Stigma; Not a Death Sentence
To the Editor:
Magic Johnson is in a very important position to educate the public about AIDS.
He says he plans to use his celebrity status to become a spokesman for safer sex and HIV.
Before he does, I hope he educates himself about what it means to live with HIV, and he should also clear up a few misconceptions he has created.


North American Ventures reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.  Capitals Beat Bruins


Review/Dance; The Audience Plays a Role in the Story
Victoria Marks has developed an intriguing choreographic voice over the last decade, a voice that is muted but uncompromising.
Small mysterious gestures are used to convey quite specific situations and relationships or to suggest whole microcosms.
Ms.
Marks expanded her palette with "This Way In," a new full-evening piece performed on Wednesday evening at the Bessie Schonberg Theater of Dance Theater Workshop, taking on the world since its creation.
There were exciting moments and satisfying realizations of movement problems throughout in dance that exploded across the stage in runs and falls, subsiding into deathlike stillnesses from time to time.
But a good deal of "This Way In" was a puzzle.


Bridge
The Fall National Championships of the American Contract Bridge League began here this afternoon, and more than 4,000 players will fight for seven major titles and a host of minor ones during 10 days of play.
The climax will be the Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams, which is generally considered the most grueling event in the tournament calendar.
The defending champions are Richard Pavlicek of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., Bill Root, Brian Glubok, Edgar Kaplan, all of Manhattan, and Norman Kay of Narberth, Pa.
Their victory in San Francisco a year ago made them candidates to represent the United States in the 1992 world team championships in August in Salsomaggiore, Italy, and they will take part in playoffs in May, adding Mike Passell of Dallas.


Daniel Mann, 79, the Director Of Successful Plays and Films
Daniel Mann, the theater and film director responsible for such successes as "Come Back, Little Sheba," "The Rose Tattoo" and "Butterfield 8," died on Thursday at the U.C.L.A.
Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 79 years old.
He died of heart failure, said the actor Harold Ramis, his son-in-law.


Perles Digs In Heels
GEORGE PERLES has rejected the offer from Michigan State's president, JOHN DIBIAGGIO, that he remain as athletic director while giving up his job as football coach.
"It is my preference to coach the M.S.U. football team next fall," Perles said in a statement yesterday.
Perles has held the dual role since July 1, 1990.
"He intends to continue working as both until either an acceptable offer is made or until he's removed," said KEN HOFFMAN, a spokesman for Perles.


Another Theater Seeks Young Audiences
To the Editor:
It is wonderful that the American Theater Wing enables high school students to see Broadway shows for $2.50 a ticket (news article, Nov. 9).
There is a theater company on the Upper West Side of Manhattan that is also trying to bring young people into the theater.


Magic Johnson Makes Us Look at HIV Stigma; Dial for Condom Advice
To the Editor:
In response to the report that Magic Johnson is joining the National Commission on AIDS, we have opened up a toll-free "800" number to help.
Anyone, anywhere in the United States who calls 1-800-WORLD 99 (967-5399) can hear a two-minute recorded announcement on proper use of a condom for disease prevention.
We chose the condom-use topic in view of the barriers to broadcasting such frank discussion on television and radio.
Because we are the country's phone privacy system, callers also have the assurance that no record of their calling number will be kept.
WILL DWYER 2D President, Private Lines Inc.
Beverly Hills, Calif., Nov. 16, 1991


(Sh!) More Men Color Their Hair
Does he or doesn't he?
With growing numbers of hair-coloring products for men on the market, chances are better than ever that he does.


News SUmmary
International 2-6  INVITATION TO MIDDLE EAST TALKS
The United States invited Israel, the Palestinians and the Arab countries to resume their peace talks in Washington on Dec. 4.
Page 1


Classical Music in Review
Moscow Virtuosi  Carnegie Hall


LSB Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
David Holzman Pianist
Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


Metall Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stocks Slip As the Dow Loses 29.96
Stocks were hit with another stiff wave of selling yesterday, ending a week in which the market suffered the reverberations of last Friday's 120-point plunge in the Dow Jones industrial average.
The Dow dropped 29.96 points, to 2,902.73.
For the week, the Dow lost 40.47 points.
Big Board volume yesterday came to 188.3 million shares, down from 196.2 million Thursday.
Losing issues outpaced gainers, 1,149 to 507.


Kennedys Mark Dallas Anniversary


9,900 Jobs To Be Cut By Nynex
The Nynex Corporation, the provider of local telephone service in New York State and New England, said yesterday that it planned to reduce its work force over the next two years by more than 10 percent, or about 9,900 employees.
The cost of severance pay and early-retirement benefits, plus costs for getting out of the separate businesses of writing computer software in Britain and developing real estate in the Northeast United States, is expected to total more than $500 million.
As a result, the company will report a substantial loss for its fourth quarter, instead of the modest profit that had been expected.


Valspar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


Rochester Institute to Decide C.I.A.'s Future on Campus
After months of disclosures about a hidden relationship with the Central Intelligence Agency, a university here is trying to decide whether there is room for secret intelligence research on its campus.
The debate at the Rochester Institute of Technology, which began last spring when the school's president acknowledged he had secretly worked for the C.I.A., will be taken up by the trustees on Saturday.
What they decide may influence how other universities respond to the criticism that research for clandestine groups is inconsistent with academic values of open expression.


CHRONICLE
He is not usually at a loss for words, but PETER JENNINGS had a hard time preparing for his speech at the Gathering of Remembrance and Renewal that the Gay Men's Health Crisis conducted last night at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
"I was struggling with what I might say, so I did what inept people like me do in these situations," he said.
"I looked for a poem to read and couldn't find one that was apt.


O'Casey of 1923: Not Dated Yet
Last summer in Belfast, Northern Ireland, a 13-year-old girl sorrowfully approached one of the actors of the O'Casey Theater Company after a performance of "The Shadow of a Gunman," Sean O'Casey's 1923 play, which uses exuberant humor and soaring language to evoke the human tragedy of the 1919-1921 bloodletting between the British and the Irish.
"The girl said to me, 'Isn't it terrible that nothing has changed,' " recalled the actor, Niall Buggy, who portrays Seumas Shields, a sharp-tongued Dubliner and onetime revolutionary.
The play opens on Monday at the Symphony Space, at Broadway and 95th Street in Manhattan, for a two-week run.
It is the first production of the newly formed O'Casey company, which has arrived in New York on its inaugural American tour.


Motivated Devils Crush Whalers
The Devils rarely lost a battle in the neutral zone or in the corners tonight against the Hartford Whalers, and the result of such domination was an impressive 8-2 triumph at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"It's good to play well and score some goals," said Claude Lemieux, who led the Devils with two goals.
"It's good to see us play with some motivation."


Magic Johnson Makes Us Look at HIV Stigma; Sex Partner Numbers
To the Editor:
Magic Johnson, the basketball great, produced unforgettable numbers.
Let him, as a spokesman for HIV (editorial, Nov. 9), continue to talk the numbers and tell every 14-year-old in the world:


Sonny Werblin, an Impresario of New York's Sports Extravaganza, Is Dead at 81
David A. (Sonny) Werblin, the sports and entertainment impresario who upstaged his entire stunning career by luring Joe Namath to the struggling New York Jets in 1965, died Thursday at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old.
Mr.
Werblin, who had homes in New York, Miami and Rumson, N.J., died of a heart attack, his wife said yesterday.


Lisa Lundal, Student, Weds
Lisa Louise Lundal, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mandius C. Lundal of Spokane, Wash., and Alexander Boris Diekmann, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kurt K. Diekmann of Darien, Conn., were married yesterday in New Haven.
The Rev.
Harry B. Adams, a minister of the United Church of Christ who is the Yale University chaplain, officiated at the nondenominational ceremony at Dwight Chapel at Yale.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from Yale, where she is studying for a master's degree in environmental studies.
Her father is the president of Sircle Engineering, a consulting concern in Spokane.


Slippers That Are Light on Your Feet
Slippers are probably among the most boring though useful gifts for the holidays.
But now a practical touch -- "headlights" -- adds some humor and safety, by helping you to see where you are going in the dark.
Peter Altman and Yuval Shenkal of Innovative Design and Marketing in San Diego are the designers of the new product, Nitemates, sllippers with battery-powered beams at the toes.


Aetna Life's President Gets Chairman's Post
The Aetna Life and Casualty Company announced yesterday that Ronald E. Compton would succeed James T. Lynn as chairman and chief executive when Mr.
Lynn retires on March 1 at age 65.
Mr.
Compton, who is 58 years old, will keep his title as president of Aetna Life, the nation's largest publicly traded insurance and financial services company, which reports assets of $91 billion.


EXECUTIVES
*
Bank of California, San Francisco, a subsidiary of Mitsubishi Bank Ltd., announced that Yasumasa Gomi, president and chief executive, would assume the additional duties of chairman. *
Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, Chicago, the coordinating organization for Blue Cross and Blue Shield health plans, named Andrew P. Czajkowski chairman.
He remains president and chief executive of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Minnesota.


Negative Newsletter Scores Big
To the Overpriced Stock Service, an investment newsletter, something looked suspicious.
While doing research on an apparently prosperous retailer, Cascade International Inc., it could not get from the company a straight answer to a seemingly simple question: How many stores did it own?
That began a chain of events that included this week's mysterious disappearance of Cascade's chief executive, Victor G. Incendy, amid suspicions that the company's bookkeeping has been fraudulent.


Sununu Says Bush 'Ad-Libbed' Comment on Credit Card Rates
John H. Sununu, the beleaguered White House chief of staff, said today that President Bush was responsible for the remark about credit card interest rates that started a chain of events and sent the stock market skidding last Friday.
Mr.
Sununu's comments in a television interview to be broadcast this weekend seemed aimed at heading off the mounting pressure for his removal.


William G. Mulligan, 85, Lawyer And Aide in a Corruption Inquiry
William G. Mulligan, a lawyer who aided the investigation that forced Mayor James J. Walker out of office in 1932 and who played an important role in the merging of New York City's subways, died on Thursday.
He was 85 years old and lived in Panther Valley in Allamuchy Township, N.J.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Tests for Olajuwon
HAKEEM OLAJUWON of the Houston Rockets underwent additional medical tests yesterday to determine what was causing him to have a fluttering heartbeat.
The 7-foot center, who missed Thursday night's game against Minnesota, will remain hospitalized at least through the weekend, General Manager STEVE PATTERSON said.
"He's going in for more tests and nothing will be conclusive until those tests come back," said ADRIENNE SOBOLAK, spokeswoman for Memorial Southwest Hospital, where Olajuwon, 29, has been since late Wednesday.


Ford Shutdowns
The Ford Motor Company said it would close its car plant in Oakville, Ontario, for two weeks starting on Monday and would extend the closing of its Atlanta car plant another week because of slow sales.
The Oakville plant makes about 4,800 Tempo and Topaz models a week.
Ford's Atlanta plant produces about 5,000 Taurus and Sable cars a week.
Ford's Escort car plant in Wayne, Mich., and the Thunderbird/Cougar plant in Lorain, Ohio, will be closed for a second week, also starting on Monday, as previously announced.
This week, 8 of Ford's 16 car and truck assembly plants are closed because of a lack of dealer orders.


Amid Faulty Street Work, Officials Point to Changes
Acknowledging that oversight of New York City's street reconstruction program is flawed, city transportation officials said yesterday that they have begun making changes to insure that contractors do what they are being paid for.
The changes come amid revelations that the city Transportation Department failed to act after being told that contractors had used faulty concrete and violated safety rules on three major street reconstruction projects.
As a result, the city's assistant commissioner for street reconstruction has been reassigned and the state has threatened to withhold tens of millions of dollars in Federal highway money.


Lee Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


YELTSIN LEAVES GERMANS DUBIOUS
Boris N. Yeltsin, the President of the Russian republic, assured German business leaders today that he was determined to transform the Russian economy and offer new possibilities for foreign investment.
But some leading industrialists and political figures said they doubted that Mr.
Yeltsin had the strength or determination to build a market economy in Russia.
They reacted coolly to his call for new economic cooperation.


It's Not the Tyson Fight, But at Least It's a Fight
For Evander Holyfield, the fight is not the one he wanted.
Holyfield, the undisputed heavyweight champion, was to have fought Mike Tyson earlier this month in a match that, had he won, would have finally silenced critics who have repeatedly called him an overblown cruiserweight ever since he won the title from James (Buster) Douglas in October 1990.


Beliefs
Wearing a well-tailored beige robe beneath a black cloak and a white turban around a head that is shaded with a short full beard, Ayatollah Jalal Ganjei looks pretty much like any other ayatollah.
Listening to him over a cup of coffee is another matter.


Sanctions Said to Drive Poor Haitians to Risk the Open Sea


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about the murder conviction of two men in a "gay bashing" case in Queens referred incorrectly in some editions to a third man involved in the killing.
He is Daniel Doyle.


Rohr Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3


Circus Circus Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the disappearance of Victor Incendy, the head of Cascade International, referred incorrectly to his marital status.
He is not married.
The article also misidentified his former wife.
She is J. B. Van Zanten.


Oil Drops to 4-Month Low On Rumors of Iraqi Sales
Crude-oil futures prices plunged to a four-month low yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange as rumors about Iraqi oil sales prompted a selloff.
Other petroleum futures also fell sharply, under pressure in part from unseasonably warm weather that has cut into demand for heating oil in the United States.


L.A. Gear Set To Close Unit
L.A.
Gear Inc. said it would shut down its money-losing apparel business and lay off 400 workers as part of an effort to cut costs and regain its financial stability.
The company, which is best known for its sneakers and other footwear, said the moves will result in charges against earnings of $22.5 million for its fourth quarter, which ends Nov. 30.
But L.A.
Gear said the changes would reduce its annual costs by $25 million.


Gladys Delmas, 78; Contributed Millions And Guided Library
Gladys Krieble Delmas, a philanthropist and writer who gave more than $20 million to cultural and educational institutions, died on Wednesday at Beth Israel Medical Center.
Mrs.
Delmas, who was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan, died of heart failure, her lawyer said.


Don't Slam the Door on China
China's leaders embarrassed President Bush when they sent Secretary of State Baker home this week with barely anything to show for Washington's conciliatory policies.
The President will now find it harder to hold off punitive measures from Congress, and may feel less inclined to do so, with the Presidential campaign almost at hand.
Narrowly cast sanctions linked to specific grievances like abuse of prison labor can make sense, and Congress is right to press for a more insistent position on human rights.
But normal diplomatic and commercial ties between the world's richest country and the most populous remain a matter of mutual self-interest.
Even if the Chinese have responded lamely, that's no reason to react impetuously and risk rupturing relations.


Review/Ballet; Solitude of a Woman Twice Rejected
A woman encounters one man, then another, then both at the same time and is finally deserted by each.
Out of this banality, the very stuff of novels becomes the stuff of a compelling ballet by Peter Martins called "Poulenc Sonata."
At its premiere in 1985, the work served essentially as a vehicle for Kyra Nichols, who danced with a reckless splendor.
Now, upon its return to the New York City Ballet repertory on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater, the choreography reconfirmed its sophistication as an experiment in dramatic form.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Nynex plans to reduce its work force by more than 10 percent, or about 9,900 employees.
The company will report a substantial fourth-quarter loss from the cost of severance pay and early-retirement benefits, plus the cost of leaving the software business in Britain and the development of real estate in the Northeast.  [ Page 35. ]


Lock the Doors When You're Riding in a Taxi
To the Editor:
I was dismayed to hear of the possibility of another New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission rate increase because of decreased ridership.
If the commission would like to attract more riders, I have several suggestions that would cost nothing: cleanliness of the cabs and the drivers, common courtesy, safe driving.


Pitt Blocks Kentucky From Trip to Garden


IRT Property Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


If There's a Family Emergency, Many Airlines Cut the Fare
Kerry Ramdass, an electrician who lives in St.
Albans, Queens, had to fly home to Trinidad in June after his father died.
When he asked about the air fare, he was told it was about $500.
But just before he left, someone told him about lower-priced emergency fares for people who have had a death or a grave illness in the family.
"I had to bring back a death certificate," he said.
"But the money I saved made a big difference."


Ewing Hits Richest Pact; Bonilla Is on Deck
The Knicks made Patrick Ewing the highest-paid player in professional team sports today, giving him a contract extension that will result in his earning $33 million over the next six years.
Ewing's new average annual salary is $5.5 million, placing him above the highest-salaried stars in the other major sports: Boston's Roger Clemens in baseball ($5.3 million), Miami's Dan Marino in football (about $5 million) and Los Angeles's Wayne Gretzky in hockey ($3.1 million).
But it is possible that Ewing will soon be eclipsed by Bobby Bonilla, the free agent from the Pittsburgh Pirates who is being pursued by the Mets and other teams, and who could command a contract worth $6 million a year or more.


Mother Scolded for Suit Over Son's Honors
Denouncing those who try to "elevate mere personal desires into constitutional rights," a Federal judge told a Westchester mother to pay $60,000 in legal fees to the school district she sued when her son did not get in the National Honor Society.
In a bluntly worded ruling released yesterday in Federal Court in Manhattan, Judge Gerard L. Goettel excoriated Lisa Dangler for suing the Yorktown school district in the first place, saying that he would have overturned the jury's verdict had it gone in her favor.


CHRONICLE
SEYMOUR DURST, the real-estate developer, has gotten used to moving the "national debt clock" that he put up two and a half years ago at 42d Street and Avenue of the Americas.
He moved it 10 months ago to 42d Street east of Broadway because the building at the original site was demolished.
Three weeks ago he moved it again because the building was condemned for the 42d Street redevelopment project.
Last Friday, it went up at 43d Street and Avenue of the Americas.
But if they are keenly observant, passers-by may notice another change: the calculations of the debt that constantly flash are now moving even faster.


Senators Load Banking Bill With Items of Local Interest
Senator Charles E. Grassley is an Iowa farmer not known among his colleagues for any particularly strong interest in banking legislation.
But late Thursday evening, shortly before a final vote on a bank bill, Mr.
Grassley, a Republican, stepped up on the floor of the Senate and introduced a complex provision on the regulation of the sale of credit cards.


Limits Are Suggested on College Accrediting Group
Members of a college accrediting agency that is under attack for using a racial and cultural diversity standard that has been assailed as discriminatory, said today that they would reluctantly accept a one-year Federal reauthorization instead of the normal five-year renewal.
The recommendation for the one-year renewal was made in a staff report to a Federal advisory panel investigating whether the agency, the Commission on Higher Education of the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, should continue to receive Federal recognition.
The temporary renewal would give the Department of Education more time to study the question.


TCI International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Haley Industries reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Guidepost; For That Holiday Glow
It's not too soon to buy holiday lights, with Hanukkah on Dec. 2 and Christmas not so very long after.
It's wise to check on regulations covering outdoor lighting because many communities have ordinances that prohibit lights that shine directly into a neighbor's window or interfere with a passing motorist's vision.
Condominiums and co-ops often have strict rules that may restrict outside lighting to a specific season -- say, 14 days before and after Christmas Day.
Safety is important.
Don't overload circuits or allow hot lights near anything combustible.
Here is a sampling of this year's offerings.
Miniature Light Strands: Plain, colored, flashing or simple on-and-off are the staples.
Strands normally have 50 to 100 lights and can be bought for as little as 89 cents (for a house brand like Sears) to $4.99 for a strand with a brand name.
Kodak has a new feature on its lights called lamp lock, which prevents the bulbs from falling out of their sockets.
Musical Lights: New on the market, these play holiday music.
Two examples are "Christmas Musical Lights," offering 21 Christmas carols, Radio Shack, $14.99; "Santa's Marching Band" with four-inch lights in figurine shapes playing a medley of 35 holiday tunes, Sears, $79.
Figures and Structures: These are molded porcelain or plastic pieces in the shapes of holiday figures like Mrs.
Santa or Mr.
Elf, some with moving limbs, or a Victorian house, a church or a candy store.
They are normally 6 inches to 3 feet high.
Caldor, for example, has moving figurines at $40 to $80 and porcelain lighted houses at $10 to $15.
Candles: Offered in brass, ceramic and plastic these mimic real candles.
They are available with batteries or plug-in cords, and stand 6 to 9 inches high.
Best buys are four in a box, about $4, rather than singles, $1.50.  (Sources: Radio Shack, Sears and Caldor discount department stores)


Patents; Human-Safe Roach Trap Uses Fungus
In search of a way to kill cockroaches without endangering humans, a Massachusetts company this week patented a baited trap lined with a fungus that infects the pests and devours their inner organs.
The trap is one of several developed by the Ecoscience Corporation of Worcester, Mass., a company specializing in pest control using naturally occurring microbes.
Company officials said the fungus was safer than traditional chemical pesticides, because it attacked only roaches and had no effect on other living creatures.


Tenneco Railroad Sales
Tenneco Inc. said it had agreed in principle to sell its three short-line railroads for a total of $54 million.
The company said it would sell the 14-mile Marinette, Tomahawk &amp; Western Railroad and the 13-mile Valdosta Southern Railroad for $22 million.
On Nov. 13, Tenneco said it had agreed to sell its Corinth &amp; Counce Railroad to the Midsouth Corporation for $32 million.
Tenneco said its Packaging Corporation of America unit, which owns the railroads, w would eliminate about 350 jobs by the end of the year.
The job cuts will save about $19 million a year.


Classical Music in Review
Teresa Lawlor
Harpist Weill Recital Hall


Markel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Abu Dhabi May Cover Some B.C.C.I. Loss
The Government of Abu Dhabi is close to agreeing to a plan that would pay the Bank of Credit and Commerce International's depositors worldwide 30 to 40 cents on the dollar to cover their losses, the bank's liquidators in London said yesterday.
Details of the settlement plan were not disclosed in a statement from the liquidators, Touche Ross &amp; Company.
But according to the people close to the negotiations, the plan calls for Abu Dhabi, the fallen bank's majority shareholder, to make commitments of up to $5 billion in cash and B.C.C.I. liabilities assumed.


Park Service Backs Demolition on Ellis Island
After fighting for years to save all 32 historic buildings on Ellis Island, the National Park Service has endorsed a plan to demolish 12 small, crumbling structures to provide room for a $140 million conference center with 325 hotel rooms, a restaurant and shops.
Federal officials say the buildings, abandoned and decaying since 1954, have less historic and architectural significance than any others on the island and that demolition is the only financially viable way to build the new conference center and hotel and to guarantee the rehabilitation and preservation of other derelict buildings on the southern half of the 25-acre island.


Cenvest Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Aviation Agency Chief Is Named by the White House
Jerry R. Curry was nominated by the White House today to head the Federal Aviation Administration, succeeding James B. Busey, who is being promoted to Deputy Secretary of Transportation.
Mr.
Curry is now the Administrator of the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration, which like the F.A.A. is part of the Transportation Department.
The F.A.A. manages the nation's air traffic control system and regulates aviation.


The U.N. Turns to an Egyptian
It is an impossible job for which nobody is truly qualified.
That said, Boutros Ghali of Egypt is an appealing choice as the next Secretary General of the United Nations.
He meets the tests of character and experience, offsetting doubts that at 69 he is too old for a demanding five-year term.
And since Egypt is both an Arab and an African state, he can bring new diversity to a post previously held by three Europeans, an Asian and a Latin American.
It is nowhere inscribed that this was "Africa's turn" to fill the job.
Yet the Security Council faced a rebellion if its five permanent members -- Britain, China, France, the Soviet Union and the U.S. -- ignored geography in submitting a candidate for General Assembly approval.
Wisely, Washington supported Mr.
Ghali in the vote on Thursday that ended a deadlock.
The result took fair account of Africa's claims; if rival contenders from black Africa were passed over, so was the Dutch Foreign Minister, whom George Bush was said to favor.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about a planned anti-missile system misstated the amount the United States has spent on "Star Wars" missile defense research.
It is $25 billion, not $25 million.


Dollar Settles Mostly Lower As the Mark Gets Stronger
The dollar settled mostly lower on world currency markets yesterday as traders turned their attention to the German mark.
Gold prices rose.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold bullion for current delivery settled at $369.30 an ounce, up $1.10 from Thursday.
The Republic National Bank said gold advanced $1.10 an ounce, to a late bid price of $368.50.


State Chose Not to Punish Physician Tied to a Death
State health officials said yesterday that they were aware of misconduct allegations against Dr.
Abu Hayat for more than two years -- including a report that he botched an abortion, leading to a young woman's death -- but took no action against him because they did not believe they could prove he posed an "imminent danger" to public health.
The New York State Department of Health knew about at least two other allegations of misconduct before Dr.
Hayat was accused of severing the arm of a fetus during an illegal abortion last month, health officials said.


Brown-Forman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Sonny Werblin Dies


Giants' Offense Conservative? Answer Is Yes, No or Depends
The numbers back up what many frustrated fans have pointed out for 11 weeks: The Giants' passing game seems to have gone on sabbatical.
This season, the Giants have passed for only 5 touchdowns, the fewest of the 28 teams in the National Football League.
They rank 26th in passing yardage with 170.5 a game, leading only the Tampa Bay Buccaneers (157.7) and the Phoenix Cardinals (170).


Ernest Dichter, 84, a Consultant On Consumer Motivation, Is Dead
Dr.
Ernest Dichter, a psychologist and an expert on marketing, died on Thursday at the Hudson Valley Hospital Center outside Peekskill.
He was 84 years old and lived in Peekskill.
He died of heart failure, said his wife, the former Hedy Langfelder.


Larizza Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An American Device On a Soviet Satellite Collects Ozone Data
An American instrument aboard a new Soviet satellite is sending back high-quality data on changes in the ozone layer, including confirmation of a recent record drop in the protective shield over Antarctica, scientists said today.
The total ozone mapping spectrometer, or TOMS, launched aboard the Meteor-3 weather satellite on Aug. 15, will become a major component in worldwide studies of ozone depletion, American and Soviet scientists said at a news briefing.


John N. LaCorte, 81, Champion of Italians and Columbus Day
John N. LaCorte, a champion of Italian heritage who won a national holiday honoring Christopher Columbus and got a major bridge named for a neglected explorer, Giovanni da Verrazano, died on Wednesday at Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 81 years old and lived in Brooklyn Heights.
He died of complications from a heart attack, his family said.


Jean Philippe Fragrances reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Florio Says a Key Adviser Will Resign as Treasurer
After weeks of denying that it would happen, Gov.
Jim Florio announced today that Douglas C. Berman, his former campaign manager and a chief adviser, is resigning as State Treasurer in January.
Mr.
Berman, a leading architect of the Governor's politically disastrous $2.8 billion tax increase last year, had been the subject of resignation rumors almost from the day he took office two years ago as the cabinet member many colleagues saw as second only to Mr.
Florio in authority.


Lefebvre Wins Job As Cubs' Manager
JIM LEFEBVRE, dropped by the Seattle Mariners last month after managing them to the first winning season in franchise history, was given a more awesome task yesterday: revive the Chicago Cubs, who have not won a World Series in 83 years or even reached one in 46 years.
In being named manager of a team that was 77-83 last season, the 49-year-old Lefebvre replaces JIM ESSIAN, who was fired after less than a year on the job.


Your Money; Some Advantages In Savings Bonds
With the interest rates paid on savings accounts, money market funds and short- term certificates of deposit only half to two-thirds their levels of less than a year ago, many savers, particularly retirees, are seeking ways to receive better yields with limited risk.
Joel S. Isaacson, a partner who is in charge of personal financial planning at Clarfeld &amp; Company, a New York accounting firm, recommends United States Government savings bonds.
He cited a number of advantages to these bonds:


Quotation of the Day
"They did the right thing." GEORGE H. BABIKIAN, president of ARCO, on California's new pollution standards for gasoline.  [ 7:4. ] "I think the American people lost." JAMES KINNEAR, chairman of Texaco.  [ 7:4. ]


Review/Music; Dutoit Both Indulges His Penchant and Transcends It
If one quality has consistently characterized Charles Dutoit's performances in New York City, both with his own Montreal Symphony Orchestra and in his frequent guest appearances with other ensembles, it is his preference for works that use color and texture in complex but thoroughly picturesque ways.
For the most part, these are pieces from the first half of the 20th century and from well outside the Germanic core of the repertory.
Two of Mr.
Dutoit's specialties -- Bartok's "Miraculous Mandarin" and Ravel's "Daphnis and Chloe," Suite No. 2 -- made up the second half of his program with the New York Philharmonic on Thursday evening.
And the first half of his program, though more conventional, was stylistically wide ranging nonetheless.
It included Mozart's courtly Symphony No. 14 and an incendiary performance of the Tchaikovsky Violin Concerto with Midori as the soloist.


Lock the Doors When You're Riding in a Taxi
To the Editor:
Lock all doors when riding in a taxi.
I was mugged and robbed of my wallet while sitting in a cab stalled in traffic en route to Pennsylvania Station on the afternoon of Nov. 5.


Noted With Pleasure
The True Features of Goodness
Flannery O'Connor, asked by a group of nuns to help edit a manuscript about a gifted child disfigured by cancer, who died as a result of the disease at the age of 12, was led to reflect on the fact that while we have vivid ideas about the face that evil takes in the world, we are far vaguer about the identifiable features of goodness.
This is from her introduction to "A Memoir of Mary Ann" by the Dominican nuns of Our Lady of Perpetual Help Home in Atlanta (Frederic C. Beil, 414 Tattnall Street, Savannah, Ga. 31401).


PEARL HARBOR IN THE MIND OF JAPAN
The caption under a picture illustrating your article reads: "The rare Japanese tourists to visit the U.S.S. Arizona Memorial at Pearl Harbor."
When I visited the U.S.S.
Arizona last year, I noted, to my surprise, that at least one-quarter of the visitors were Japanese.
More to the point, I saw that almost all of the Japanese did as so many of us did: they threw their leis down upon the covering waters.
This is a gesture that I had not heard or read about before my visit (nor since), but it becomes a universal urge when one is standing there.
TERRY MORROW Sherman, Conn.


The Muddle of Insider Trading Regulation
To the Editor:
"Insider Trading With Impunity?" (Forum, Oct. 27) states that the result in United States v.
Chestman is incongruous because the defendant was found guilty of violating Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 14e-3, which prohibits trading with information of a forthcoming tender offer, but not guilty of general insider trading.
The article says the anomalous decision is the result of Congressional and S.E.C. reluctance to define insider trading.


Action by Missouri Police Raises Questions of Racism
When a jewelry store owner in a complex of offices and shops in this wealthy, predominantly white suburb of St.
Louis saw a black man glancing in the window several nights ago, he called the police and reported that the man was casing his store.
The man was Gerald Early, a prominent associate professor of literature at Washington University in St.
Louis and the winner of the Whiting Writers' Prize for his book "Tuxedo Junction: Essays on American Culture."


Fighting Obscurity on Tight Primary Budgets
If there is one piece of information that illuminates the difference between this Presidential campaign and the last one, it is this: By October 1987, Michael S. Dukakis had raised $8 million for his primary campaign.
By October 1991, the six Democratic Presidential candidates together had raised one-quarter of that amount.
Hampered by a late start, a recession and an incumbent in the White House, several of this year's Democratic candidates are heading into the Presidential primary season with less money than it takes to run a credible campaign for Mayor of New York City.


A Murder Verdict Becomes a Rallying Cry
IN the early morning darkness of July 2, 1990, a 29-year-old man named Julio Rivera approached a Queens schoolyard known as a gay cruising spot.
Three younger men also approached it.
Minutes later, Mr.
Rivera was the victim of a savage and deadly attack.
Murder verdicts were delivered in a New York courtroom last week, and gay-rights groups said the circumstances and the outcome of the case would have national reverberations.
One of the three men lured Mr.
Rivera, who was gay, into the Jackson Heights schoolyard, according to testimony at the trial, which ended Wednesday.
Another repeatedly smashed him in the head with a hammer.
The third stuck a knife in his back, inflicting the fatal wound.


The Partial President
Nearly three years into his term, George Bush remains mystifyingly incomplete: shrewd and energetic in foreign policy and just the reverse -- clumsy and irresolute -- at home.
This concerns not only George Bush's friends and supporters but all who believe that when his Presidency succeeds, America succeeds.
If only, they implore, the foreign Bush would lend his shrewdness, energy and values to the domestic Bush.
The foreign Bush has been exemplary.
One can argue whether Desert Storm troops should have pushed all the way to Baghdad, but it is hard to deny the skill with which he organized a collective response to Saddam Hussein's aggression.


Amy Cantor to Wed David Stampfer
Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Cantor of Silver Spring, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amy Lisa Cantor, to David Stampfer, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Morris Stampfer of New Rochelle, N.Y.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cantor, 25 years old, graduated from Barnard College and is a second-year law student at Boston University.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Brownstein Zeidman &amp; Schomer in Washington.
Her mother, Susan Cantor, is a board member of Second Genesis, a drug rehabilitation program in Washington.
Mr.
Stampfer, also 25, is a fourth-year medical student at the University of Pennsylvania.
He graduated summa cum laude from Columbia University, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
His father is a cardiologist in New Rochelle.
His mother, Deborah Stampfer, is the chairwoman of the mathematics departments in the Byram Hills school district in Armonk, N.Y.


QUOTATION OF THE DAY
"I am already very hungry, and many people have told us we will never make it, because the boats never arrive" -- ROGER EMILIEN, a Haitian  about to embark for the United States.  [ 12:3. ]


A New 'Golden Boy' at Candlewood
A LONG-DELAYED reworking of the 1964 musical "Golden Boy" is ready to begin previews at the Candlewood Playhouse -- give or take $100,000.
Still, the management of the nonprofit theater in New Fairfield is looking for donors to help it meet the show's estimated budget of $275,000 and for investors to come up with an additional $1 million to $1.2 million needed to take the production to Broadway, said Candlewood's executive producer, Rick Belzer.
In one of several under-the-wire pleas for funds, a backers audition was held in Manhattan as recently as Nov. 4, the day rehearsals began.


In the Nation; Why Another ABM?
At a time when bridges are falling down on the homeless sleeping under them, when millions of Americans have neither medical care nor the money to pay for it, the new defense authorization bill provides $4.15 billion for the nation's
sixth
attempt to deploy a ground-based anti-missile defense.
If pursued to its ultimate, predictable futility, the new successor to Nike-Zeus, Nike-X, Sentinel, Safeguard and Loads (Low-Altitude Defense System) could cost as much as $60 billion.
Like its forebears, none of which worked or proved necessary or could be sustained, it may then be abandoned.


Ballet Theater Promotions
American Ballet Theater has announced the promotions of four members of the corps de ballet -- Parrish Maynard, Alexander Ritter, Keith Roberts and Roger Van Fleteren -- to soloist rank, as of Jan. 2.
The company will perform at the Metropolitan Opera House from April 20 to June 20.


Arkansas Is Behind Before the First Tip-Off
A few hours before a game between the third-ranked Arkansas Razorbacks and the German national team last week, Nolan Richardson, the Arkansas basketball coach, sat in a hotel cafeteria and elaborated on one of his favorite themes: strugglin'.
Overcoming the odds, coming from behind, strugglin'.


Gali Freedman, Designer, Weds
Grace Helen Freedman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Freedman of West Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to Oz Ben-Amram, a son of Eliahu Ben-Amram of Herzliya, Israel, and Clelia Ben-Amram Segre of Jerusalem.
Rabbi Paul Laderman officiated at the Hyatt Regency on Mount Scopus in Jerusalem.
The bride, 29 years old, is known as Gali.
She is a graphics designer and illustrator in Tel Aviv.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received a bachelor's degree in art from the Bezalel Academy of Art in Jerusalem.
Her father, who is retired, was an advertising production schedule keeper for The New York Times.
Her mother, also retired, was an assistant school principal in Newark and a reading specialist in West Orange.


Yeltsin Says Lost Czarist Treasure Is Traced
Boris N. Yeltsin, president of the Russian republic, announced a series of economic and technical cooperation agreements with the German state of Baden-Wurttemburg today, but what really turned Germans' heads during Mr.
Yeltsin's visit has been his assertion that he knows the whereabouts of a legendary czarist treasure that disappeared during World War II.
Mr.
Yeltsin first mentioned the treasure, known as the Amber Chamber, in a meeting with members of Parliament in Bonn on Friday.
Karsten Voigt, a deputy who was present, reported that Mr.
Yeltsin said the treasure was "buried in cases" somewhere in eastern Germany.
He asked permission to dig it up and take it back to Russia.


Summer Love


Black Ties Come Out to Herald a New Boutique
If you are a major player on the fashion stage and are establishing a larger presence in New York, you have to make a dramatic entrance.
So to herald the opening of the Escada boutique at 7 East 57th Street on Friday, there were three nights of benefit parties.
Wolfgang and Margaretha Ley, who own Escada, held a dinner party on Monday at the Frick Collection for an exhibition they have underwritten there.
On Tuesday, they underwrote the gala opening of the New York City Ballet's winter season, and on Wednesday they held a preview party at the store to benefit the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, the Kips Bay Boys and Girls Club and the New York Botanical Garden.


Ms. Halbower Has Wedding
Rebecca Halbower, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph David Halbower Jr. of Fort Worth, and Robert Sem Levi, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rolf Levi of New York, were married yesterday at Park Avenue Christian Church in New York.
The Rev.
John W. Payne, a Disciples of Christ minister, officiated, witnessed by Rabbi Roy Rosenberg.
Ms.
Halbower, 36 years old, will keep her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Vanderbilt University and has a law degree from Southern Methodist University.
She is the research director of Charlex Inc., a New York video production company.
Her father is the president of the Texas Drug Company, a wholesale drug company in Fort Worth.
Mr.
Levi, 38, is an independent film producer and director.
He graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
His father retired as president of a leather trading company in Cairo.


Polaroid's Russian Success Story
To Soviet factory managers, whose lives are made miserable by ramshackle machinery and a lack of raw materials, the Polaroid Corporation's circuit-board operation here must seem like a mirage.
Tucked into one corner of a glum, fortress-like factory building, Polaroid's five brightly lit, freshly painted rooms hum with gleaming American machinery, an abundant supply of precision parts and 70 workers hunched intently over their workstations.


JUMP-STARTING NEW YORK
Peter D. Salins writes a very timely but somewhat idealistic article ("Jump-Starting New York," Nov. 3).
He has the city's woes in a nice bundle, but some of his solutions lack a realistic view of the human condition.
It seems to me that "social-assistance grants" will wind up being paychecks for drug dealers.
Instead, why not pay some individuals an hourly wage to clean up the neglected parks, roadways and municipally held properties.
This not only cuts some heavy spending but also instills a needed ethic.
Salins's views, I hope, will not go unseen by the next mayor in the next election.
MICHAEL D. MCCARTY New York, N.Y.


Ellen Iseman Has Wedding
Ellen Marjorie Iseman, the president of Issues Management International Inc., a government and public-affairs consulting concern in New York, and Trevor Quaid O'Neill, a lawyer in New York and Westport, Conn., were married last evening in New York.
Judge John Carey of Westchester County Court officiated at the Cosmopolitan Club.
Mrs.
O'Neill, 37 years old, graduated from Yale University.
She is the daughter of Marjorie F. Iseman of New York and Joseph S. Iseman of Paris and Rye, N.Y.
Her father, a former president of Bennington College, is of counsel in Paris to the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
Her mother is a magazine writer.
The bride is a granddaughter of the late Justice Alfred Frankenthaler of New York State Supreme Court.


'A War Without Bloodshed'
To the Editor:
"Too American for Its Own Good?" (Oct. 27) claims Toyota has played by the rules.
What rules?
I assume your writer refers to following Lee Iacocca's challenge to build plants in the United States and to increasing jobs here and the purchases of American auto parts.
But jobs and investment here simply take business from our own automobile producers.


Youth Slain in Dispute Over a Stolen Charity Box
A teen-ager was shot to death and another was seriously wounded yesterday as four residents of a Bronx group home for troubled youths were arguing over the theft of a donation box from a local restaurant, the police said.
The two teen-agers were shot outside the Wendy's restaurant at 3547 Ely Avenue in the Edenwald section of the Bronx shortly after 11 A.M., said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Norris Hollomon.
Two other youths were arrested and charged in the shooting, detectives said.
All four were residents of Crossroads, a foster home for troubled teen-agers at 1250 East 229th Street in the Edenwald section.


Virgin Continent


The Executive Computer; Compuadd Moves Up to the First Tier
BILL HAYDEN, recently identified in a local publication as one of the 100 richest Texans, doesn't wear a necktie to work.
The chairman and chief executive of the Compuadd Corporation, he doesn't have a secretary.
In fact, there are no secretaries at Compuadd.
And the company has no vice presidents, only front-line managers.
The meeting room at Compuadd is sandwiched between the small offices of Mr.
Hayden and Edward Thomas, the president.
Roughly the size of a supply closet, it has a Formica table, four chairs and a framed picture on one wall.
The picture is crooked.


May Wedding For Miss Ware
Mr. and Mrs.
John Peyton Ware of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Peyton Ware to Stephen Ellis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carleton Ellis Jr. of Southport, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Ware is the director of promotion for Variety and Daily Variety, the entertainment publications, in New York.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University, and received a master's degree in journalism from Boston University.
Her father retired as the industrial sales manager for the New York publishing house of John Wiley &amp; Sons, and is the co-author of the book "A Cruising Guide to the New England Coast."


Corrections
An article in the Arts and Leisure section on Nov. 3 about the Public Broadcasting Service misstated William F. Baker's tenure as president of WNET in New York.
He has held the post since 1987.


2 HELD IN TAPING OF QUEENS MUGGING
A Queens teen-ager who told investigators that he "just likes to videotape things" taped a friend mugging another teen-ager Thursday night, the police said yesterday after charging the youths with robbery.
They said the tape shows a young man grabbing the shirt-tails of a victim, pulling him to the ground and kicking him several times.
After tearing a gold chain off the victim's neck, the mugger poses for the camera, holding the chain up as if it were a trophy and smiling.
At the end of the tape, which lasts about 45 seconds, there is a closeup of the victim's dazed face, the police said.


How to Quiet Down Those Noisy Valves
NOISES from water pipes and plumbing fixtures include high-pitched squealing, whistling and hissing, as well as banging, chattering and thudding.
Not only are plumbing sounds annoying, but they can also indicate problems that can lead to major damage.
If squealing, whistling or hissing occurs, it is usually when a faucet is on or when a toilet tank is refilling.
The sound is caused by water's flowing rapidly through a narrow restriction or past an obstruction.


A Late Villanova Rally Is Another Fordham Loss
Tom Colombo's 5-yard touchdown pass to Scott Donald with 2 minutes 58 seconds left in the game yesterday led Villanova to a 14-9 victory over Fordham in the Bronx.
The winning score came after a 16-yard punt by Fordham's Steve Muzzonigro.


UP AND COMING: Matthew Siegel and Danny Gerard; Boys Will Be Boys, Be It 1991 or 1956
A spaldeen? what's that?
"I have no idea," says Danny Gerard, 14, his dark eyebrows scrunching dramatically in puzzlement.
"Me neither," says his friend and admirer, Matthew Siegel, who is 8.
On further examination, it turns out that the two co-stars of the new CBS comedy "Brooklyn Bridge" (Wednesdays at 8 P.M.) couldn't tell you the difference between an egg cream and an eggnog, a Nash Rambler and a Studebaker President, or the BMT local and the IRT express.


Cleveland Indian Nickname Honors a Forgotten Baseball Hero; Tribute, Not an Insult
To the Editor:
Since Jane Fonda got caught doing the tomahawk chop, killjoys have been complaining it is an insult to native Americans to name sports teams after them.
It is no insult to native Americans that Atlantans root for the Braves.
People name their teams for symbols they respect.
The Braves are in good company among the Celtics, the Eagles and the Steelers.
JOHN G. MCGARRAHAN New York, Nov. 10, 1991


Where to Be Pampered in a Hectic Season
IT'S that time of year when schedules seem to be more hectic than usual.
Whether it is trying to meet end-of-the-year deadlines at work, shopping for Christmas and Hanukkah presents or preparing for family holiday celebrations, everyone's calendar seems stretched to the limit.
So it is perhaps not surprising that while sugarplum visions dance in some people's heads, others dream of soothing massages, relaxing facials, foot rubs and other equally self-indulgent pampering.


Making a Difference; End of an Era at Kimberly
When Darwin E. Smith said earlier this month that he would step down Dec. 19 after 20 years as chief executive of the Kimberly-Clark Corporation, he also declared that the company soon would pay its 20th consecutive annual dividend increase and split its recently high-flying shares two-for-one.
Analysts said it was a fitting coda for one of the more dazzling corporate reigns of the last two decades.
Mr.
Smith, who will be succeeded by Wayne R. Sanders, the company's president, transformed Kimberly from a staid forest products concern when he took charge in 1971 into what is now a handsomely profitable maker of mainly consumer products.


Soft Luggage
To the Editor: Betsy Wade's "Lighter Bags, Shorter Trips" (Practical Traveler, Sept. 1) overlooks the principal reason for the preference for soft rather than hard luggage.
I am referring to the increased prevalence of casual attire among American travelers.
Ironically, in eschewing style for comfort, too many Americans dismiss the possibilities that formality affords: it opens doors and engenders courtesy in a way that soft baggage and its casual contents never can.


Results Plus
TENNIS Flach and Seguso Win


Smoking Banned In Padres Park
Smoking will be banned in all seating sections at San Diego Jack Murphy Stadium beginning next year, but smokers will still be able to light up in the concourse and plaza areas.
Representatives of the Chargers, Padres and the San Diego State University Aztecs, the three teams that regularly use the open-air stadium, made the announcement, citing a national trend toward limits on public smoking.


High Credit Card Rates: A Luxurious Necessity?
AS a matter of principle, Ralph Nader has no credit cards.
He says they encourage reckless spending, raise prices and permit the creation of data banks that could lead to invasion of privacy.
He may be right.
But few other people would accept the inconvenience of life without plastic.
For the person with no credit cards, it is difficult if not impossible to rent a car, reserve tickets to the theater or sports events, travel without a dangerous wad of cash or engage in many other routine activities of modern society.
Mr.
Nader, in fact, caused a ruckus in a Princeton, N.J., hotel last week when he arrived to check in and could not produce a credit card.


Running Short Of Public Money
The 18-year-old Federal matching campaign fund is financed through a checkoff on Federal tax returns; those who mark the checkoff box contribute $1 of their taxes toward the fund.
For the 1992 Presidential election, the fund is expected to include $127 million.
By some estimates, this is several million dollars less than will be needed to provide matching money to all candidates who qualify.


Reversal of Values
To the Editor:
Some decades ago The New Yorker published a parody of Reader's Digest.
On the mock cover one of the mock titles was "Funerals Can Be Fun!" I remembered it recently when funerals were going on for the victims in Texas of the most atrocious of all wanton mass murders in a period when gratuitous slaughter becomes more and more frightening.


In the Paint or Off Court, O'Neal Is on Top of Game
Of all the rejections Shaquille O'Neal has created on a basketball court as the center at Louisiana State University, ending dozens of ill-advised journeys that overpowered opponents have taken into the paint, there was nothing in his brief college career that could compare with something that happened earlier this month.
Because of his size -- 7 feet 1 inch and 294 pounds -- and his status as a consensus first-team all-American as a sophomore last season, O'Neal became one of the most recognizable figures in the state.
He might have been as well known nationally as anyone in the state, until David Duke came along, election day drew near, and swastikas on anti-Duke billboards began to dot the Louisiana landscape.


Katherine Van Wagenen Is Married
Katherine Litke Van Wagenen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert M. Van Wagenen 3d of Old Lyme, Conn., was married yesterday to William Rutherford Sperry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Sperry of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Lawrence Inzeo, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y.
Mrs.
Sperry, 29 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is an assistant vice president at G.E.
Capital Corporation in New York, a financial services company.
Her father retired as the president of the Original Trenton Cracker Company in Lambertville, N.J.


The Perils At Home Sadden Petrovic
Drazen Petrovic was looking forward to this date, tonight's game against the Boston Celtics and a reunion with his old friend, Stojan Vrankovic.
They have known each other since 1979, began the climb together through the Yugoslav basketball federation and now have taken bitter leave from it from across the Atlantic Ocean.
"We talk almost every day on the phone," Petrovic said.
"He calls me, I call him. It's nice to have someone to talk to about things."


Amtrak on Time
To the Editor: The Amtrak on-time listing in Travel Advisory (Sept. 22) could have used a footnote saying that delays for mechanical reasons are not excluded, as they are in the airlines' on-time tabulations.
If airlines had to count delays due to missing screws in a stabilizer, for example, their on-times would not look so good.
DAVID MILLER Milwaukee A spokeswoman for Amtrak comments: On-time reports do, indeed, encompass delays for mechanical problems, which are excluded from airline reports to the Department of Transportation.


Moving to Make Saturdays Super
New York racing has come up with a great new star to sell horse racing to the public: the horse.
At least, it is creating a cluster of "Super Saturdays" to feature the horse as the star of the show and to induce people to stop gazing at their television sets and get out to the track.


THE JOY OF OLD
Rembar forgot to mention the courteous treatment we older citizens receive when we ride the New York City subways.
I'm constantly being offered seats by young ladies and young men of all ethnic groups, which belies the myth that New Yorkers are rude and thoughtless.
I'm old, but I'm embarrassed that others recognize my being old.
Perhaps a bonus of aging is the liberty we enjoy of flirting with strange women without getting slapped.
Who would slap a senior citizen?
SAMUEL E. FRIEDMAN New York, N.Y.


Young Tibetans Trained in China: A Golden Opportunity, or Brainwashing?
For a boy who grew up as a Tibetan nomad, herding 50 yaks and 200 sheep in the hills around his tent, living without electricity, speaking no Chinese and rarely seeing a Chinese person, Buzhuoyu fits in remarkably well in this bustling eastern Chinese metropolis.
"I was a bit scared at first, because I'd never been to a city before," Buzhuoyu, a high-school junior with a shock of black hair over a grinning face, said in the fluent Chinese that he has absorbed in the five years since he was plucked from from his mountainous homeland.
"But I got used to it."


A Cocaine Baron's Tales of Intrigue And Greed Liven Up Noriega's Trial
THERE were moments at the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega last week when it seemed as if the Medellin cartel had at one time or another worked hand in glove with every government in the Western Hemisphere during the 1980's.
To hear one of the founders of the drug cartel tell it from the witness stand, everyone from Fidel Castro to American intelligence operatives performed favors for the Colombian drug syndicate -- giving Panama's deposed dictator plenty of company in the rogue's gallery of cartel accomplices.
The testimony of Carlos Lehder Rivas, a former head of transportation for the Medellin cartel who is now serving life plus 135 years in an American prison, was the climax of the prosecution's case against General Noriega, who has been charged with 10 counts of cocaine trafficking, money laundering and racketeering.
But Mr.
Lehder's most sensational and potentially damaging statements had to do with what he described as assistance by the Cuban and Nicaraguan governments in smuggling cocaine into the United States and back-channel approaches by American officials willing to let him run cocaine into Florida if he would only help them ship weapons to the Nicaraguan contras.


The Bold Eagle
To the Sports Editor:
I read with sadness that the British Olympic Association has decided not to nominate Eddie (The Eagle) Edwards to represent Great Britain in the 1992 Olympic ski-jumping competition.
The reason was not that there were more deserving British jumpers, but because the B.O.A. feels that "to be an Olympic competitor now, you have to be good."


Landlords Ask Sea Cliff To Change Zoning Law
SEA CLIFF has been described by residents as a "time capsule," a "Beaver Cleaver" village where youngsters meet at the beach and ride their bikes in the street.
The town, which covers one square mile, is home to more than 5,000 people.
Sea Cliff Avenue, the main street, is dotted with bright Victorian homes and storefronts.
But many are empty.
Two landlords have had problems keeping tenants and have asked the Zoning Board for a variance to convert five stores into ground-floor studio apartments.


Fighting Back
When Wang Meng was purged in 1957 for writing a short story that some Communist Party bureaucrats didn't like, he accepted his punishment: two decades of forced labor and isolation in western China.
In recent months hard-liners again denounced one of his stories, but this time he decided to sue.
Like many deposed leaders, Mr.
Wang was "rehabilitated" after his years of internal exile, becoming a well known writer and serving as China's Cultural Minister from 1986 until the Tiananmen Square crackdown three years later.
This summer a hard-line newspaper published a letter to the editor -- believed by many to actually be a letter
by
the editor -- charging that a story he published in 1989 was a subtle attack on the country's patriarch, Deng Xiaoping.
Last month Mr.
Wang tried to file a libel suit, but so far he can't find a court that will accept it.
Defying a gag order, a few newspapers have begun to write about the case, and old copies of the story, "Hard Porridge," are in great demand.


How to Quiet Down Those Noisy Valves
NOISES from water pipes and plumbing fixtures include high-pitched squealing, whistling and hissing, as well as banging, chattering and thudding.
Not only are plumbing sounds annoying, but they can also indicate problems that can lead to major damage.
If squealing, whistling or hissing occurs, it is usually when a faucet is on or when a toilet tank is refilling.
The sound is caused by water's flowing rapidly through a narrow restriction or past an obstruction.


Lisa Wolfe Marries Joseph Ravitch
Lisa Wolfe, an associate producer of the CBS News program "60 Minutes," and Joseph Ravitch, an associate of the law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton, both in New York, were married in Montreal last evening.
Rabbi Howard Joseph officiated.
Ms.
Wolfe, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in Arabic and Arab cultural history from Columbia University.


'A Pact With the Bygone'
The pull of things past is felt at surprising times and in unexpected ways.
The act of dipping a small, sweet cake in a cup of herb tea elicited volumes of prose from Proust; the smell of pickling beets coming from a Nebraska kitchen released a powerful longing in the American novelist and photographer Wright Morris, which he spent years transforming into images and words.
Mr.
Morris has attempted before, not always successfully, to use his photographs to complement his writing, as another way of evoking the rural life he remembers from his Nebraska boyhood.
In editing PHOTOGRAPHS &amp; WORDS (Friends of Photography, $32.50), James Alinder, a photographer and a frequent collaborator with Mr.
Morris, has reproduced the photographs in rich black-and-white tones, thereby revealing strengths that earlier publications obscured through cropping and mediocre printing.
Mr.
Morris briefly recounts his years as a photographer and describes a momentous visit to his aunt and uncle's Nebraska farm in the 1940's.
Awakened by his "beet-pickled emotions," Mr.
Morris dedicated himself to "a pact with the bygone" and to recording the symbols of a passing way of life.
Of the images included here, only the first portrays a living person -- his uncle, shown from the back as he wheels his tools into the barn.
Mr.
Morris searches for human presence in weathered farm buildings, bureau tops and barber chairs.
Some of the images show farmhouse interiors with old photographs of family members.
Mr.
Morris's yearning for a past impossible to recover, and his good eye for revealing detail, are what animate these photos and make them compelling.


Mission Trail
To the Editor: We enjoyed the article about the California missions founded by the Franciscan father Junipero Serra (Travel, Aug. 18).
Many Easterners will be pleasantly surprised to find they have their own "Mission Trail" of chapels, founded in the early days of the century and expanded with the efforts of a kindly German Franciscan, Father Francis Koch.
The New Jersey mission story is far less "political" than California's, and instead of conquistadors, Father Francis simply trod the trails with a fellow friar and a German-English dictionary.


POSTINGS: Renovation; American Irish Society
A $200,000 renovation of the building that houses the American Irish Historical Society in Manhattan is expected to be finished within the next few weeks.
The exterior work on the building at 991 Fifth Avenue, between 80th and 81st Streets, began in June and is complete except for some small repairs to the roof and skylights.
The most dramatic changes are a restoration of the balconies and Neo-Georgian, brick facade.


If You're Thinking of Living in: South Orange
SOUTH ORANGE, which is laid out along the side of New Jersey's Second Mountain, stands in sharp contrast to the high-crime inner cities east of it.
Its expensive homes on large, heavily treed lots, keep their value, showing that integration can work.
"Thirty years ago, during the race riots in Newark, many people fled from the surrounding lily-white communities," said Harry W. Drum, a 15-year resident and businessman.
"But South Orange, although posh, was an integrated community then. Because race was not considered a problem, people just stayed put."


Apple Donors Brightening Many Lives
"THOSE wonderful apples are the only fresh produce we can get. And they are so desirable. When we gave out bags of food to 769 people last week, I noticed that many of them just dove right into the bags and started eating the apples."
Mary Lou McNaney is the executive director of Hope Community Services at the Holy Trinity Lutheran Church in New Rochelle.
Her agency is one of about 200 recipients of the fresh produce supplied by Harvest With Heart, a nonprofit, almost entirely volunteer organization that gives fresh apples to people who cannot afford to buy them.


Another Yale Panel Urges More Women and Minorities for Faculty
Eighteen times since 1968, committees at Yale have recommended that the university do more to recruit women and minorities for the faculty.
The latest committee said in a report released last month that "Yale's position and its national image in this area remains precariously close to the backwaters of academic progress, not in the position of national leadership we proudly seek and claim in other important areas."


Miss Barney Plans to Wed
Mrs.
James L. Neff of New York and Robert W. Barney of Lyme, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alexandra Washington Barney to Brian Jonathan Cowley, a son of Rosemarie Cowley of New Canaan, Conn., and Robert Cowley of West Norwalk, Conn.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Barney, 31 years old, is an account manager for The Ladies' Home Journal in New York.
She was a member of the New York Junior Assembly in 1978 and graduated from New York University.
Her father retired as a political analyst for Mobil Oil in New York.
She is a great-great-great-granddaughter of Albert Gallatin, Secretary of the Treasury in the Jefferson Administration and a founder of N.Y.U.
Mr.
Cowley, 32, graduated from Bryant College.
He is a vice president of National Decision Systems, a division of the credit reporting company Equifax Inc., in New York.
His father is the controller for Putnam Buick in Greenwich, Conn.


No Headline
International 3-23  POLLUTION TRANSFORMS BLACK SEA
For centuries, the Black Sea produced dolphin skins and caviar and fish so plentiful that no one thought such bounty could ever end.
But pollution is causing changes.
Page 1


Rookie Reflects on Impact of Utley's Injury
David Rocker played in his first National Football League game last week.
The Rams picked up the rookie defensive tackle, Houston's fourth-round pick out of Auburn, after he was waived from the Oilers' practice squad.
He arrived in Los Angeles on Wednesday and, because the Rams' defensive line was short of help, he got a chance to play against the Lions at Detroit on Sunday.
It was Rocker who was working against Detroit lineman Mike Utley on a pass play early in the fourth quarter that resulted in Utley injuring his neck so severely that he is now a paraplegic.
No amount of football experience could have prepared Rocker for dealing with the remorse associated with being involved in Utley's paralysis.


A Dispute In Kyoto
A long-simmering feud over real estate development in Kyoto, Japan's ancient Imperial capital, has finally broken out in a full-scale battle -- with visitors the prime target.
For several years now a variety of citizens' groups have been protesting what they see as over-development in this lovely city, which is often described as Japan's cultural soul.
At the head of the opposition is an association of Buddhist temples.


BEST SELLERS: November 24, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
1
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the lives and fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
3
2
6
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
4
4
14
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
5
3
4
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) A diplomat, returning to his native Gloucestershire, finds that his past life in horse racing may help save others.
6
5
4
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $22.50.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide and herself.
7
6
8
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
8
7
5
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $22.) A lawyer returns to her estranged family to attend a funeral.
9 *
8
11
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate a balloon accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force.
10
9
5
ALL THE WEYRS OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $20.) A new volume in the science fiction series "The Dragonriders of Pern."
11
1
THE SAPPHIRE ROSE, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in "The Elenium," a fantasy saga.
12
10
3
REUNION, by Michael Jan Friedman. (Pocket, $19.) The U.S.S.
Enterprise crew undertakes to stop a war in outer space; a "Star Trek" novel.
13
12
37
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
14
11
2
LILA, by Robert M. Pirsig. (Bantam, $22.50.) On a sailboat cruise down the Hudson with a woman companion, a philosopher reflects on the nature of our society.
15
15
87
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
6
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
2
2
10
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
3
3
3
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (Zondervan/HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel, with his view of the Iran-contra affair.
4
6
3
DANCE WHILE YOU CAN, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress examines her feelings about relationships, aging and the future.
5
5
13
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces. (LP)
6
9
3
CHILDHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Putnam, $14.95.) The entertainer reflects on his boyhood and kids today.
7
7
4
PRAIRYERTH, by William Least Heat-Moon. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A close look at the people and mores of Chase County, Kansas.
8
4
4
THE NEW WORLD ORDER, by Pat Robertson. (Word Publishing, $17.99.) A clergyman discusses the significance of global changes.
9
11
6
CRUEL DOUBT, by Joe McGinniss. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The tale of a woman whose son was accused of planning her murder and her husband's.
10
8
23
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
11
12
2
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
12
10
53
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
13
1
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media, the fashion and beauty industries and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
14
3
MADONNA UNAUTHORIZED, by Christopher Andersen. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) A biography of the pop star.
15
13
4
SAVAGE INEQUALITIES, by Jonathan Kozol. (Crown, $20.) The current crisis in the nation's inner-city public schools.
16 *
1
THE MONEY CULTURE, by Michael Lewis. (Norton, $19.95.) Essays about the shenanigans financiers played on Wall Street and around the world during the 1980's.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
15
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
3
54
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
3
4
95
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
4 *
5
37
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find Waldo as he travels from ancient Egypt to today.
5
1
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
ON THE ALTAR OF FREEDOM: A Black Soldier's Civil War Letters From the Front, by Corporal James Henry Gooding (University of Massachusetts, $21.95), and FALLEN LEAVES: The Civil War Letters of Major Henry Livermore Abbott (Kent State University, $27).
Two very different versions of the war: the first written as polite journalism by a member of the heroic 54th Massachusetts Regiment, the other sent home by a Boston aristocrat who spared no detail of carnage or of his prejudices.
CELIA: A Slave, by Melton A. McLaurin. (University of Georgia, $19.95.) A historian's reconstruction of the short life of a woman, purchased in 1850 for concubinage, who killed her master in 1855.
THE SAMSON OPTION: Israel's Nuclear Arsenal and American Foreign Policy, by Seymour M. Hersh. (Random House, $23.) Mr.
Hersh keenly conveys the dynamic and scale of Israel's nuclear program and probes the American reluctance to interfere.
MURTHER &amp; WALKING SPIRITS, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $21.95.) A fine story by the distinguished Canadian storyteller, whose protagonist is murdered on the first page, then endures as a ghost, watching ghost movies about his own ancestral past.
SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION, by David B. Feinberg. (Viking, $19.95.) Mr.
Feinberg's funny, moving stories about being single, Jewish, gay and HIV-positive are both urgent and convincing.
FROG, by Stephen Dixon. (British American, $29.) A stubborn, tense, aggressive, tricky chunk of fiction that portrays the artist as teacher, lecher, householder, son, brother, worrier and crank.
TIME'S ARROW: Or, The Nature of the Offense, by Martin Amis. (Harmony, $18.) This poignant, indignant novel explores how its shady protagonist's life would look and feel if run backward.


Scotland's Single-Malt Whisky
THERE'S long been a "Whisky Trail" through the valley of the River Spey in the Highlands of northeastern Scotland, famous for its salmon, scenery and some of the best-known single-malt whisky.
Distilleries on the tour, signposted with a schematic drawing of a "peat reek," the pagoda-like cupola that covers a distillery's malting floor, include Knockando, Tamdhu, The Glenlivet and Glenfiddich and others whose products are readily available in the United States.
With more than 120 distilleries, Scotland presents a rich course of study, maybe even a doctoral thesis, for somebody prepared for the rigors of thorough research.
Some of the most attractive single-malt distilleries are right next to Edinburgh and Glasgow, the first stops on any tourist itinerary.
But there are others farther afield, from way out in the Hebrides in Islay (pronounced EYE-lah), where some of the smokiest, most heavily "peated" malts are made, to the Orkney Islands far up in the North Sea.


Streetscapes: The 1881 Schepp Building; The Coconut King's Beheaded Factory
EVEN in its truncated state, the 1881 Schepp Building dominates Duane Park and most of TriBeCa.
Now this structure at the northwest corner of Duane and Hudson Streets is in the first stage of a major facade repair, a $500,000 project to restore the slate roof and dormers and cure persistent leaks.
But the piece de resistance, the restoration of the long-gone corner mansard tower -- will have to wait indefinitely.


The Lonely Lolita Of 'Cape Fear'
It was only a few years ago that Juliette Lewis was playing "airhead teeny-boppers," as she puts it.
Ms.
Lewis was so frustrated by her sitcom roles that she ended each day in tears.
"I wanted to do more," says the 18-year-old actress.
Now critics are praising her luminous performance as the teen-age Danielle Bowden in Martin Scorsese's new film, "Cape Fear." In his review, Vincent Canby of The Times called Ms.
Lewis "a new young actress of stunning possibilities."


Fire That Killed 6 in Queens Is Laid to Faulty Wiring
The fire that swept through a house in Queens and killed five children and their grandfather on Friday night was caused by faulty electrical wiring, fire officials said yesterday.
Standing outside the gutted, two-story house in South Ozone Park, Arthur Massett, supervisor for the Queens Fire Marshal's office, said the blaze had begun at an electrical outlet in the enclosed front porch.
Mr.
Massett said it was unclear whether the faulty wiring was in the porch wall or in a cord that family members said had connected the outlet to a television set, which was turned on at the time.


Bottoms Up: Brown Defeats Columbia
Despite having failed in the first nine weeks of the season, Brown gave an effort good enough today to beat Columbia, 28-23.
The defeat left Columbia (1-9 over all and 1-6 in the league) tied for seventh place with Brown (1-9, 1-6) in the Ivy League standing.
The Bears had to hold off a second-half rally by the Lions to preserve the victory.
The Lions scored twice in the third quarter to trim a 19-point deficit to only 6.
The first score came when quarterback John Tribolet hit Mike Sardo with a 27-yard pass for a touchdown midway through the period.
Seven minutes later, tailback Greg Abbruzese ran 5 yards for another touchdown that made the score 22-16 after three quarters.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Newtown, Pa.; Making Room For Visitors
TWO months ago, a local developer expanded his selection of home models here and in two other projects to include one with an accessory suite, or granny flat, for visiting friends or relatives.
The developer, DeLuca Enterprises, has already sold three of the new models, called the Wynford.
Requests from homeowners to renovate garages or build additions for a guest room prompted DeLuca to design the model, said Perry J. DeSiato Jr., marketing vice president of DeLuca Enterprises of Newtown, Pa.


Making a Difference; The 9.5% Credit Card Bank
A week or so ago, big banks -- and Wall Street -- screamed in pain and panic when the Senate considered putting a 14 percent cap on credit card interest rates.
How's a bank supposed to make a living, much less a profit, without charging the more typical 18, 19, 20 percent?
Simple, says Robert C. Dill, executive vice president and marketing director of Simmons First National Bank of Pine Bluff, Ark., one of the banks that regularly appears at the top of lists of low-interest cards.


Rangers Prepare for Defensive Shuffle
In order to nip a bad streak in the bud tonight, the Rangers were expected to shuffle their lineup on defense and to keep the ailing Mark Messier pinned together for another game.
Despite the public calm emanating from Coach Roger Neilson and General Manager Neil Smith, both men were clearly concerned about the Rangers' 6-1 loss Thursday in Los Angeles and a 2-4-1 slide in their last seven games.


A la Carte: Down Home
AT breakfast and lunch, Mercedes-Benzes, Cadillacs and pickups are about equally represented outside a modest white farm cottage in Smithtown.
Maureen's Kitchen, a cute cozy charmer at 101 Terry Road, is a no-pretense, no-credit card, no-dinner operation that six days a week churns out generous portions of wholesome food at moderate prices in a friendly atmosphere.


For Collectors, a Decade to Treasure
I HAVE known a lot of neat cars.
I have driven Ferraris.
I have been at the wheel of the Thomas Flyer that once, back in July 1908, won the New York-to-Paris race.
I have ridden down Fifth Avenue in a Hispano-Suisa.
But for all that, my pocketbook has never let me be a real player in the world of fancy iron.
Pshaw.
There was the '37 Cord convertible, for instance, flamingo pink and strutting around with a price tag of only $2,500.
I could have bought the dark green Packard at the farm auction in Quakertown, Pa.
My buddy Jim Case traded his '40 Cadillac on a new '54 Ford, and I could have had that lovely Fleetwood sedan real cheap.
I should have kept my '36 Ford.


Seeking Ms. Right in Throngs of Ms. Wrongs
On a steamy Summer day in his West 54th Street office, the casting director Louis DiGiaimo is auditioning actresses for the role of Vida, the saucy, ebullient arsonist in "Wilder Napalm." In the movie, Vida is married to Wilder, a Fotokwik clerk and volunteer fireman who loves calling bingo games and is blessed with the ability to set fires with his mind.
Wilder's brother, Wallace, to be played by Dennis Quaid, is a carnival clown (also pyrokinetic) whose ambition is to lead his co-workers in an appearance on the "Tonight" show.
Though "Wilder Napalm" is not to begin filming until early November, the summer finds Mr.
DiGiaimo deeply involved in the casting process.
The job requires him to fly between New York and Los Angeles to audition actors for not only Vida and Wilder but such characters as the Snake Lady; Rex, the chief carny, and a company of volunteer firemen.


Yale Erupts After Winning 'The Game'
Ecstatic Yalies dashed onto the field of friendly strife today at the final gun.
Was this an Ivy title they were celebrating?
Or even a prestigious grant from the National Endowment for the Arts?


Corrections
An article on Nov. 10 about the Old Croton Aqueduct Trailway referred incompletely to the financing of a paving project in Irvington.
Its cost was shared by the village and the State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation.


Eileen O'Neill Weds
Eileen O'Neill, a daughter of Mrs.
Hugh John O'Neill of Brewster, N.Y., and the late Dr.
O'Neill, was married yesterday to Gregory John Lagrotteria, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James William Lagrotteria of Cohasset, Mass.
Msgr.
John Oliver performed the ceremony at Miller Chapel at the Princeton Theological Seminary in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Lagrotteria was until recently an advertising sales representative for Time magazine in Washington.
She graduated from Western Connecticut State University.
Mr.
Lagrotteria is a sales representative for Sebago Inc., footwear manufacturers, in Westbrook, Me.
He graduated from Boston College.


THE JOY OF OLD
Rembar is exactly correct in rejecting terms like "senior" and "elderly" for "old," which has become virtually a taboo word.
The significance of such euphemisms should be obvious: old people are at best a source of embarrassment, and at worst the objects of fear and prejudice.
Compulsory retirement, for example, is nothing less than a form of bigotry.
It is true, as Rembar suggests, that old and wise are often juxtaposed, but he overlooks the equally common dictum that "there is no fool like an old fool."


A Great Heart As Well as Brain
To the Editor:
As a Sherlockian, an invested member of the Baker Street Irregulars and a devotee of Jeremy Brett's wonderfully precise interpretations of the Master, I must rebuke Mr.
Brett for his statement that "Holmes is hollow . . . you must always remember: this is a mind without a heart"  [ "How to Play Holmes? Elementally," Nov. 10 ] .


Timorese in Lisbon Demonstrate Against Killings


No Chairman Of the Board
To the Editor:
Will someone please suspend the First Amendment and make it illegal to mention Harry Connick Jr. and Frank Sinatra in the same breath?  [ "Harry Connick, the New Sinatra or Boy in a Bubble?" Nov. 3 ] .
To compare a soulless nasal whine to the voice that elevated popular singing to its artistic pinnacle is like comparing a glass of Cold Duck to Dom Perignon.


Science Publishers Bridging U.S.-Soviet Gap
For the first time since the end of the cold war, editors of 19 leading Russian physics journals met last week with American counterparts to discuss the broadening of scientific exchanges between the two countries.
But underlying the camaraderie was some hard-nosed bargaining between the two nations' scientific publishers, each side hoping to cut costs in the face of mounting economic pressures at home.
As the two delegations sat down for talks at Loews New York Hotel in Manhattan, an American physicist asked, "Are you speaking for Soviet physics journals, or Russian ones?" After a long pause, one of the Russians replied: "We don't really know. But maybe they're the same thing now."


Personal Freedom And Garage Sales
Re: "More Towns Reulating Garage Sales" (Nov. 3):
The last personal freedom left to the entrepreneur and the fun-loving shopper is now to be licensed and catalogued in the government papermill, along with the car, the dog, the cat, the hunter, the fisherman, ad infinitum.
Everyone and everything must have a permit and pay a fee.
The garage sale was the last bastion of an activity not overseen by the ever-present "Big Brother."


Libby Jeffrey Is Wed to Peter Laino
Elizabeth Burr Jeffrey, a staff assistant in the business, government and competition department at Harvard Business School, was married yesterday to Peter Stephen Laino, a principal of Riverside Partners Inc., a Cambridge, Mass., investment partnership.
The Rev.
John Corr officiated at Christ the King Roman Catholic Church in New Vernon, N.J.
Mrs.
Laino, 26 years old and known as Libby, graduated from Williams College, as did her husband.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard R. Jeffrey of Montclair, N.J.
Her father is a senior partner in Vilas-Fischer Associates, a New York investment management concern.


Harold M. Tract, 65; Co-Founded Law Firm
Harold M. Tract, a co-founder of an international law firm specializing in insurance, died on Monday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 65 years old and lived in East Hills, L.I..
He died of cancer, his family said.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York House
1.
Veto Override: Vote to override President Bush's veto of a spending bill that included a provision to block the Bush Administration from enforcing a ban on abortion counseling at family clinics receiving Federal funds.
Failed, with 276 in favor and 156 opposed (12 votes short of the two-thirds needed to override), Nov. 19.
2.
Banking: Vote on passage of a banking bill that would shore up the bank deposit insurance fund; give regulators greater authority to close ailing banks and supervise foreign institutions; restrict the Government's policy of bailing out banks considered too big to fail and limit some banks from entering the insurance business.
Approved 344 to 84, Nov. 21.
1
2
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D)
Y
Y
3. DeLauro (D)
Y
Y
4. Shays (R)
Y
Y
5. Franks (R)
Y
Y
6. Johnson (R)
Y
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Y
N
2. Hughes (D)
Y
N
3. Pallone (D)
Y
N
4. Smith (R)
N
Y
5. Roukema (R)
Y
Y
6. Dwyer (D)
Y
N
7. Rinaldo (R)
N
Y
8. Roe (D)
N
Y
9. Torricelli (D)
Y
Y
10. Payne (D)
Y
Y
11. Gallo (R)
Y
Y
12. Zimmer (R)
Y
N
13. Saxton (R)
N
Y
14. Guarini (D)
Y
N
New York
1. Hochbrueckner(D)
Y
Y
2. Downey (D)
Y
Y
3. Mrazek (D)
Y
A
4. Lent (R)
N
Y
5. McGrath (R)
N
Y
6. Flake (D)
Y
Y
7. Ackerman (D)
Y
Y
8. Scheuer (D)
Y
Y
9. Manton (D)
N
Y
10. Schumer (D)
Y
Y
11. Towns (D)
Y
N
12. Owens (D)
Y
N
13. Solarz (D)
Y
Y
14. Molinari (R)
Y
Y
15. Green (R)
Y
Y
16. Rangel (D)
Y
Y
17. Weiss (D)
Y
Y
18. Serrano (D)
Y
N
19. Engel (D)
Y
Y
20. Lowey (D)
Y
Y
21. Fish (R)
Y
Y
22. Gilman (R)
Y
Y
23. McNulty (D)
Y
N
24. Solomon (R)
N
N
25. Boehlert (R)
Y
Y
26. Martin (R)
Y
Y
27. Walsh (R)
N
Y
28. McHugh (D)
Y
Y
29. Horton (R)
Y
Y
30. Slaughter (D)
Y
Y
31. Paxon (R)
N
Y
32. LaFalce (D)
N
Y
33. Nowak (D)
N
Y
34. Houghton (R)
Y
Y
KEY Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
There were no Senate votes last week.


Getting to the Best Part: Turkey Stuffings
THE best part of the Thanksgiving turkey, in my view, is the stuffing.
It is even better the following morning, eaten cold for breakfast.
While some people like to experiment with exotic flavorings, combining chorizos with dried apricots or adding jalapenos to corn bread, I prefer conventional stuffings.
When I was growing up, we used two stuffings in our turkey: chestnut at one end, sausage and apple at the other, and these remain my favorites.


Lisa C. Banks Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Percival C. Banks 3d of Berkeley, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Charlotte Banks to David Eliot Stark, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Stark of West Orange, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Banks, 25 years old, and Mr.
Stark, 24, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
Miss Banks is the managing editor of the Mercedes-Benz magazines at McCaffrey &amp; McCall Partners and her fiance is the director of special projects for the estate of the artist Keith Haring, both in New York.


Shakespeare, The Difficult
Campbell Scott fidgets a bit at the mention of Shakespeare's "Pericles, Prince of Tyre." For good reason, too.
The play, which opens tonight at the Public Theater -- No. 19 in the Shakespeare Marathon and under the direction of Michael Greif -- is one of the playwright's most obscure and difficult works.
"It is a hard one," said Mr.
Scott, who plays the title role.
"It is certainly disjointed."


Driver No Longer Worries of Shadows
Bruce Driver has been a reliable defenseman for the Devils for seven years, but during his college days at the University of Wisconsin, he has been behind someone else's shadow.
Driver anchored the defense for Wisconsin, which won two collegiate titles in his three years with the Badgers, but he was overshadowed in Madison by the presence of Chris Chelios, now one of the National Hockey League's elite defensemen with Chicago.


JUMP-STARTING NEW YORK
There can be no successful city without a viable middle class, and it, in turn, cannot thrive without three essential, irreducible conditions: affordable housing and associated amenities, acceptable levels of security and decent schools.
New York, unfortunately, has turned its back on all of them, and that is why it has been in a state of decline for decades.
Hard as it may be to confront, even a benign, affluent society has limits, economic, social and political.
When New Yorkers confront that unyielding reality and start making rational choices that balance the welfare of productive members of society against its dregs, a restoration of the city will become possible.
But continuation of the present course, with its squandering of fortunes on unworkable social programs and its dreary political vilification of middle-class values, can only foster a continuing decline of a once great city.
GIDEON KANNER Los Angeles


18-Year-Old Accused In Grandfather's Death
A high-speed chase involving a car that the police mistook for one used in the theft of gas from a service station led to the discovery on Friday of an apparent killing and the arrest of the victim's grandson and a friend.
The suspects, Christopher Shapard, 18 years old, of Waterbury and Damian Izarry, 16, of Prospect each was charged Friday with murder in the death of 67-year-old Roy Shapard.


Assigning Students By Accomplishment
In the Westchester Q&amp;A  [ Oct. 27 ] , Dr.
Linda Darling-Hammond states that "virtually all American kids should be receiving gifted and talented kinds of curriculum."
However, urban schools, in particular, have substantial bodies of students who are seriously deficient in reading, writing and arithmetic and are unlikely candidates for gifted and talented studies.


THE JOY OF OLD
Grateful thanks to Charles Rembar for his advice to ignore middle age and go directly to old (About Men: "The Joy of Old," Oct. 27).
I turned 60 this year and retirement continues to seem a long way off -- rather to my relief, or so I thought.
Now, after reading Rembar's views, I'm far from sure.


Illusions of Immortality
PASSAGE
A Work Record.
By Irving Penn.
With the collaboration of Alexandra Arrowsmith and Nicola Majocchi.
Introduction by Alexander Liberman.
Illustrated. 300 pp.
New York: Callaway/Alfred A. Knopf. $100.


The Winning Ways of Stock Funds
More individuals are adding stock mutual funds to their investment portfolios than are adding shares of individual stocks, according to a recent survey conducted by the New York Stock Exchange.
What the study calls a "key finding" is that by the end of 1990 there were more than 25 million holders of stock mutual funds -- more than double the number five years earlier.
The number of individuals who added stock mutual funds to their holdings in the last five years alone was more than 14 million, while the number adding shares traded on various exchanges totaled 8.6 million.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My bathroom vanity is made of cultured marble, with the sink molded in as part of the top.
The area around the drain has become very worn.
I tried touching it up with a porcelain paint, but the result is not very attractive and the paint does not last long.
I hate to replace the entire vanity, as this would ruin the surrounding wall covering.
Is it possible to cut out the sink and then install a regular porcelain one in the same top?
A.
Assuming that the vanity's top material is structurally sound, I see no reason why you could not cut an opening in the top to accept a new sink.
The opening would have to be slightly larger than the existing sink, and so you would also have to buy a sink that was larger than the current one.
The new sink should be the kind that has a rim that will overlap the existing counter top when dropped into the new opening from above.
This rim will thus overlap and conceal the edges of the opening.


Ms. de Marneffe Is Wed in West
Daphne Elizabeth de Marneffe, a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at the University of California at Berkeley, and Dr.
Terrence Clifford Becker, a psychiatrist, were married yesterday in San Francisco.
The Rev.
Richard Fabian, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Swedenborgian Church.
Ms. de Marneffe, 32 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Nancy Ferranti of Arlington, Mass., and Dr.
Francis de Marneffe of Raleigh, N.C.
Her father, a former director of the psychiatric division of Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, is the medical director of Holly Hill Hospital in Raleigh.
Her mother is an actress and a former elementary-school teacher at the Advent School in Boston.
Dr.
Becker, 35, graduated from Stanford University and received his M.D. degree from the University of California at San Francisco.
He practices in San Francisco.
He is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John Becker of Whitefish Bay, Wis.
His mother, Kathleen Becker, is a former nurse.
His father is an internist in Milwaukee.


Design; Bedtime Stories
By its imposing nature, a four-poster bed becomes the centerpiece of any bedroom.
The modern renditions shown here are self-contained environments.
Each evokes a special fantasy.


Airline Help
To the Editor: While on vacation, I was overtaken by a medical emergency that forced my return from Rio de Janeiro to New York for treatment.
I would like to compliment Varig Airlines for the help I received.
One of my traveling companions, wanting to spare me unnecessary walking, went to the offices of Varig in my place, explaining the problem to the shift supervisor.
He returned saying that the supervisor would not rebook us, that there was no flight out for three days.
The next day, my friend and I returned to Varig loaded for bear.
This was unnecessary because the new shift supervisor went out of his way to accommodate and facilitate my leaving Rio for New York.
I hope Varig will place a letter in the record of this employee, Rui Porto.
SIDNEY EASTON Flushing, Queens A spokeswoman for Varig confirms that Mr.
Porto is the supervisor in the Copacabana Varig office in Rio.


Commercial Property: 125 West 55th Street; The Anatomy of a Macklowe Tower Leasing Coup
WHILE other freshly minted West Side office buildings are searching -- if not begging -- for tenants, Harry Macklowe has managed to fill his new tower at 125 West 55th Street, having clinched a 94 percent tenancy rate with the second largest transaction of 1991.
That 20-year, 224,000-square-foot deal is to bring the international law firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby &amp; MacRae out of 520 Madison Avenue, owned by Tishman Speyer.
The aggregate rent would amount to more than $200 million, although none of the parties to the deal would be more specific.


Lisa Spinoso and John DeRose 3d Are Married
Lisa Spinoso, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard S. Spinoso of East Islip, L.I., was married yesterday to John DeRose 3d, the son of Carol Glynn of Brielle, N.J.
Msgr.
William Karvelis, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Mary's Church in East Islip.
Mrs.
DeRose, 24 years old, graduated from Pennsylvania State University, and is a certified public accountant with Price Waterhouse in New York.
The bridegroom, 27, graduated from the Maine Maritime Academy, from which he also received a master's degree in maritime transportation management.
Formerly a lieutenant in the United States Coast Guard, he is a marine surveyor for Det Norske Veritas Classification, a ship inspection company in River Edge, N.J.


Book Frees Up the Voice Of a Burmese Nobelist
As a young woman in England, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi carefully avoided becoming involved in the politics of refugee Burmese who inveighed against their military Government.
But 20 years ago, she forewarned her British fiance that it was inevitable she would return to her homeland some day and the fate that might await her as the daughter of the man who led Burma to independence.


Good Music Is Colorblind
To the Editor:
George Walker's article on the plight of black composers  [ "Make Room for Black Classical Music," Nov. 3 ]  would have been more reasonable and effective had he substituted the words "contemporary American" for black composers, because the lack of performances among living composers is not restricted to blacks.
Most of his references are appropriate to contemporary serious composers in general.


Cooper Gets a Contract
When a coach has taken a team to 8-2 against tough competition, it really doesn't seem fair to make his entire career hang on the outcome of a single late-season game.
That's the way Ohio State's athletic director, JIM JONES, apparently figured it when he found a way to squelch rumors that the Buckeyes' head coach, JOHN COOPER, would be dismissed if his team didn't win yesterday's game against Michigan, a team Cooper had not beaten in his first three seasons, in Ann Arbor.
Just before yesterday's game, Jones announced that Cooper had been given a three-year contract extension, with details to be worked out later.
"We are pleased with the direction our program is going, and with the effort of our student-athletes on the field and in the classroom," he said.


Fight Against TB Is a Worldwide Job
To the Editor:
The AIDS epidemic should have taught us that in the world of infectious diseases, there is nothing that is truly remote and no one from whom we are disconnected.
We have perhaps forgotten that infectious diseases are still the largest cause of death in the world and that tuberculosis is the leading cause of death attributable to an infectious disease.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
WESTCHESTER CAT SHOW
Speaking of munchkins, the Westchester Feline Club is featuring one at the 16th yearly Westchester Cat Show today from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
The Munchkin cat, making its first appearance in a Westchester show, is described by officials as a domestic breed possessing a gene similar to those in the Basset hound and Dachshund.


How to Quiet Down Those Noisy Valves
NOISES from water pipes and plumbing fixtures include high-pitched squealing, whistling and hissing, as well as banging, chattering and thudding.
Not only are plumbing sounds annoying, but they can also indicate problems that can lead to major damage.
If squealing, whistling or hissing occurs, it is usually when a faucet is on or when a toilet tank is refilling.
The sound is caused by water's flowing rapidly through a narrow restriction or past an obstruction.


Camera
To avoid failing in the marketplace, most new cameras have to offer something for everybody.
Manufacturers hope to do the virtually impossible: appeal to both the beginner and the expert.
The ideal product would be easy to use for the amateur with absolutely no knowledge of photography, and a challenge for the expert who knows it all.
With these concerns in mind, Leica, Konica and Nikon have each introduced a new camera recently.
Together, they demonstrate that as technology advances the art of camera design, cameras become harder to choose but easier to use.


South Africa Poaches On Europe's Anthem
To the Editor:
I trust that the choice of Beethoven's "Ode to Joy" as the South African Olympic team's anthem (Topics of The Times, Nov. 14) followed consultation with the European Community, of which the "Ode to Joy" is the official anthem.


New Conference Will Be Formed
Butler, Dayton, Drake, Evansville and Valparaiso will form a new conference beginning play in 1993 that the schools hope will be the first to earn Division I-AAA designation.
The Pioneer Football League, as NCAA rules now stand, will begin play as a I-AA conference, but if the I-AAA legislation passes at the N.C.A.A. convention in January, the new league hopes to become the first in the new designation, according to the Butler athletic director, John Parry.


When Houses Pose for Portraits, Owners Feel the Elation
ALAN REINGOLD said he loved the portrait from the moment he saw its pink glow.
"I felt a euphoria," recalled Mr.
Reingold, who is an illustrator.
"My jaw hit the ground."
Mr.
Reingold was talking about a painting of his house here done by Susan Stillman, a White Plains artist.
The large oil work shows the 126-year-old house suffused in the glow of a late October afternoon.
That is a "special time of day," Mr.
Reingold said, because then "the gray on the house gets very pink."


Pope Called Unlikely to Oust Officials on Abortion
Anti-abortion groups have petitioned Pope John Paul II to excommunicate about two dozen prominent American lawmakers who support abortion rights, but church spokesmen say it is unlikely the Pope will do so.
"I'd be extremely surprised," Joseph Zwilling, a spokesman for the New York archdiocese, said Friday.
"It's just not done that way."


Sunday Menu; Half the Meat But Twice The Garlic
The difference between this recipe for spaghetti and meat sauce and my mother's is that it has half the meat and twice as much garlic.
And it's not cooked as long -- just 15 minutes instead of an hour.
No question, it would be even better if it were simmered for an hour, but it will do perfectly well this way.
Since there is enough for four servings it will give a family of two an opportunity to taste it when it is even better, on the second day.


Chess
The bad thing about a round-robin tournament is that no matter how poorly you are doing, you must complete the schedule.
Sometimes that means dragging yourself through the later games, but you owe it to the other players not to become a pushover.
The good thing about a round-robin is that you can relieve some of the frustration by pulling off a splendid attack.
Even if there is no prize for brilliance in the event, the satisfaction of such an achievement can take your mind off the previous failures and at least help you get ready for your next competition.


Leelee Smith, Banker, Weds
Elizabeth Dexter Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Batterman Smith of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Frederick Klein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stewart E. Klein of Washington Depot, Conn.
The Rev.
Frederick T. Bender, an Episcopal priest, officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Marcus Zbaren, a Lutheran pastor, at St.
Michael's Lutheran Church in New Canaan, Conn.
The bride, known as Leelee, is a graduate of Denison University and is a personal trust officer at the Citibank Private Bank in New York.
Her father is the managing general partner of Private Equity Partnership in New York.
Her mother, Linda Smith, is the receptionist at the New Canaan Country School.


Thatcher Close to Break With Her Replacement
Relations between Prime Minister John Major and Margaret Thatcher, who praised him as her protege when he succeeded her a year ago, have come close to the political breaking point after a series of vintage Thatcher outbursts over both foreign and domestic policy.
Mr.
Major, who has to call a general election by next July, needs to be his own man, and did not much relish Mrs.
Thatcher's promise when she resigned to be an excellent back-seat driver.


Redmen's Experiment Almost Blows Up in the Lab
While St.
John's was busy experimenting with new lineups in its season opener at Alumni Hall last night, Niagara was slowly putting together a formula potent enough to nearly produce an upset.
The Redmen, ranked 10th in the nation in The Associated Press's preseason poll, and first in their conference by Big East coaches, barely escaped with a 73-64 victory over a squad that was picked to finish seventh in the nine-team Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference.


Managing; Hanging On to Diversity in the 90's
Some were acting from conscience.
Others were forced by consent decrees.
And many were responding to the demographic certainty that white men would be a work force minority by the century's end.
Whatever the reason, American corporations spent much of the last two decades hiring women and minorities -- and much of the last few years losing them.
As Faith A. Wohl, a director of human resources for E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, put it, "We were all so focused on recruiting them that no one thought about how to keep them."


Cleveland Indian Nickname Honors a Forgotten Baseball Hero
To the Editor:
Native Americans have indeed been maligned in image and reality by the North American invaders (letter, Nov. 10).
But amid outcries over the tomahawk chop and "Hail to the Redskins," the matter of the Cleveland Indians needs to be addressed.


An Apology, of Sorts, From a Senator
REPRIMANDED by the Senate ethics committee last week for his part in the Keating Five scandal, Senator Alan Cranston said he had "deep remorse" in his heart.
But he also had some defiance in there.
Of the five Senators accused of accepting large contributions from Charles H. Keating Jr. at the same time they were intervening with Federal regulators to save Mr.
Keating's collapsing savings and loan association, Mr.
Cranston, a California Democrat, raised the most money -- nearly $1 million -- and got the harshest punishment.
Senators Dennis DeConcini, an Arizona Democrat, and Donald W. Riegel Jr., a Michigan Democrat, were both admonished for giving the appearance of impropriety.
Senators John Glenn, an Ohio Democrat, and John McCain, an Arizona Republican, were cited for the lesser offense of exercising poor judgment.
Their misdeeds were not regarded as serious enough to warrant a hearing before the full Senate.
In Mr.
Cranston's case, however, the panel said the evidence called for "the fullest, strongest and most severe sanction which the committee has the authority to impose." The committee "strongly and severely" reprimanded him for acts it called "improper and repugnant."


Business Diary/November 17-22
COMPANIES Battle Shapes Up Over One of America's Last Areas of Dominance


Schools Are Challenged on Programs for the Retarded
A MENTALLY retarded fourth grader in Stamford is in a regular classroom for every subject except math and reading, but his parents say that is not enough.
The boy and three other children, who live in West Hartford, Wethersfield and Windham, are providing a test case through which an advocacy group is trying to force an overhaul of state rules on education for retarded youngsters.
The group, the Connecticut Association for Retarded Citizens, has filed suit in Federal District Court in Hartford, seeking to force those towns and the State Education Department of Education to pursue a policy of including such students in regular classrooms more often.
The association challenged state policy in 1978, when it filed a suit seeking to close the Mansfield Training School, claiming mentally retarded people had a right to live in the least restrictive setting possible.
The state agreed to transfer people from Mansfield into group homes and other living arrangements, and moving people from institutions has become state policy.


A Touch of Class at the Head of the Class
FOR nearly a decade, the luxury restaurant in the Garden City Hotel has been a barometer of Long Island top-drawer dining.
First, there was Cote D'or, then Giorgio's and now the Market Sea Grill.
For that special evening out, we have traveled from fancy French to elegant Italian to grilled fish.
Diners who remember the wood-paneled Old World ambience of Giorgio's will be surprised by the light airy look that the Market Sea Grill has achieved in the same space.
White walls and shining wood floors set the stage.
Wisely retained are the comfortable seating and widely spaced tables.


Soft Luggage
To the Editor: On the article on soft-sided vs. hard-sided luggage,
the problem is that most people take far too many clothes even for long trips.
When I first started on voyages of several weeks in 1950, a wise older traveler said, "You'll never be either the best or worst-dressed traveler, so stop trying." She was right.
For three weeks in China, or four weeks in the South Pacific, I managed with one carry-on.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL AROUND THE NATION
Worth Noting ARKANSAS (6-5, 5-3) defeated RICE (4-7, 2-6), 20-0, at Little Rock.
After 77 years, Arkansas played its last game in the Southwest Conference and also played its way into the Independence Bowl on Dec. 29 at Shreveport, La.
The Razorbacks needed the victory to reach the National Collegiate Athletic Association's minimum of six victories to accept a bowl bid.
E.
D.
Johnson became the first Arkansas back to rush for more than 100 yards (120 yards on 20 attempts) in a game this season.


YUGOSLAV RIVALS SIGN A CEASE-FIRE
A United Nations effort to bring a halt to the fighting in Yugoslavia achieved its first success today when the leader of separatist Croatia signed a cease-fire agreement with the Serbian leader and the head of the Serbian-led Yugoslav Army.
The United Nations mission by Cyrus R. Vance, a former American Secretary of State, calls for the dispatch of armed peacekeeping troops if a real cease-fire holds.


How to Quiet Down Those Noisy Valves
NOISES from water pipes and plumbing fixtures include high-pitched squealing, whistling and hissing, as well as banging, chattering and thudding.
Not only are plumbing sounds annoying, but they can also indicate problems that can lead to major damage.
If squealing, whistling or hissing occurs, it is usually when a faucet is on or when a toilet tank is refilling.
The sound is caused by water's flowing rapidly through a narrow restriction or past an obstruction.


This Week: Fall Cleaning
Continue to clean any dead leaves and annuals from the garden, and add them to the compost pile.
Rake the rest of the leaves and add them, too.
Clear dead leaves from the rose bed, and mound soil 10 to 12 inches high around the stems to protect the plant from winter damage.
Wait until the ground freezes to mulch the beds.
Wood chips, leaf mold, straw or pine needles make good winter mulch.


Helen Kener Weds
Helene Susan Kener, an account executive at Daniel J. Edelman Public Relations Worldwide, and Dr.
Richard Gray, a resident in oral and maxillofacial surgery at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, both in New York, were married yesterday evening in Tarrytown, New York.
Rabbi Robert Rothman officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill.
Mrs.
Gray, 25 years old, graduated from Barnard College; Dr.
Gray, 27, from Brandeis University.
He has a degree in dental medicine from the University of Pennsylvania.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Kener of Brooklyn.
The bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry Gray of Rye, N.Y.


Filling the Unmet Labor Needs
To the Editor:
"The Disability Dilemma" (Forum, Nov. 3) points out that employment prospects for people with disabilities are not as good as originally anticipated for white-collar jobs.
But American business cannot fill many millions of jobs annually in fast-food chains, department stores and other establishments that require employees for customer contact, technical information processing, telephone marketing and back-room activities.
Most American companies are regarding the Americans with Disabilities Act as an unabashed disaster.
The costs and administrative burdens cannot be denied.
But some companies have happily recognized the value of hiring the disabled and more will eventually realize that the law has the potential to wipe out a chronic and future shortage of qualified entry-level and skilled labor plaguing businesses.
The law also has the potential to turn 43 million formerly disenfranchised disabled citizens into consumers and taxpayers with spending power the economy badly needs.
STEPHEN E. MESSINGER  New York, Nov. 13


Israeli Prime Minister Meets With Mayor Dinkins


Mirror Image


GUARD SHOT DEAD IN QUEENS ROBBERY
A retired New York City police officer was shot to death yesterday by two men who robbed him and another guard of the cash they were loading into an armored van in front of a Macy's department store in Elmhurst, Queens, the police said.
The two robbers approached the guards from the Cash Room armored car service about 4:30 P.M. on a raised platform in the Macy's parking lot at 88-01 Queens Boulevard, Capt.
Bernard Gillespie said.


Paying for Fraud/A special report.; Mental Hospital Chains Accused of Much Cheating on Insurance
Investigators looking into psychiatric hospitals that are operated for profit have uncovered evidence of fraud and abuse in the filing of insurance claims that could run into millions of dollars.
The authorities say these investigations, coupled with earlier findings, suggest that insurance fraud and abuse may permeate the entire medical field and contribute significantly to the country's soaring health-care costs.


Medieval Serial Killer
THE TRIAL OF GILLES DE RAIS
By Georges Bataille.
Translated by Richard Robinson. 279 pp.
Los Angeles: Amok.
Paper, $12.95.


Miss Gilligan To Wed in April
Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Gilligan of Manasquan, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Patricia Elizabeth Gilligan to John Emmet White, a son of Mrs.
John H. Keating Jr. of Rumson, N.J. and the late Dr.
Richard L. White.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Gilligan, 26 years old, is a senior promotion writer and producer at WCVB-TV in Boston.
She graduated from Villanova University.
Her father is the director of sales for Jac Jacobsen Industries, a Greenwich, Conn., lighting concern.


Making a Difference; Barking Back Again for Big Oil
These are tough times to be a lobbyist for big oil.
Oil and gas supply most of America's energy, but the public and Congress, far from grateful, want the job done with less pollution.
The industry's image was so hurt by the Exxon Valdez spill and last year's sharp run-up in the price of gasoline -- even if that was Saddam Hussein's fault -- that oil companies have offered little resistance at times to their critics.
As the deadlines set by last year's Clean Air Act loom closer, however, the industry is complaining louder, and near the head of the pack is Charles J. DiBona, the president of the American Petroleum Institute since 1979.


Olajuwon Placed On Injured Reserve
Houston Rockets center HAKEEM OLAJUWON, hospitalized after suffering a fluttering heartbeat, was placed on the injured reserved list yesterday and won't be eligible to return until Dec. 5.
Olajuwon can begin full physical activity again after outpatient diagnostic tests are performed in 7 to 10 days, the team said.
He will remain hospitalized through the weekend at Memorial Hospital Southwest in Houston although he has been transfered out of the intensive care unit.


PENTAGON MAKING A LIST OF CHOICES FOR SPENDING CUTS
Fearful of a Congressional stampede on the military budget next year, the Pentagon is quietly preparing options for deeper long-term spending cuts than were planned and that President Bush could use to reclaim the initiative on the domestic front, senior Administration and Defense Department officials say.
The cuts, which would affect fundamental military programs, including troops, weapons purchases and military bases, could free as much as $50 billion over the next five years for use in other domestic programs at a time when Mr.
Bush is under growing attack by Democrats who assert that he has failed to address problems at home.


After the Cold War, Different Times, Different Stations
NOT since World War II have the listeners from the British Broadcasting Corporation's overseas monitoring service been so busy.
At their outpost in a former boys' school in rural Caversham, west of London, they work in relays before banks of dials and scanners, tuning in to the growing babble of faraway radio voices that fill the ether, bringing news of ferment and democratic rebellion in the Ukraine and Uzbekistan and Georgia.
Over the last four decades, the B.B.C., along with the Voice of America and Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, helped pry apart the first cracks in the Iron Curtain, their scratchy short wave broadcasts piercing the noise and static from jamming transmitters across the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.


Editorial Notebook; Making Israel Safer
Israel is a nightmare to defend so tiny it might be overrun in a surprise attack before the reserves, the vast bulk of its military forces, could be mobilized.
A visitor readily sees that Israel's first border on the east, the so-called Green Line, was almost literally indefensible; it followed no natural physical barriers and left Israel's urban and industrial heartland vulnerable to attack from the central hills, only 10 miles from cities on the Mediterranean.
A mortar in the mountains could shut down Ben Gurion Airport.
A tank could reach the coast in 20 minutes, a jet fighter in the wink of an eye.


On the Street; Patches: In, Not Down And Out
All the patched clothes seen around town recently were not a result of the present recession, nor yet of nostalgia for the Great Depression of the 1930's, when patching clothes was a necessity.
Today's patches are all about status and style.
Christian Francis Roth's clothes (at right and far right) have intricate patch inserts that are part of Mr.
Roth's designs.


Rutgers Is Eliminated as S.M.U. Wins by 3-2
There will be no third consecutive trip to the Final Four of the Division I soccer tournament for Rutgers, ranked first in the country in the coaches' poll earlier this month.
The Scarlet Knights were eliminated by Southern Methodist University, 3-2, in the second round of the N.C.A.A. tournament this afternoon before an enthusiastic crowd of 6,868 at Rutgers Stadium.


Miss Curran Wed on L.I.
Kathleen Marie Curran, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Curran of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to Brian John Granath, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Granath of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Paul F. Butler officiated at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from St.
John's University and was until recently a sales planner at MTV Network in New York.
Her father is a senior vice president of Ketchum Advertising in New York.
Mr.
Granath, 28, graduated from the University of Vermont.
He is an account executive in the sales department of the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network in New York.
His mother is an actress with the professional name Ann Flood.
His father is the president of Capital Cities/ABC Video Enterprises in New York.


With God on Their Sides
CULTURE WARS
The Struggle to Define America.
By James Davison Hunter. 416 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $25.


PEARL HARBOR IN THE MIND OF JAPAN
Weisman argues persuasively that the Japanese should admit that they were wrong to bomb Pearl Harbor and that they were, to an extent, responsible for their own suffering in Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
It seems to be a cultural habit to assess relative guilt.
But where does it get us?
Each side tends to hold fast to its opinion and goes away angrier than before.


Building a New Foreign Policy
To the Editor:
"The Next Persian Gulf Explosion" (Nov. 3) urges the Bush Administration to end the global quarantine of Iran and Iraq.
But neither nation has the slightest interest in constructively building a relationship with America.
The article is a stark reminder of the need for a new theme for American foreign policy.
Only with a consistent, coherent and comprehensive foreign policy will the Irans and Iraqs of the world understand that the new world order will benefit them when they are prepared to move toward us; not the other way around.
WILLIAM E. RAPFOGEL  New York, Nov. 7


Kathleen Flood Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
James Joseph Flood Jr. of Chevy Chase, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathleen Eleanor Flood to Marshall Bagley Reid, a son of Leslie Bagley Reid of Fishers Island, L.I., and Mrs.
Michael B. Wray of Richmond.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Flood, 27 years old, graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She is the vice president of marketing at JMW Settlements, specialists in structured settlements of insurance and other claims.
Her father is the senior partner in the law firm of Flood &amp; Ward in Washington.


Old Gamble By Prokofiev Still Pays Off
The biggest gamble of Fyodor Dostoyevsky's "Gambler" was the author's own: if he had not written the novel within a month, according to his contract the unscrupulous publisher would have gained the right to publish any of Dostoyevsky's books freely for 10 years.
The biggest gamble of Sergei Prokofiev's opera based on the 1866 novel was that he could turn this tale about a distasteful lot of obsessed characters waiting for Lady Luck into an effective opera.
Both men won their figurative wagers.
Dostoyevsky dictated the novel to a woman he would later marry, completing it the day before the deadline.
And while Prokofiev's opera languished for decades, appearing only intermittently in international productions, in its first production by an American company earlier this month at the Chicago Lyric Opera (where two final performances can be seen on Tuesday and next Sunday) it proved crisp and eminently effective.


Vanishing Act
With reports that it was signing a deal with the designer Oleg Cassini to start a national chain of specialty stores, Cascade International Inc. was flying high last summer.
As investors tried to get in on the ground floor of what seemed like a promising stock, shares of the company, which runs several strings of clothing and cosmetics boutiques, neared a peak of $12.
Then came the fall.
After accusations that Cascade, which is based in Boca Raton, Fla., misled investors about how many stores it owns, Victor G. Incendy, the chief executive, promised to clear matters up at a meeting last week in New York.
But on Monday it was canceled, and two days later the company announced that Mr.
Incendy had disappeared.
Trading in Cascade stock has been halted at $2.75 a share while an accounting company goes over the books.
Meanwhile the Federal Bureau of Investigation is looking into charges that Mr.
Incendy orchestrated stock transactions to inflate the price of Cascade shares.


Blame for New York's Budget Mess
If Gov.
Mario Cuomo really wants to run for President, he'll have to convince America that New York's fiscal mess -- the "New York Nightmare," in Vice President Quayle's alliterative words -- is Washington's fault.
Can Mr.
Cuomo legitimately claim that responsibility for the state budget deficit, newly doubled to $3.6 billion, lies outside Albany?
The short answer is no.
The long answer is, there's plenty of blame to go around.
Mr.
Cuomo cannot be blamed for the state's plunging economy, a product of the national recession.
Nor is it his fault that states with large populations of the poor have suffered since the Reagan years from deep cuts in Federal social programs.


Corrections
An art review on Oct. 20 about the exhibition "Discarded" at the Rockland Center for the Arts omitted the name of the curator.
A letter received by The Times on Nov. 14 pointed out that she is Joyce Abrams.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ARTISTS' COLONY
The home of American Impressionism is reviewed in an exhibition called "The Holy House: The Florence Griswold House in Old Lyme," through March 1.
The title derives from the nickname that the artists who boarded there bestowed upon it, in recognition of the devotion with which Miss Griswold welcomed and pampered them.


CAMPUS LIFE: U.C., Riverside; New World Technology Meets Sumo Wrestling
A crowd of more than 150 gathered outside the bell tower at the University of California, Riverside, last week, as the two competitors flexed their control switches and edged up to the starting line.
A moment later the two machines collided, and the first robot sumo wrestling competition in the United States had begun.
"Get out of my way!" shouted Thor, a shoe box-size robot equipped with a voice box, as it was slowly tried to push its rival, Beast, backward.
But its cries were in vain.
Beast, an acronym for Best Engineering for American Student Technology, locked onto Thor's wheel and quickly drove it out of the ring.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
AS usual, Msgr.
John P. Hourihan was rushing.
It was a Monday like any other on Mulberry Street in downtown Newark, but he was late, delayed by an unavoidable visit to the dentist.
He was hurrying back because he knew his parishioners had already started coming, wandering noiselessly up the cracked sidewalks and over the dead-end streets in pairs and ragged clusters but most often by themselves, single souls in a big city accompanied only by their own troubles and woes.
Out on Mulberry Street some got in line right away and others milled about, waiting for the telltale opening of the door beneath the rectory steps of St.
John's Roman Catholic Church through which more than 300 meals would be passed starting at 3:15 P.M.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My bathroom vanity is made of cultured marble, with the sink molded in as part of the top.
The area around the drain has become very worn.
I tried touching it up with a porcelain paint, but the result is not very attractive and the paint does not last long.
I hate to replace the entire vanity, as this would ruin the surrounding wall covering.
Is it possible to cut out the sink and then install a regular porcelain one in the same top?
A.
Assuming that the vanity's top material is structurally sound, I see no reason why you could not cut an opening in the top to accept a new sink.
The opening would have to be slightly larger than the existing sink, and so you would also have to buy a sink that was larger than the current one.
The new sink should be the kind that has a rim that will overlap the existing counter top when dropped into the new opening from above.
This rim will thus overlap and conceal the edges of the opening.


As Keating Case Comes to a Close, Confusion Over Ethics Rules Remains
Two years of inquiries into the relations between senators, lobbyists and campaign contributors ended this week in a tangle of mixed messages that left many senators unsure when their behavior crosses the line from upright to improper.
Lawmakers say they were shaken, and perhaps made more cautious, by the Senate Ethics Committee's rebukes to five Senators for their efforts on behalf of Charles H. Keating Jr., a savings and loan operator and major political donor.


In Monet's Light
THE TRAIN DOES NOT RUN TO VETHEUIL, a tiny river village about an hour northwest of Paris.
You can get there by taxi, but my driver assumes a slightly worried expression when informed of my destination and unfolds a large map.
Vetheuil is surrounded by quiet countryside, all yellow fields and red poppies and the Seine rising and falling.
It's one of those anonymous, blink-and-you-miss-it villages, with a center square that offers little more than a Frenchman's notion of the necessities -- a patisserie, a grocery, a dusty antiques shop cluttered with old dishes and the rare find.
And there's the obligatory cafe, with a tableful of men hunched over a game of cards.
Guidebooks will tell you that Claude Monet lived here in the 1870's, in the years before he moved to nearby Giverny and painted his famously blurry "Water Lilies." His former residence, a somber, green-shuttered house, sits squarely on a street now named for him.


For Now, Anyway, Taking Hostages Just Doesn't Pay
IN the eight-year ordeal of hostage-taking in Lebanon, the release of Terry Waite and Thomas M. Sutherland last week was a breakthrough.
Mr.
Waite, the Anglican Church envoy, was not only the last British hostage to be freed; he was also the most valuable, the one who had been both accused of spying and credited with resolving other Middle East hostage crises.
The Iranian-backed captors made predictions that the remaining Western hostages would be freed within weeks or even days and offered concessions -- however hollow -- that the hostage-taking in Lebanon had all been a mistake.
Finally, the captors dropped their insistence that Arab prisoners be released by Israel, simplifying matters and essentially dealing the Israelis out of what had been a three-way game.


Getting to the Best Part: Turkey Stuffings
THE best part of the Thanksgiving turkey, in my view, is the stuffing.
It is even better the following morning, eaten cold for breakfast.
While some people like to experiment with exotic flavorings, combining chorizos with dried apricots or adding jalapenos to corn bread, I prefer conventional stuffings.
When I was growing up, we used two stuffings in our turkey: chestnut at one end, sausage and apple at the other, and these remain my favorites.


Miss Cook Wed To Hans Kraus
Mariana Ruth Cook, a portrait photographer, and Hans Peter Kraus Jr., a photography dealer, historian and publisher, both in New York, were married in New York yesterday at the Puck Building.
Judge Whitman Knapp of Federal District Court in Manhattan performed the ceremony.
The bride, a graduate of Barnard College, is keeping her name.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John A. Cook of New York.
Her father is a psychoanalyst and her mother, Margaret H. Cook, is a translator of French, both in New York.
Mr.
Kraus, a graduate of Tufts University, is the son of Hanni Z. Kraus of New York and Ridgefield, Conn., a dealer in rare books and manuscripts, as was her late husband.


Sleeping Beauties
As the days get shorter and the nights longer, fashion goes under covers.
Today there's as much variety in what to wear to bed as there is in what to wear to work.
No-nonsense types can climb into their four-posters wearing classic men's pajamas and warm socks or a designer T-shirt.
Vamps, meanwhile, can choose from a vast selection of seductive satin and lace lingerie.


Social Events
Tribute to Robert Maxwell
Nov. 24 -- The YIVO Institute for Jewish Research will honor Elisabeth Maxwell and pay tribute to her late husband, the publisher Robert Maxwell, for the couple's support of the institute's studies of Eastern European and American Jewry.
The black-tie event at the Plaza starts with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 535-6700.


Sports Are More Than Games in the Groves of Academe
THE Footnote League has opened its season and the air is filled with flying hypotheses and the heady crunch of fresh ideas.
It is the time of academic conferences, and these days there are few meetings of historians or political scientists or sociologists without at least one session on the intricate relationship between sports and society.


Children's Books
A YOUNG PAINTER
The Life and Paintings of Wang Yani -- China's Extraordinary Young Artist.
By Zheng Zhensun and Alice Low.
Illustrated. 80 pp.
New York: A Byron Preiss/ New China Pictures Book/ Scholastic. $17.95. (Ages 8 and up)


Automaton With a Message
To the Editor:
The article "Screen Robots Tell a Tale of Mankind"  [ Nov. 3 ]  was very interesting but failed to mention the robot of salvation.
Remember the robot from "The Day the Earth Stood Still"?
He taught us that humankind could find peace by surrendering to a greater force.
DAVID T. GROSS New York


Recipe for Deadly Fire Is Prevalent in Southeast Queens
Three ingredients that equaled tragedy in the fire that killed five children and their grandfather on Friday night are all too common in parts of New York City like the victims' South Ozone Park neighborhood, safety experts say.
The three factors are old homes built of wood, overcrowding and a lack of smoke detectors, sprinklers, fire extinguishers or fire escapes.
The conditions are especially prevalent in southeastern Queens, which fire officials say has one of the highest fire fatality rates in the city.


Another View On Orthodontics
After reading the Oct. 27 article "Orthodontists Finding a Rise in Adult Patients," I was somewhat disappointed in the reporting of this current trend.
The majority of adults undergoing orthodontic treatment are female, and yet a female orthodontist was never interviewed on her viewpoint of this topic.
In addition, several pieces of information were inaccurate.
The actual age group we are seeking consists mostly of individuals in the late 20's to mid-50's.
If you surveyed the majority of orthodontists in New Jersey, you would find that very few have treated patients beyond the age of 60.


Do Giants Smell a Rout Against Bucs?
If the Giants are going to blow out an opponent this season, this is the day.
They will face the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in Florida before a rare sellout crowd at Tampa Stadium, and the Bucs appear to be worse than their 2-9 record.
On offense, they have turned over the ball 35 times, the most in the National Football League.
They rank last in passing, next to last in scoring.
Their quarterback, Vinny Testaverde, has been a long-term disappointment, partly because of nonsupport.


Review/Opera; 'The Consul' With Piano
Although the topics of "The Consul" are not exclusively contemporary, Gian Carlo Menotti's operatic melodrama of political oppression made its first appearance most conveniently in the middle of the Cold War.
Opening in Philadelphia and then on Broadway in 1950, it won -- among other prizes -- the Pulitzer.
"The Consul" reappeared in respectable but less glamorous circumstances at the New-York Historical Society on Friday night, semi-staged with piano accompaniment.
Two themes -- the frustrations of international bureaucracy and the unhappinesses of political dissidence -- are threaded together here.
A fugitive husband waits in the hills while his wife fends off secret police and tries to obtain an exit visa from an unnamed country's consulate.
It all ends badly.


The Economy as a Random Event
The President's market-spooking call for lower credit card interest rates and his quixotic attempt to cheerlead the economy out of recession hardly are encouraging signs for workers and families bearing the brunt of the current downturn.
Comparisons of George Bush's recent behavior with Gerald Ford's "Whip Inflation Now" campaign and Jimmy Carter's infamous "malaise" speech leave many Americans wondering whether the Bush Administration has any idea what is happening in the economy.
Some attribute the White House's bizarre behavior to jitters over the upcoming election.
Yet while election seasons often lead politicians to contemplate particularly inane policies, there is a growing sense that the Bush Administration truly does not understand what caused the recession and has no clue how to reverse the economy's slide.
Nor is it simply the case that George Bush is blaming the recession on factors unrelated to the downturn or supporting the wrong policies to get the economy growing again.
The Administration seems to lack any focused plan for the economy, even a bad one.


Amanda Kelly To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Robert Kelly of Bristol, R.I., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Kelly's daughter, Amanda Clarke Horn Kelly, to Howard Bock Cromey Courtemanche, a son of Mrs.
Edwin H. Cromey of Tuxedo Park, N.Y.
Miss Kelly is also the daughter of Charles A. Horn of Westport, Conn.
The wedding is to be in May.
The bride-to-be, 25 years old, is an account executive at the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi advertising concern in New York.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her stepfather is a pension consultant for Metropolitan Life in Warwick, R.I.
Her mother, Lynn Kelly, is the director of public relations for the Trinity Repertory Company, a theater company in Providence.
Mr.
Horn owns Bost Enterprises, a direct-marketing concern in Westport.


THE JOY OF OLD
After 55, good health is young.
Poor health is old.
There are no stages.
DOLORES HAGGERTY Medford, N.J.


Mystery! Woman
To the Editor:
Jeremy Brett's second wife, Joan, was not just a Boston TV executive; she was the creator, and until her death, the producer of the Mystery! series as well as producer of Masterpiece Theater.
FRANK GOODMAN New York
The writer is the press representative for Mystery! and Masterpiece Theater.


CANADA RETHINKS ITS HEALTH CARE
An unparalleled round of hospital staff layoffs and bed closings has hit Canada's national health-care system as it struggles against the biggest crunch in resources since the Medical Care Act came into effect in 1966.
Ontario, the richest and most populous province, where more than a third of Canadians live, has lost nearly 5,000 hospital jobs and 3,500 beds over the last two years.
In Toronto, the provincial capital, 2,900 of 15,000 acute-care beds have been taken out of service.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Howell 200,000
37 Driftwood Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, family room, deck, patio; taxes $4,243.
Hopatcong 260,000
12 Oakdale Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old raised ranch; lakefront property, boat port with patio, dock; taxes $6,839.
Jackson 120,000
16 Bennett Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 26-year-old ranch; family room, w/w carpeting, full basement, fenced yard; taxes $2,017.
Piscataway 133,900
237 Johnson Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old upgraded Cape Cod; fenced yard, dead-end street, full basement; taxes $2,000.
Ramsey 259,000
202 Norman Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old split level; fireplace, new baths, new Pella windows; taxes $4,532.
Waldwick 161,000
100A Grove Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 51-year-old Cape Cod; new kitchen, full basement; taxes $3,133.
OTHER AREAS Chappaqua, N.Y. 449,000
251 Millwood Road  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 39-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, family room, screened porch, 1.25 acres; taxes $9,354.
Bloomfield, Conn. 232,500
1 Haviland Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 50-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 0.33 acre; taxes $2,911.
Sayville, L.I. 138,000
46 Tariff Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33- year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, fireplace; taxes $4,400.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
BELOVED STREET AND SIGN
IF you are trying to find Sesame Street in Kings Park, you'd better look up.
The Sesame Street street sign has been stolen so many times that the Smithtown Traffic Department recently mounted it on a utility pole.


Dawn Staley and the Fine Art of Suggestion
She started with a pair of high-tops.
Dawn Staley's powers of persuasion began long before she would become the national player of the year, leading the University of Virginia to a 31-3 record and a spot in the 1991 championship game.
Staley was just a highly recruited freshman, a veteran of competition with boys and men in north Philadelphia, all promise and flash and attitude.


CAMPUS LIFE: Southwestern; An Open Forum Sets Off Debate On Racial Issues
Angry exchanges between the dean of students at Southwestern University and the College Republicans, a student group, have generated campuswide discussions over racism and affirmative action.
The talks flared into heated disputes during a recent debate of the issues.
About 350 students, faculty members and administrators attended the open forum at which Dinesh d'Souza, author of "Illiberal Education," argued that scholarships should be based on socio-economic need, not on race, and that multicultural curriculums are so politicized that they shut off discussion.
His opponent, Evan Carton, an English professor at the University of Texas at Austin, insisted that Mr. d'Souza was the spokesman for a predominantly white, male and monied crowd.


Miami, Now at No. 1, Ignores New Believers
One week and more than a thousand miles removed from the climax of their perfect season, the University of Miami Hurricanes went about the formality of securing a fourth unofficial national college football championship in nine seasons.
The final stage of their task, beginning tonight against Boston College, may not be as simple as it appears.
Have you ever tried to set up assigned seating on a bandwagon?


Abortion Mills Thriving Behind Secrecy and Fear
It is a shadowy business, the unregulated world of abortion mills, shabby clinics operating behind the facades of doctors' offices, often in poor neighborhoods.
Its victims are women who know little about legal rights or medical options, who have seen an ad or heard a tip and come to this -- driven by fear and loneliness or fates beyond invention -- to risk butchery on a table.
No one knows how many such fly-by-night surgeries there are in New York City or how many abortions they produce.
But law-enforcement officials and medical experts say dozens of these clinics are believed to be tucked away behind storefronts and in more ordinary-looking doctors' offices and they are believed responsible for scores or even hundreds of illegal or incompetent abortions annually.


Rising Tension Imperils Lebanon's Leadership
Barely a year since the guns of this country's 15-year civil war fell silent, continued scattered outbreaks of factional violence and a fitful economic recovery are fueling political tensions that threaten the Government of President Elias Hrawi.
The discord took an ominous turn on Friday when Prime Minister Omar Karami threatened to resign.
Mr.
Karami's threat was made in a fit of pique at a military parade in Beirut marking the 48th anniversary of independence from France.
Mr.
Karami was heard to say he felt slighted because he was not received by an honor guard when he arrived at the reviewing stand, and would resign.


Jet Hoping to Sack an Old Friend
Before Green Bay came to Giants Stadium on Nov. 3, Marvin Washington was leading the Jets in quarterback sacks with six, two more than his fellow defensive end Jeff Lageman had.
After the Packers had been beaten, the two Jets were tied at six.
Now, Washington, still at six, is one behind Lageman.
Lageman was especially pumped for the Green Bay game because he was rushing in against quarterback Don Majkowski, one of his former teammates at the University of Virginia, and someone whom he didn't particularly get along with.
Lageman ended up sacking Majkowski twice, then he got another sack last week against the New England Patriots' Hugh Millen.


Jill Kreitman, A Rabbi, Wed
Rabbi Jill Kreitman, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Benjamin Z. Kreitman of Brooklyn, was married last night to Dr.
Corey Lance Goldstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard I. Goldstein of Staten Island.
The bride's father officiated at Central Synagogue in New York.
Rabbi Kreitman, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the assistant Rabbi of the Community Synagogue of Port Washington on Long Island.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in Hebrew literature from Hebrew Union College, where she was ordained.
Her father is the executive vice chairman of the World Council of Synagogues in New York, and the executive vice president emeritus of the United Synagogue of America in New York.


Making a Difference; Setting the Pace On Discounts
With their industry awash in red ink, most airline executives say that only increased traffic and higher fares can restore profitability.
But USAir has set its rivals' teeth on edge by periodically offering discount fares -- most recently, earlier this month -- and some analysts think the carrier may be on the right track.
The credit for the move -- or the blame -- must go to Seth E. Schofield, the 52-year-old president and chief executive of USAir Group and its principal subsidiary, USAir, based in Arlington, Va.


Q and A
Decontrolled Rent Question: If a one-bedroom, rent-controlled unit with a maximum base rent of $600 a month is vacated, and another one-bedroom apartment in the same building is renting for $1,200, will the decontrolled one-bedroom apartment automatically rent for a minimum of $1,200 too? . . .
Marjory Rice, Manhattan Answer: No.
The new rent would depend on several factors.
The procedure for setting rents after a tenant moves out of a rent-controlled apartment in New York City is spelled out in Section 25-22.3 of the Rent Stabilization Code.
This applies to apartments in buildings with six or more units constructed before Jan. 1, 1974.
The code says, in part, that the landlord of a decontrolled apartment has the right to set the first rent at a fair market level, which means what a similar apartment would rent for in the neighborhood.
However, the first tenant after decontrol has the right to challenge that rent if he believes it exceeds what is fair for the market.
The landlord must file an initial rent registration form, which includes the new rent, with the State Division of Housing and Community Renewal.
The landlord must also give the tenant a copy of the form, via certified mail, within 90 days of the tenant's occupancy.
"The tenant then has 90 days to challenge the rent," said Joseph D'Agosta, an assistant commissioner for the agency.
"If there is no protest, the rent is set and all future increases are calculated on the stabilized rent."
If the tenant objects to the rent and the housing agency agrees that it exceeds the fair market rate, the new stabilized rent can be calculated in one of two ways.
In one formula, it is determined by adding 15 percent to the maximum base rent of the controlled apartment.
In the other, that figure -- the M.B.R. plus 15 percent -- is added to rents on similar apartments in the same building, and then the average of those two figures provides the new stabilized rent.
The rent registration forms and forms for the Fair Market Rent Appeal are available at the central rent administration office, 92-31 Union Hall Street, Jamaica, Queens, and in the rent office in each borough office.
In Manhattan they are at 156 Williams Street, ninth floor, and 163 West 125th Street, fifth floor.
More information is available by calling the Rent Administration Hotline at (718) 739-6400.
The Legal Fee on a Sale Question: I recently inherited a co-op apartment, which I plan to sell.
I understand that the board of directors requires that the seller pay not only his own legal fees, but also the fee of the lawyer handling the co-op's involvement in the sale.
Is this legal? . . .
Jo G. Trabucco, Woodside, Queens Answer: Yes.
Marc Luxemberg, a lawyer specializing in real estate matters, said it is common for co-op proprietary leases to require that legal fees be paid by the shareholder in cases involving the sale or transfer of shares.
If the co-op uses the standard proprietary lease, he said, this provision will probably be in paragraph 16.
"If this owner refuses to pay the co-op's legal fees," said Mr.
Luxemberg, "the board would be within its right to reject the sale."  New Rule for Tenants Question: Recently I received a notice from the managing agent for my co-op concerning an extra payment for subletting.
The board of directors has decided that after next January there will be another charge on subletting apartments.
As I recall, the bylaws mention an initial fee for approved sublets.
Can the board pass new fees without amending the bylaws? . . .
Rosalyn Levin, Brooklyn Answer: They probably can.
The bylaws of most co-ops give boards the authority to establish fees, among them sublet fees and flip taxes.
Moreover, the right of boards to levy or increase fees without the specific approval of the shareholders has been upheld by the courts.
But to determine if the board has exceeded its authority, you should check the language of your co-op's documents.


Irving Penn Is Difficult. 'Can't You Tell?'
Irving Penn never wanted fame but had the misfortune of being so talented he could not keep it at bay.
Now 74, he has in his time staged a one-man revolution in fashion photography, created uncommonly enduring advertising images, aroused controversy with overrefined pictures of headhunters and chieftains' wives, and found graphic splendor in cigarette butts.
While his stark, close-up portraits of major figures in the arts like Barnett Newman and Truman Capote underlined and validated their celebrity on the pages of Vogue, he fought to keep fame at arm's length from himself.
His new book, "Passage: A Work Record" (Callaway/Alfred A. Knopf), which he designed, was recently awarded the Prix Nadar in France for the best photographic book of the year.
One show, "Irving Penn: 48 Portraits Made in 1948," is at Pace MacGill, 32 East 57th Street in Manhattan, through Saturday; another, "Irving Penn: Master Images," which closed last Sunday at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, will re-open in January at the Norton Gallery in West Palm Beach, Fla.


Review/Dance; Tale From Ancient Egypt
Old-fashioned storytelling is not much in fashion today.
But Abdel Salaam, a choreographer who marches to his own quiet drumbeat, has chosen to work that vein, and he is clearly onto something.
Mr.
Salaam still has a way to go.
But his "Coming Forth by Day," presented by his Forces of Nature Dance Company on Thursday night at Aaron Davis Hall at City College, takes something old and makes a new thing of it.
It is homespun spectacle, committed story-telling, and pageantry with a human face and a dancer's electric energy.
It needs tightening, but it flows with the ease and imperturbability of an ancient river.
Based on the Egyptian Book of the Dead, the two-act piece incorporates dramatic theater and several styles of dance to reflect on a pre-dynastic ritual of resurrection that helped the deceased through the underworld and subsequent spiritual development.


Children's Tales On Stage In London
With the coming of the holiday season, London's theaters are preparing to serve up the usual Christmas glitter, from Scrooge and fairy-tale pantomimes to dancing sugarplums.
But for lovers of fantasy and epic children's literature, there is a richer than usual choice in the West End this season.
The vainglorious Toad, along with Mole and Rat, have returned in Alan Bennett's witty musical adaptation of "The Wind in the Willows," one of the hits of the 1990 season.
It opened earlier this month at the Olivier.


Homeless Benefit From West Side Book Fair
The cartons of books began trickling into the Goddard Riverside Community Center on the Upper West Side months ago, eventually spilling from the storeroom into the exercise room and squeezing out the weekly classes for the elderly.
By yesterday some 20,000 books, donated by more than 100 publishers, had overwhelmed the place, attracting hundreds of book buyers and browsers -- all to raise money to fight homelessness.
The founder of the New York Book Fair to Aid the Homeless, Donald Porter, concedes that as sympathy for homeless people has waned, it has become more difficult to raise money to combat the problem.
The book fair, he added, relied on an irresistible lure: "People come because they want cheap books for Christmas."


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Sept. 29 about the Swiss Pass, which allows free travel on trains, rural buses and boats in Switzerland, referred incorrectly to one of its benefits.
A reader has recently pointed out that free rides on tramways and buses in Swiss cities are not new; they have been a benefit since 1989; the number of cities in which free rides are allowed with the pass rose this year to 30, not 25.


Buyers Insist a Bigger House Is Better
ARCHIE AND TERRI SIMONS of Newtown, Conn., are 40 years old.
They have two incomes.
They plan no children.
Edward and Kaye VanDyke of Fairfield, Conn., are in their 50's.
They each have careers.
Their three children have grown up and moved away.


Miss Serchuk to Wed Edward Segal
Ivan Serchuk of Waccabuc, N.Y., and Phoebe Satlin of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Camille Serchuk, to Edward Alan Segal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Segal of New York.
Miss Serchuk, 27 years old, is a Ph.D. candidate in art history at Yale University.
A graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, she was until recently the assistant registrar and archivist at the Pierpont Morgan Library in New York.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm of Serchuk &amp; Zelermyer in White Plains.
Her mother, who is retired, was an accountant in New York.


Britain and Argentina Move on Falklands Oil
In a delicate maneuver orchestrated by the British and Argentine Governments, Britain says it is opening the waters around the Falkland Islands to oil exploration, a move that some say could lead to the discovery of large new oil fields.
At the same time, Argentina announced on Friday that President Carlos Saul Menem had signed a decree claiming all of its continental shelf for Argentine commercial development, including the Falkland Islands.


IN SHORT/SMALL PRESSES: FICTION
QUICKSAND  By Emmanuel Bove.  Marlboro Press, $18.95.


Navratilova in Final


Artful Simplicity, Tuscan-Inn Style
FAIRFIELD COUNTY is doubly blessed with the opening within weeks of each other of two excellent Italian restaurants. (Bella Luna, in Greenwich, was reviewed here Oct. 3.) Now, Sole e Luna has opened in Westport.
To add to the pleasure, each has created the warm, welcoming atmosphere of a Tuscan farmhouse or inn.
Sole e Luna, which calls itself a ristorante Toscano, sets the tone with a whimsically decorated oven, visible through a large window as you enter.
To spark one's appetite, a table of vegetable dishes (a tavola fredda or cold table) is at the entrance to the large dining room.
Natural wood floors, post-and-beam construction, rush-bottom chairs and white walls add to the Tuscan inn look.
Sole e Luna's hallmarks are freshness and simplicity, not lavish saucing or ornately complex creations.
The best dishes are the most straightforward.
For instance, as a starter nothing surpassed portobello alla griglia, a fresh, meaty grilled portobello mushroom that covered the entire plate was drizzled with extra-virgin olive oil.
It sufficed -- exquisitely.
A grilled fillet of pearly white swordfish (spada griglia alla benedetta) with garlic and sage, was accompanied by three perfect asparagus spears.
Again, the union of first-rate ingredients prepared with expert simplicity triumphed.
The triumph continued with the tavola fredda, eight vegetables served at room temperature: paper-thin slices of pleasingly charred eggplant, grill-brushed cauliflower, red and yellow peppers, olives scented with bay leaf, rosemary and garlic, fire-etched onion wedges, white beans, marinated beet and elegant whole green beans with slivers of red pepper.


Cleveland Indian Nickname Honors a Forgotten Baseball Hero; Kansas City's Chief
To the Editor:
It is logical to believe, along with LaMar Miller and Joshua P. Bogin (letter, Nov. 10), that the Chiefs of Kansas City were named after the Indian sort.


Filling In The Resume
To the Editor:
The article about Hugh Wolff, conductor-to-be of the St.
Paul Chamber Orchestra  [ "A Conductor Scales Down to Move Up," Nov. 3 ] , did not mention that Mr.
Wolff left the National Symphony for several years to conduct the Northeast Philharmonic Orchestra in the Wilkes-Barre-Scranton area.


Making a Difference; Changing Channels
Albert D. Jerome has been a broadcaster for 25 years, working at one time or another for all three major networks.
But, Mr.
Jerome says, "The business isn't all broadcasting anymore. The business is anything that comes through a television set."
Which helps to explain why Mr.
Jerome announced last week that he would be leaving NBC, where he has been president of the network's station division for the last nine years, to become head of one of the businesses that has established itself by sending something different through TV's.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
Auto sales, annual rate, millions
5.7
6.1
Tuesday
Consumer confidence index
60.4
63.0
Wednesday
Durable goods orders, percent change
-3.2
1.3
Personal consumption, percent change
0.9
0.3
Personal income, percent change
0.5
0.3
Monday: Existing home sales for October *
Japan and European Community meet for trade talks *
European finance ministers meet in Brussels *
Two-year Treasury note auction *
OPEC meeting begins in Vienna
Tuesday: Third-quarter corporate profits *
Five-year Treasury note auction *
Mortgage delinquency survey
Wednesday: Third-quarter balance of payments
Thursday: Thanksgiving, markets closed
(Sosurce: I.D.E.A. Inc)


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 24, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $6.99.) The experiences of a couple on a trek across Europe during the ice age.
2
2
UNIFICATION, by Jeri Taylor. (Pocket, $4.99.) In this "Star Trek" story, the Enterprise crew tries to discover why Spock has made a forbidden trip.
3
5
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
4
4
THE EAGLE HAS FLOWN, by Jack Higgins. (Pocket, $5.99.) A German attempt to rescue a paratrooper who tried to assassinate Churchill.
5
11
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
6
4
HOCUS POCUS, by Kurt Vonnegut. (Berkley, $5.99.) Life in the near future, as noted by a college professor and prison administrator.
7
13
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four tales of late-night horror.
8
22
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
9
4
THE RIFT, by Peter David. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" novel.
10
1
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician's successful cloning of dinosaurs for use in a theme park leads to a global emergency.
11
3
POSSESSION, by A. S. Byatt. (Vintage, $12.) A pair of British academics pursue the relationship between two Victorian poets.
12
18
THE MUMMY, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Ramses the Great and Cleopatra return to life in Edwardian England.
13 *
6
RENDEZVOUS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $4.99.) A freethinking British woman engaged to an earl has some second thoughts.
14
2
SNARE OF SERPENTS, by Victoria Holt. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A Victorian-age Scottish woman flees to Africa to escape a suspicion of murder.
15 *
1
22 INDIGO PLACE, by Sandra Brown. (Fanfare/ Bantam, $4.50.) A bad boy from the wrong side of the tracks, now a millionaire tycoon, comes to buy an heiress's mansion and win her heart.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
27
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
2
19
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
3
3
A LIFE ON THE ROAD, by Charles Kuralt. (Ivy, $5.99.) The memoirs of the television newscaster.
4 *
420
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
5
105
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
6
20
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
7
35
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspiration.
8
4
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, feel, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
9 *
5
SEXUAL PERSONAE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $15.) The case for regarding all art as a pagan battleground between male and female, form and chaos, civilization and demonic nature.
10 *
28
WHEN RABBIT HOWLS, by the Troops for Truddi Chase. (Jove, $4.95.) A woman voices the 92 personalities that live within her.
11 *
4
DAVE BARRY TURNS 40, by Dave Barry. (Fawcett, $10.) Reflections on the crises of middle age by the syndicated humorist.
12 *
49
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
8
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
4
UNNATURAL SELECTIONS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Far Side" cartoons.
3
15
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
69
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
5
49
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


What Did You Say?
Custom-made earplugs seem to be the latest rage among football teams playing in high-decibel indoor stadiums.
According to RANDY MORGAN, president of Westone Laboratories, which makes a promising new line in Colorado Springs, the plugs, which are specially fitted to individual players, are designed to filter crowd noise down to 15 decibels, "a level where the ear can accept it."
His latest clients, the Denver Broncos, plan to use the new earplugs when they play the Seahawks in the Seattle Kingdome this afternoon, according to Morgan.
He said his other clients include the New Orleans Saints and the Minnesota Vikings. (AP)


Robin Zeilberger and Sanford Burns Are Wed
Robin Ilse Zeilberger, a daughter of Elaine and Fred Zeilberger of Cedarhurst, L.I., was married there yesterday to Sanford Burns, the son of Eleanor and Richard Burns of Wantagh, L.I.
Rabbi Moshe Edelman officiated at Temple Beth El.
The bride, who graduated from Tulane University, is 29 years old.
She is an assistant vice president in New York for the banking concern of CIC-Union Europeenne International in Paris.


World Markets; Equities March Their Separate Ways
When stock markets worldwide fall as they did early last week, it fosters the belief that they always dance to the same tune -- in this case the 4.3 percent swoon of the Dow Jones industrial average from Friday, Nov. 15, through last Tuesday.
Actually, markets around the world do not move in lockstep very often.
And because of the weakness of the correlation among world markets, European stocks could offer an interesting opportunity for Americans in the next several months, especially if Wall Street declines slowly.


Honecker Reported To Ask to Be Sent To Chile for Exile
The former East German Communist leader Erich Honecker, wanted by Germany on manslaughter charges, has told Soviet officials he wants to live out his life in Chile with his family, a German magazine reported today.
"I am seeking a humanitarian solution with a family reunion in Chile," Stern magazine quoted Mr.
Honecker as telling Deputy Foreign Minister Yuri Deryabin of the Soviet Union.


Coins
In 1898, an American business traveler did what a lot of us do today: He brought home a few foreign coins from his trip.
The traveler went to Hawaii, and the coins he acquired there will be part of an auction at Christie's next month.
Hawaii was a confusing place in the late 19th century.
It was still an independent kingdom, but was rapidly filling with American and European businessmen and missionaries from New England.
And the Hawaiians' economy was slowly eroding as the old feudal system was supplanted.


Elizabeth Sloan Marries Avi Kaner
Elizabeth Ellen Sloan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton J. Sloan of Manhasset, L.I., was married last evening to Avi Kaner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Israel Kaner of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
Rabbi David H. Chanofsky officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Kaner, 25 years old, is a portfolio administrator at Globe Finlay, a New York investment management concern.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father owns seven stores he calls Associated Supermarkets in Manhattan and the Bronx.
Her mother, Judith Sloan, is an administrator in the grants office of the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, L.I.


The Executive Life; Japanese Benevolence, Low-Profile Indeed
Yasuyuki Katoh and Ryosei Kojima are snaking their way through midday Manhattan traffic toward Harlem.
It's a chilly fall day, and the two businessmen are snug inside a chauffered car.
Dressed in dark suits and white shirts, they have an animated conversation in Japanese about the passing sights.
As the glittering skyscrapers give way to vacant, worn out buildings, their conversation grows hushed, then halts.
At the corner of Broadway and 138th Street, a seedy strip littered with crack vials, the limousine glides to a stop near a big blue motor home parked at the curb.
A line of small children clinging to their mothers huddles outside.
Gingerly elbowing through, Mr.
Katoh and Mr.
Kojima board the vehicle.
The crowd eyes them warily, glancing at their sleek briefcases and polished shoes.


INSIDE
12 Billion Light-Years Away
Astronomers reported a revealing glimpse into the creation of galaxies: a vast cloud of carbon monoxide near the fringe of the universe.
Page 25.
Fire in Queens
The fire that killed five children and their grandchildren on Friday night was caused by faulty wiring, fire officials say.
Page 40.
Iraq Frees Imprisoned Briton
Baghdad freed a jailed British businessman in return for the unfreezing of funds in London and agreed to let the U.N. continue its humanitarian efforts in Iraq for six months.
Page 7.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
African Violets Q.
My African violets are under fluorescent lights.
They have tall leaves but no blossoms.
I have fed them and avoided overwatering, but this "dormant period" seems unduly long.
What can I do to bring them into bloom? -- Sarah Hamburg, New York.


POSTINGS: Bedford Hills Saga; The Rough Road to Rentals
An on-again, off-again plan to develop moderate-income apartments is finally nearing completion in the Westchester County community of Bedford Hills, where 64 one-bedroom units, with rents ranging from $542 to $810 a month, are scheduled for occupancy by the end of the year.
The developer, Norman Hoberman, president of Bedford Lake Development Corporation, based in Bedford Lake, has spent five years mired in a series of problems, which began with the onset of the region's real estate slump in 1987 and included the failure of his construction lender, the Connecticut Bank and Trust Company.


Holy Cross Brushes Off Colgate for No. 20
Holy Cross barely beat Fordham a week ago, so the Crusaders' record-breaking winning streak appeared to be in jeopardy this afternoon against Colgate, a much more formidable opponent than the Rams.
After losing four of their first five games, the Red Raiders had won three of their last four.
And those last four contests counted the most since all were against Patriot League rivals.
That gave Colgate a 3-1 record in the fledgling league and meant that a victory this afternoon would give it a tie for first place with the Crusaders.


Racial Politics: Back With a Vengeance
RACE-RELATED issues are a staple of modern politics, but rarely has the subject seemed as raw or as close to the surface as it does now, as the country heads into the 1992 campaign.
Some political professionals say racial issues may be more prominent in this election than they have been in 20 years, when the painful battles over busing and civil rights, and the candidacies of George Wallace, kept the subject front and center in Presidential politics.


Surprise! The Sprain Was Designed for Speed
I read with a combination of amusement and amazement your article about the state troopers and highway traffic enforcement  [ "Tracking Speeders on the Sprain," Nov. 10 ] .
The amusing part is how simple relationships elude the self-protective mind.
The troopers claim to have a problem enforcing the speed limit on the Sprain Brook Parkway.
The article then explains it was designed to be a high-speed road, making me wonder why the troopers are surprised people speed.
Were they truly interested in slowing traffic down, the troopers would urge road redesign.


D. B. Cooper, Still Among Us
Twenty years ago today, D. B. Cooper skyjacked a Northwest Airlines Boeing 727 and bailed out over a densely wooded area of Washington State.
He was ahead of his time.
Back in 1971, every skyjacker was going to Cuba.
Skyjacking was a political statement.
Cooper, the only American skyjacker who has never been caught, was a harbinger of the go-go 1980's: he did it for the money.
He also did it in a business suit and loafers.
Very un-1971.
He said he had a bomb.
During the flight, a milk run from Portland to Seattle, he demanded $200,000 and two sets of parachutes.
After landing in Seattle, where the 36 passengers were released and Cooper's demands were met, the plane took off for Reno.
Somewhere over Washington he climbed down the aft stairway, the $200,000 (10,000 $20 bills in a bank bag weighing 21 pounds) strapped to his belly.
At 10,000 feet, in a storm, the wind was gusting at 200 miles an hour.
Visibility was zero.


The Whole Untruth
LIVES, LIES AND THE IRAN-CONTRA AFFAIR
By Ann Wroe.
Illustrated. 341 pp.
New York: I.B.
Tauris &amp; Company/ St.
Martin's Press. $24.95.


PEARL HARBOR IN THE MIND OF JAPAN
It seems that Japan has launched an attack upon the truth in its rationalizations about Pearl Harbor: 1) The United States was informed in advance; 2) The Japanese didn't know much about the war at the time, and still don't; 3) Hirohito couldn't have stopped the attack if he had wanted to; 4)Japan was the victim, not the victimizer; 5) It was a long time ago, let's forget it; 6) Japan is peaceful now.
Contrast this with the soul-searching that the United States has gone through over its mistakes -- the mistreatment of American Indians and blacks, the relocation of Japanese-Americans during World War II, the Vietnam War.
GERALD W. GRUMET, M.D.
Rochester


News From Lake Wobegon


Classic Stylist


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
LEHMAN 18, CANARSIE 12 -- Quarterback David Niskanen (7 of 11 for 140 yards) found Robert Talley twice in the end zone and Brian Underwood rushed four yards for the other score to lift Canarsie into the Public Schools Athletic League A championship game against Kennedy.
Kennedy defeated Lincoln, 6-2, yesterday to gain their championship berth.
Talley (9 tackles) and Noel Santiago (7 tackles) led the defense.
Billy Devito picked off a pass to increase Lehman's incredible season interception total to 28.


Junk Science in the Courtroom
To the Editor:
In her review of "Galileo's Revenge" by Peter W. Huber (Oct. 13), Elisabeth Rosenthal endorses his "solution for getting junk science out of the courtroom": "Expert witnesses  [ should ]  represent currently accepted scientific theories rather than their own, sometimes fringe beliefs." If this doctrine had been used in Galileo's trial for heresy, he would have been quickly convicted.
In his day, the "currently accepted scientific theories" made the earth the center of the universe.


S. M. Levy Wed To Ms. Madison
Felicia Joy Madison, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Madison of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., was married last evening to Sander Morton Levy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Levy of North Palm Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Howard Hirsch performed the ceremony at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Levy, 26 years old, is an account supervisor in New York for City Magazine Network.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of the Mechanics Business Machine Corporation in Manhattan.
Her mother, Joby Madison, is an accounting supervisor for Larry Tucker Inc., a direct-marketing concern in Woodcliff Lake.


1992 Spending Cuts Anger County Employees
AFTER nearly a decade of yearly combat over the budget, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke and the Board of Legislators appear to have found common ground in the proposed 1992 spending plan.
But the budget that the departing County Executive says "gives taxpayers some breathing space" has angered county employees.
Mr.
O'Rourke, nominated by President Bush for a Federal judgeship, is expected to leave office by next summer.
In presenting his budget proposal, he said he was redeeming a pledge made a year ago that he "would not increase county taxes if Albany approved a sales tax increase."


What Do the Creatures Do in Winter?
IT was a mouse's nest, at least that is what it appeared to be.
The evidence was taken to two natural-history buffs.
They confirmed the suspicion: a mouse had been at work.
The material was an accumulation of chewed-up leaves, tiny bits of tree bark and dainty pieces of gnawed wood.
The gnawed wood was the giveaway.
This is how it was discovered.
There had been a frost one night, and the impatiens growing in several redwood tubs was killed; by morning the showy annuals were a sad looking mess.


IN SHORT/SMALL PRESSES: NONFICTION
THE TIBER AFIRE By Fabio Della Seta. Marlboro Press, $19.95.


Schneider Helps Hyperactive Children
I am writing to respond to "Helping Hyperactive Children Fit In"  [ Oct. 20 ] .
Your article highlighted the importance of the correct diagnosis and treatment of youngsters with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder.
Unfortunately, your article suggested that treatment programs for this disorder are rare on Long Island.
Please be aware that the division of child and adolescent psychiatry of Schneider Children's Hospital and the Long Island Jewish Medical Center is the leading clinical and research center for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in the metropolitan area.


Smoking
To the Editor: William E. Schmidt underlines several key points in "Smoking Permitted" (Sept. 8), though he may not realize it.
Americans have become violent and self-centered to a point of absurdity.
He states that smokers are viewed as "dangerous social deviants." They have by many, to a point where dangerous criminal acts will go without notice, but a smoker will be met with a violent reaction.


Yankees' Fiscal Policy Offers Less for More
The signs are so unmistakably there, it's deja vu all over again, as Yogi Berra, who played for and managed both teams, maybe said.
The Yankees resemble the Mets of the M. Donald Grant years, and the Yankees' fans may have to adopt the same strategy as the Mets' fans of those years.
Because Grant, who ran the team for Lorinda deRoulet, refused to spend money on free agents, contending that his way would be proved right, the Mets steadily deteriorated in the late 70's.
Refusing to accept repeated last-place finishes, the fans dwindled too, reaching a franchise-low 788,905 in 1979.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My bathroom vanity is made of cultured marble, with the sink molded in as part of the top.
The area around the drain has become very worn.
I tried touching it up with a porcelain paint, but the result is not very attractive and the paint does not last long.
I hate to replace the entire vanity, as this would ruin the surrounding wall covering.
Is it possible to cut out the sink and then install a regular porcelain one in the same top?
A.
Assuming that the vanity's top material is structurally sound, I see no reason why you could not cut an opening in the top to accept a new sink.
The opening would have to be slightly larger than the existing sink, and so you would also have to buy a sink that was larger than the current one.
The new sink should be the kind that has a rim that will overlap the existing counter top when dropped into the new opening from above.
This rim will thus overlap and conceal the edges of the opening.


Butchers' Time Capsule Honors Slaughterhouse
Unhappily, this is a bloodless tale.
Something of the history of the city's butchers was unveiled on Thursday, and, to the disappointment of preservationists, the raw material wasn't great.
The occasion was nonetheless an unusual one, the opening of a time capsule dating from 1904 that was recovered on Oct. 25 during the demolition of a West Side building that had been vacant since 1982.


GAS CLOUD FOUND AT UNIVERSE'S EDGE
A vast cloud of gas molecules has been detected near the fringe of the observable universe, giving astronomers a revealing glimpse into the earliest stars in the firmament and the creation of galaxies.
Astronomers reported in The Astronomical Journal, being published this week, that the cloud had at least 100 times the mass of the Milky Way galaxy, making it the largest such object ever observed.
And it appears to be the most distant object found to harbor molecules -- in this case, carbon monoxide.


February Bridal For Ginny Byers
Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Byers of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Virginia Dwight Byers to Frederic Eustis Churchill Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Churchill of Grafton, Mass.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Byers, 23 years old, is known as Ginny.
She is a management associate in the Global Finance Training Program at Citibank in New York.
She is a graduate of Williams College, as is her fiance.
Her father is the president of the Travel Alliance, a group travel agency in New York and Greenwich.
Her mother, Victoria Byers, is the development director for the Hackley School in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Hong Kong
To the Editor: I read with great interest the article on Hong Kong's islands by Simon Elegant.
Unfortunately, Mr.
Elegant did not mention one of the most interesting (and outlying) of the islands, Tap Mun.


Meanwhile, Back in Bochco Land
There is something intriguingly subversive about Steven Bochco.
One of television's most successful producers, he has a habit of going against the grain of entrenched programming.
"Hill Street Blues" (NBC, 1981-87) transformed the standard cop show into a weekly portrait gallery of society's rejects and misfits, more than a few of them carrying police badges.
"L.A. Law," now in its sixth season on NBC, uses the pretext of court cases to provide continuing testimony as to what laughable, silly, devious, grasping fools we mortals be.
Even the Bochco failures, most notably last year's "Cop Rock" on ABC, with its operatic ambitions, evince a healthy contempt for standard formula.
Mr.
Bochco -- or at least Steven Bochco Productions -- is once again taking a walk on the anything-but-mild side with a new ABC series called "Civil Wars" (Wednesday nights at 10).
Just when prime time appears sentenced to endless sitcom exploitations of marriage ceremonies and pregnancies, Mr.
Bochco pops up with a show about the souring of relationships, about the unsettling realities of divorce.


Opossum With Rabies Raising Fears for Dogs
INTEREST in mandating rabies shots for dogs and cats is intensifying after a rabid opossum was found in Bethpage this month.
It is the first warm-blooded animal on the Island, other than a bat, known to have rabies in 45 years, and it is generating concern among health officials.
The opossum is also the Island's first evidence of a strain of rabies moving across New York City suburbs and southern and eastern New York counties.
Data show that rabies is rising in the metropolitan region, said Philip Fox, chairman of the Department of Clinic Services at the Animal Medical Center in New York City.


Nature Cruise Of Gulf Coast
The 138-passenger Yorktown Clipper will use its fleet of Zodiac landing craft to explore deserted beaches and wildlife areas along the Gulf Coast on a two-week voyage leaving New Orleans on April 11.
The vessel, which is doing cruises in the Caribbean this winter and will be sailing along the East Coast and to Canada next summer, can maneuver in coastal waters beyond the reach of many cruise ships because of its shallow draft.
Lecturers and naturalists will board the ship at various points to talk about the Gulf Coast's natural environment and history.
From New Orleans, the Yorktown Clipper will sail to Baton Rouge and Biloxi-Gulfport in Louisiana, Mobile, Ala., and, in Florida, Panama City, Tampa, Sanibel and Captiva Islands, Dry Tortugas, Key West and Miami, with disembarkation in Fort Lauderdale.
The Clipper Cruise Line, which runs the ship, says that "shipboard activities do not include bingo, casinos or Las Vegas-type entertainment." Fares are from $3,200 to $5,000 a person in double occupancy.
More information from the cruise line at (800) 325-0010 or (314) 727-2929.


An Award for Blount
Former Pittsburgh Steeler cornerback MEL BLOUNT was named Walter Camp Man of the Year yesterday in honor of his work with needy young people.
Blount, who retired from professional footaball eight years ago, will receive the award on Feb. 15 at the Walter Camp Football Foundation dinner at Yale University, where Camp, who originated the annual All-American selections, played and coached in the 19th century.


Going for the Gold
FRANK LYNN's faded, well-worn jeans were wet to midthigh and his bifocals spattered almost to the point of translucency.
Ignoring the inconveniences, he tightened his grip on the three-inch hose that was spitting out water with enough pressure to make a grown man stagger.
"This is called hydraulics," he yelled over the roar of the gasoline-driven pump.
"I'm washing away the silt so we can get to the bedrock."


Limited Menu: Lots of Pressure To Fix the Economy, But Few Options
SOMETIMES the American economy in recession, like a kayak that has capsized, rights itself.
So far, this recession has not been one of those times.
And so the question is, who should try to make the economy grow again: the President, Congress, the Federal Reserve Board or you, the consumer?
The New York Times, November 24, 1991


Rommel's Son Comes to Aid Of Foreigners
At a time when many German politicians are trying to hide from the politically explosive issue of immigration, Manfred Rommel, the maverick Mayor of Stuttgart, has made sure that his voice is heard.
Mr.
Rommel was the main speaker at a recent rally in Stuttgart supporting the rights of foreigners.
He urged citizens to "confront bigotry and violence with the deepest resolve."


Closing Down the K.G.B.
YASENEVO.
Even to most Soviet citizens, the name is unfamiliar.
But to anyone in the K.G.B., it needs no explanation.
The highly guarded, restricted compound in a wooded area southwest of Moscow is the headquarters of the K.G.B.'s First Chief Directorate, its intelligence and espionage arm.
The spies.


Adrenaline Choreography Can Have Its Limitations
Among experimental choreographers who threw dancers around with daring physicality, even brutality, Wim Vandekeybus from Belgium was the most exciting and original.
Or so it seemed when his troupe, Ultima Vez, made its United States debut in 1987 at the Kitchen with "What the Body Does Not Remember" and returned in 1989 with "The Bearers of Bad News."
At the Brooklyn Academy of Music earlier this month, the 28-year-old choreographer presented his latest premiere, "Always the Same Lies." It still has the Vandekeybus signature -- a body hitting the floor and rebounding with the urgency of a reflex action.
The image is a metaphor for feeling expressed on the instant, without reflection.


Emily Lustig to Wed
March wedding plans have been announced for Emily Diane Lustig, the daughter of Mrs.
Neil M. Lustig of Brooklyn and the late Mr.
Lustig, and Mark Stanley Sowa, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul E. Sowa of Morristown, N.J.
Miss Lustig, 24 years old, graduated from Wellesley College.
Mr.
Sowa, 23, has a bachelor of arts degree and a bachelor's in engineering from Dartmouth College.


As Session Winds Up, G.O.P. Plays for TV Time
For a while today, the House of Representatives sounded like the British House of Commons in an especially raucous session.
Cheers and hisses drowned out intelligible debate.
Republicans attacked, Democrats defended and at times dozens of lawmakers were on their feet, not debating legislation but shouting out "regular order!" and "parliamentary inquiry!"


Review/Dance; Darci Kistler Takes On a New Role
Darci Kistler has seldom been less than a lovely lyric dancer.
But, on certain treasured occasions, she can be much more than that.
Thursday night was one of them.
That was when she and Ben Huys made their debuts in the leading roles of George Balanchine's "Raymonda Variations," which opened the New York City Ballet's program at the New York State Theater.
From her first skimming entrance, Ms.
Kistler radiated a love of dancing.
Her steps were as smooth and effortless as ever.
But she brought to her technical mastery a new-found authority.
She commanded attention, not by exaggerating the scale of her movements but by suggesting, through her confidence, that the stage was a place in which she was at home and that she delighted in being there.


Debra Schlesinger and Clifford Schoen to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
David N. Schlesinger of Great Neck, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Debra Pauline Schlesinger to Clifford Stephen Schoen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Schoen of Ardsley, N.Y.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Schlesinger, 30 years old, is the administrator of the pediatrics department at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University and has a master's degree in health-care management from New York University.
Mr.
Schoen, 33, graduated from the University of Vermont and is a manufacturer's representative for CLK Packaging Inc. in Ardsley.


A PERSONAL TOUCH FOR YOUR MONEY
Among the innumerable benefits of being wealthy is having the option of turning one's investments over to a personal money manager.
Investors who hire managers receive individually tailored portfolios, direct access to the experts handling their money and the feeling of security that comes from having such personal attention.
While most personal money managers are affiliated with brokerage firms and banks, many mutual fund groups also have separate money management divisions -- and the people handling the private accounts sometimes are the same individuals who run the firms' funds.


Jordan Finds a Groove In Time to Edge Sonics
When it's not working for Michael Jordan, the Chicago Bulls' superstar just keeps telling himself it's going to happen soon.
And it usually does.
On Friday night before 38,067 fans in the Kingdome, many of them cheering for the defending National Basketball Association champions, it happened for Jordan and the Bulls in overtime.


Boredom + Claustrophobia + Sex = Punk Nirvana
Nirvana's Vertiginous ascent to stardom has to be the year's most surprising success story.
The single "Smells Like Teen Spirit" has been in heavy rotation on MTV, while the album "Nevermind" (David Geffen Company 24425; all three formats) has sold more than half a million copies in a couple of months and is currently lodged in the Top 10.
What is strange about Nirvana's popularity is that both single and album are untamed punk rock -- slightly more glossily produced and tuneful than the hard-core norm but bearing no discernible signs of compromise.
It's not so much the album's glossy grunge that's made it such a success, however, but the raw, raging fashion with which Nirvana articulates its feelings of impotence, bewilderment and inertia.
Like other classic punk albums -- the Stooges' "Funhouse," the Sex Pistols' "Never Mind the Bollocks," Black Flag's "Damaged" -- it captures the particular desperation of its day, while having a handle on the perennial teen-age obsessions with boredom, claustrophobia and sex.


Harry A. Mallon, 66, A Printing Executive
Harry A. Mallon, a printing company executive in the New York area, died Thursday at his home in Roslyn Estates, L.I.
He was 66 years old.
Mr. Mallon died of cancer of the esophagus, said his son, Timothy, of Manhattan.


Data Update
Median Resale House Prices
Sept. 1
Aug. 91
Sept. 90
Nation
$ 99,800
$ 102,200
$ 94,400
Northeast
136,900
142,300
137,100
Midwest
76,300
79,300
74,200
South
92,000
91,100
85,900
West
144,000
145,300
134,700
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.85
8.92
10.22
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.53
6.58
8.15
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.77
8.81
10.02
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.42
6.48
7.93
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.72
8.81
10.12
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.42
6.48
8.08
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.00
9.05
10.42
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.06
7.07
8.39
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.96
5.00
7.30
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.93
8.93
9.67
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Between Haiti and the U.S. Lies A Quandary
FROM its inception, the persistent clandestine marine traffic of Haitians toward southern Florida and the return of the refugees by an ever-vigilant United States Coast Guard have been fraught with deep moral ambiguities.
Since the early 1970's, shady boat operators, often said to be acting in close collaboration with Haitian authorities, have preyed upon the poor; they sell the would-be migrants expensive spots on leaky wooden boats that are known to have only slim chances ofevading disaster or detection at sea.


Rolling Out of Bed
"FOR SOME REASON, I JUST love seeing a head of hair all up in rollers," says Danilo, a New York hairdresser-of-the-moment.
For those who remember the unique torture of wearing pink plastic cylinders -- or simply looking at someone else wearing them -- these are horrifying words.
But Danilo, who rolls hair at the new Oribe salon at Elizabeth Arden, isn't thinking of Edith Bunker.
Try Naomi Campbell in a recent issue of Interview, with locks firmly coiled around Coca-Cola cans.
Or Christy Turlington in white plastic rollers and Chanel.
Try those old photographs of Marilyn, with Kenneth gently rolling that platinum hair.
We've already been tweaked with new, fun versions of false eyelashes and the girdle.
So it shouldn't be a shock that rollers, last spotted at slumber parties and suburban supermarkets in the early 70's, have returned.
They're back, we're told, because the latest hair styles, reminiscent of Rita Hayworth and Lauren Bacall, require the softness and volume that only rollers can give.
"The trend is toward a more polished look, but much looser than in the 60's," says the New York salon owner Stephen Knoll, who began using rollers again last year.
"There's so much you can do by setting hair."


Tax-Credit Program on Borrowed Time
THE New York region stands to lose more than 3,000 units of low-income housing next year if the Federal Low-Income Housing Tax Credit -- scheduled to die on Jan. 1 -- is not extended by Congress before it adjourns later this month.
Since 1987, the tax-credit program has been the nation's primary source of Federal aid for producing low-income housing.
In New York City alone it has been used to create more than 12,000 low-income apartments.
This year, 1,157 more for families and 564 single-room occupancy accommodations are being developed, with about 1,000 more projected to be developed in 1992.


Wild Turkeys Roar Back From Near-Extinction
GLENN COLE swears that no hunting is more physically and mentally taxing than that for the wily, fast and furtive
meleagris gallopavo
.
A hunter must be camouflaged head to toe, crouch motionless for hours and convey, persuasively, the notion that a bit of whistling plastic is the gobble of a love-starved hen.
Dogs spook this quarry, and no pheasant or duck bolts as quickly.
"You can't learn it from reading books or even talking to other hunters," said Mr.
Cole, the wildlife manager for the New Paltz office of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
"You only learn after years of experience."


Amy L. Grotta, Marketer, Wed
Amy Lynn Grotta, the assistant marketing director of the Philadelphia 76ers basketball team, and Jon Andrew Cummins, an assistant vice president of Amerimar Realty Company, a Philadelphia real-estate development firm, were married last evening in White Plains.
Rabbi Douglas Krantz officiated at the Metropolis Country Club.
Mrs.
Cummins, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Grotta of Armonk, N.Y.
Her father is a first vice president of Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company in New York.


French Right Hits a Nerve With Immigration Plan
After France's ultra-rightist National Front published a plan to halt all new immigration and to repatriate many immigrants already resident here, France's political establishment rushed to condemn the party as xenophobic, racist and even fascist.
Among the proposals in the party's 50-point plan, published last weekend, are creation of special camps for illegal immigrants prior to their deportation on chartered boats and aircraft, invalidation of naturalizations since 1974, reduced social welfare for immigrants amd their children and job priority for French citizens.


A Lull in Concerts During Thanksgiving Week
THANKSGIVING week is traditionally quiet on the concert scene, and that is the case this year.
Only a choral concert, a quartet of trio recitals and a couple of children's events precede the holiday.
What started 10 years ago as a gathering of 15 friends has grown into Master Singers of Westchester, a choir of more than 100 voices under the direction of Les Robinson Hadsell.
Today at 4 P.M. in Bedford's Fox Lane School, the Master Singers mark their anniversary by performing Mozart's "Great Mass" in C minor, the Vivaldi "Lauda Jerusalem" and Handel's "Dixit Dominus," with professional orchestra and five soloists -- Jennifer Lane, Julia McKinstry, Rosa Lamoreaux, Patrick Romano and Paul Rowe.
The audience celebrates, too, at a free postconcert reception; 234-6535.


All About/Weight-Loss Programs; Crash Is Out, Moderation Is In, And Diet Companies Feel the Pinch
After many years of wild growth, the $32 billion weight control industry is plunging into the valley of the 1990's with the recession to the right, regulators to the left, and the ever-expanding-and-contracting Oprah Winfrey looming in front.
Only the marginal companies are likely actually to go broke betting on the American avoirdupois roller coaster, but times are troubled.
Ms.
Winfrey's high-profile pas de deux with Optifast, which ended when she regained most of the the weight she had lost, devastated the very-low-calorie liquid diet market, which industry experts say is likely to contract.
Reports of health problems after quick and drastic weight loss have depressed the diet-center segment.
And even the venerable Weight Watchers International Inc., has been pressured by its competitors to retool.


Sports of The Times; The Champ's First Ring, First Title
HE fought in the Omni last night, hoping to retain the world heavyweight championship in his hometown.
But about five miles away, next to the basketball court in the Warren Memorial Boys and Girls Club, is the ring where Evander Holyfield won his first boxing title.
"Must've been the Pee Wee division, 109 pounds," his brother Bernard was saying now.
"His first trophy."


'Fantasia' Upstages The Latest Novelties In Classical Video
Something new is happening in classical-music video.
Or is it something old?
It's both, really.
Now that the major record labels have started video lines, directors have come to realize that straightforward recordings of symphonic concerts and recitals, while good enough for television, do not invite repeated viewing.
So the race is on to discover fresh, stimulating ways to put music on the screen.


U.N. Agrees
Since the United Nations was founded in 1945, it has never had an Arab or an African for its Secretary General.
That changed last week, on both counts, when the 15 members of the Security Council unanimously nominated 69-year-old Boutros Ghali, Egypt's Deputy Prime Minister for Foreign Affairs; his election by the 166-nation General Assembly is considered a foregone conclusion.
A Coptic Christian who is married to a Jew from Alexandria, Mr.
Ghali helped negotiate the Camp David peace accords with Israel and accompanied President Anwar el-Sadat on his historic trip to Jerusalem in 1977.
He also helped persuade the South African Government to release Nelson Mandela in 1990.
Less successful have been his attempts to form an all-Arab parliament and a petro-bank to redistribute oil wealth from rich Arab nations to poor ones like his own.
"If I lost hope each time I proposed something offbeat," he said, "I would never have accomplished anything."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article last Sunday about a collective farm in the Soviet Union omitted a passage.
The section recalling the memoirs of the writer's grand father should have continued:
"It was his loving descriptions of a youth spent here, on a prosperous estate then called Sergiyevskoye, that first led me to search for this corner of central Russia in the 1980's. But in those days the past was still taboo and authorities carefully vetted what foreigners were permitted to see.


Manhandling the Handlers
WHO'S THE MOST universal villain in politics? Not the
grafter
or
tinhorn
; not the
henchman
or
hack
or
hatchet man
or the
hanger-on
; not even the
gut fighter
or
black advance
or
dirty trickster
. The most despised, scorned and spat-upon person in politics today is the
handler
.
"Have you reconsidered the wisdom," Brit Hume of ABC asked President Bush, "of placing nominees at the disposal of White House
handlers
?"


Talking: Refinancing; Getting Around Hurdles
IT'S one thing to be told that interest rates are at their lowest levels in 17 years and now is the ideal time to refinance; it's another -- as many people are learning -- to actually get a bargain loan.
"I would read all those marvelous ads," said Thad McGar, who was eager to refinance his brownstone in the Chelsea secton of Manhattan, "but when I went to apply, the documentation was unbelievable."


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Nov. 9 MANHATTAN  Chelsea 395,000
161 West 15th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,850-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, den, c/a, 13 1/2-ft. ceilings, jacuzzi; maintenance $752, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Delson-Ginsberg Real Estate)  Columbia University Area 360,000
420 Riverside Drive (114th St.)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, renovated kitchen and bath; maintenance $1,095, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Klara Madlin Real Estate)  Gramercy Park Area 142,000
205 Third Avenue (23d St.)  (Gramercy Park Tower)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 900-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, windowed dining alcove; maintenance $725, 58% tax-deductible (Broker: Coleman-Neary Realty)  TriBeCa 495,500
16 Hudson Street  2,000-sq.-ft. open loft-co-op; elevator, 2 baths, artist studio, skylight, 1,000-sq.-ft. of private roof space, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,450, 75% tax-deductible (Broker: Laurie Poole Real Estate)  Upper East Side 2.5 million
2 East 61st Street  (Pierre Hotel)  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 2,700-sq.-ft. co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevators, 11-ft. ceilings, 3 exposures, Central Park view; maintenance $6,000, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: William B. May)  BRONX  Morris Park 230,000
2013 Bogart Avenue  2-family detached brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dinette in each unit; finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,777, includes additional 25- by 100-ft. building lot (Broker: Locascio Realty)  Riverdale 127,500
3935 Blackstone Avenue  (Woodlands)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining el, eat-in kitchen, terrace; maintenance $657, 52% tax-deductible (Broker: Trebach Realty)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill 176,000
119 Pacific Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining area, fireplace, rear deck; maintenance $398, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Harbor View Realty)  East Flatbush 145,000
132 East 88th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1-family attached brick house; living room, dinette, 1 bedroom, 1 bath, hospitality suite in basement, 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,350 (Broker: Helmar Brokerage Ltd.)  Park Slope 318,000
4 27th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1-family brick house; dining room, renovated kitchen, original mantels, 2-story extention, 16.8- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Marilyn A. Donahue Real Estate)  QUEENS  Bayside 162,000
53-31 205th Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1-family semi-attached brick house; dining room, finished basement, 27- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Veterans Realty)  Corona 170,000
34-14 101st Street  2-family detached brick and wood-shingle house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in duplex unit; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Century 21/Elms Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Dongan Hills 150,000
1788 Richmond Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1-family detached side-hall Colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished attic, semi-finished basement, 45- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $805 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)  Eltingville 177,000
19 Osborne Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 1-family detached hi-ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, attached 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,770 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)


What Do the Creatures Do in Winter?
IT was a mouse's nest, at least that is what it appeared to be.
The evidence was taken to two natural-history buffs.
They confirmed the suspicion: a mouse had been at work.
The material was an accumulation of chewed-up leaves, tiny bits of tree bark and dainty pieces of gnawed wood.
The gnawed wood was the giveaway.
This is how it was discovered.
There had been a frost one night, and the impatiens growing in several redwood tubs was killed; by morning the showy annuals were a sad looking mess.


The Amish
To the Editor: In answering a question on whether there are any Amish communities in New York State (Q. &amp; A., Oct. 20), you mention only the largest one, near Cherry Creek.
Actually there are 14 Old Order Amish settlements in New York, scattered across 10 upstate counties.
In most of these settlements a variety of crafts, baked goods and other products are sold by the Amish themselves.
It is neither necessary nor advantageous to hire a guide or join a tour to meet and do business with the Amish.
The "open" signs on Amish shops and homes attest that customers are welcome.
Cottage industry makes up an increasingly important part of the Amish economic base in New York, as in other states with an Amish population.
For better or worse many Amish are far more accessible to the general public than in the past.
From the visitor's point of view, being a customer goes a long way toward mitigating what might otherwise be an awkward and intrusive situation.
MARC A. OLSHAN Associate Professor of Sociology, Alfred University Alfred, N.Y.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a review of Melvin Konner's "Childhood" on Nov. 10 described the book's author incorrectly.
He is a nonpracticing physician who teaches medical anthropology at Emory University.


PEARL HARBOR IN THE MIND OF JAPAN
Having grown up in Korea, I am painfully aware of what my ancestors had to endure during the period of Japanese occupation.
To this day Japan refuses to negotiate a formal set of reparations with Korea.
It is infuriating to know that, in Japan, the "Pacific war" is a taboo subject -- one that is whitewashed or eliminated from textbooks.
History has a way of repeating itself.
It is crucial to recognize and learn from an ugly incident like Pearl Harbor so that it can never recur.
JI-LEON LEE New York, N.Y.


Sunday Dinner; For Variety, Italian, French or Chinese
Manhattan is a remarkable place for diners, especially those with varied tastes.
Here are three good restaurants: one Italian, one French and one Chinese.
Sistina
1555 Second Avenue, between 80th and 81st Streets; (212) 861-7660 -- The formula for success at this congenial northern Italian restaurant seems to be consistency, rather than innovation.
You can still sample many of the dishes that were on the menu in 1984 when the place opened.
Daily specials supplement that roster, which makes for happy repeat customers.


Congressional Roundup; Foley Denies Weakness In Session or Leadership
As lawmakers struggled all day to find the votes and the legislative language that would let them end the Congressional session on Tuesday, House Speaker Thomas S. Foley today defended Congress and himself personally against charges of ineffectiveness.
At a breakfast with reporters, he said Congress had made a "very good record" in adhering to last year's budget agreement as well as on domestic legislation from civil rights to the still incomplete banking, transportation and campaign finance bills.
And he called it "the most constitutionally important Congress since World War II" for asserting war-making power in the Persian Gulf conflict.


Foreign Affairs; The U.S.: A Pathetic Nation?
With the trillions spent to win the cold war, it will be pathetic if the U.S. fails to find $1 billion to combat famine and the danger of nuclear chaos in the Soviet Union.
Famine in Soviet cities this winter could kill the Soviet democratic experiment, and there is only one way to prevent starvation.
That is by loading up U.S. military aircraft with food, flying to cities and overseeing the distribution.
But aside from a few Democratic Representatives such as Les Aspin and Lee Hamilton, Washington sits on its hands.


Hoax Rescue Calls Plague Coast Guard and Cost Thousands of Dollars
THE four men flying the Coast Guard helicopter were no rookies on a search-and-rescue missions.
The senior pilot, Lieut.
Joseph Turosky, had flown helicopters with the Marines.
His co-pilot, Lieut.
Gregory W. Martin, had been in the guard eight years.
Richard Schultz, the flight mechanic, had flown rescue missions before, and the Emergency Medical Technician, Harold Hoffmaster, was a seasoned rescue swimmer, the Coast Guard version of a Navy frogman.
But none had ever experienced the 35-foot seas and 67-knot winds they flew into off Montauk Point on Aug. 19, at the height of Hurricane Bob.


For Black Sea, Slow Choking By Pollutants
For centuries, the Black Sea produced dolphin skins and caviar and fish so plentiful that no one thought such bounty could ever end.
But now this ancient highway between Europe and Asia is suffering extensive changes, the proportions of which are only just becoming fully known.
All along its 2,500-mile coastline, fishing boats sit in port, idled by the collapse of sturgeon, mackerel, anchovy and other commercial fisheries.


Ex-Hostage Is Feeling Better After Treatment for an Ulcer
The freed American hostage Thomas Sutherland, under treatment for a stomach ulcer after six and a half years in captivity, is eating normally and feeling no pain, his doctors said today.
"He rested very comfortably last night and is feeling absolutely no discomfort," said a spokeswoman at the United States military hospital here.
"He is recovering as expected and is eating normally."


IN SHORT/SMALL PRESSES: NONFICTION
KAHLIL GIBRAN  His Life and World. By Jean Gibran and Kahlil Gibran. Interlink, $35.


Currency; Stock Drop Batters Dollar
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
129.37
129.30
127.10
per Dollar
W.German Mark
1.5845
1.6745
1.4858
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1391
1.1296
1.1600
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7935
1.7855
1.9665
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$368.50
$359.00
$383.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Risk Is Part of Life
To the Editor:
Regarding "The Money Song, From Nick and Nora' "  [ Nov. 3 ] : There are Broadway winners who become megabuck heroes and there are the losers in a modern-day money game of book, lyrics and song.
But Broadway does have financial winners -- "City of Angels," for one, has paid back its investors and is making a profit now.


Having Fun Doing Good
MONDAY -- The Lighthouse was the beneficiary of a dinner-dance that honored Shirley Lord Rosenthal, the beauty director of Vogue magazine, who served for two years as vice chairwoman of the benefit.
Proceeds from the party went to the Lighthouse services that provide access to the printed word.
TUESDAY -- The New York City Ballet opened its 95th New York season with a dinner-dance after the performance.
The Hank Lane Orchestra played softly, and Robert Isabell had cut the height of his flower arrangements to 12 inches so that the guests could see each other at the tables.
On the fashion front, short black lingerie dresses were a theme.
Escada, the new 57th Street store, underwrote the dinner as part of its weeklong opening celebration.
The evening raised money for the ballet's general operating fund.


Strike Over Air France Cuts
Air France ground crews have called a 24-hour strike for Thursday to protest a plan that will cost 3,000 jobs.
The airline, which announced a reorganization in September, said today that it did not expect serious disruptions.
The two biggest trade unions have not joined the strike call, it said.
A similar strike on Friday forced the cancellation of 20 short-haul services and caused some delays on other flights.


J. K. Wade Wed To Miss Clifton
Alexandra Guerra Clifton, a daughter of Peter F. and Alice Ann Clifton of Water Mill, L.I., was married yesterday to John Kevin Wade, a son of Peter H. and Joan Kehoe Wade of Pawling, N.Y.
The Rev.
L.
Paul Jaquith, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony in the chapel of the Convent of the Sacred Heart in New York.
Mrs.
Wade, 33 years old, is known as Sasha.
She is an associate at Tina S. Fredericks Realty in Bridgehampton, L.I.
Her parents are partners in Clifton Associates, a teacher-placement firm in Water Mill.


Style Makers; William J. Squires, Flocking Designer
Many hunters, fishermen and other outdoorsmen are more comfortable in cold and wet weather because of the efforts of William J. Squires, who has been developing and designing flocked fabrics for more than 15 years.
With flocking, fine particles are applied to an adhesive surface to give it a decorative and functional characteristic.
Mr.
Squires's company, Squires Hightech of Stamford, Conn., creates fabrics for jackets and coats under the Hunt-Cloth brand that have special consumer-friendly properties.
"They conform to the body, they don't wrinkle and they have warmth without weight," he said.


Jennifer James Weds B. P. McHugh
Jennifer James, the director of annual giving for the Baldwin School in Bryn Mawr, Pa., and Burton Peek McHugh Jr., the president of Turnberry Inc., a Philadelphia stock options company, were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Chestnut Hill, Pa.
The Rev.
Charles A. Carter 3d officiated.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
Robert C. Wallis of Philadelphia and the stepdaughter of Mr.
Wallis, the associate director of Episcopal Community Services in Philadelphia.
Her mother is the director of annual giving for the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center in Philadelphia.
Mr.
McHugh, 30, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and is a son of Mrs.
Burton P. McHugh of New York and the late Dr.
McHugh, who was an internist in New York.


A Collection That Grew To Fill a Museum
MOST craft collections start with an impulsive purchase, perhaps a richly toned ceramic plate, a glass vase or a pair of earrings.
Buy one, two, three or more and you're hooked; the word "enough" soon disappears from the vocabulary.
But few collectors can match Agnes and Edgar Land.
They amassed nearly 7,500 craft items and tools that now fill the Museum of Early Trades and Crafts here.


New Yorkers, etc.
Caroline Jones sums it up succinctly: "List people are crazed," she said.
This may sound a trifle harsh, but for real list people, as opposed to half-hearted amateurs, the description is on the button.
True and dedicated list-makers know that they may appear funny, strange, ridiculous or plain nuts to others, but it doesn't bother them.
Their reaction is usually quite the opposite.


Case Against Miller and Aide Is Nearing End
Federal prosecutors are expected to wind up their case against Mel Miller in the next day or so, after two weeks of testimony that both hurt and helped the defense.
Mr.
Miller, the Speaker of the New York State Assembly, and a top aide, Jay Adolf, are charged with fraud involving their conduct as lawyers representing clients in the purchase and sale of cooperative apartments in 1984 and 1985.


Ms. Shen Wed To Cung Wong
Jenny Jing-Yi Shen, the computer network operator and developer at WNET, Channel 13 in New York, and Cung Wong, a marketing analyst at American Transtech, an A.T.&amp;T. subsidiary in Jacksonville, Fla., were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Chapel of Columbia University.
The Rev.
J.
Scott Hudgins, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Shen, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bo-xun Shen of Shanghai and a granddaughter of Xian-Ying Zhu of Shanghai.
She graduated from Shanghai Teachers University and received a master's degree in computers in education from Columbia.
Her father is a professor of electronic engineering at Fudan University in Shanghai.
Her mother, Hui-Zhen Kong, is a teacher in Shanghai.
Mr.
Wong, 28, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Shu-Tong Wong of Hong Kong.
A graduate of Canton Teachers College, he received a master's in applied statistics from Columbia.
His mother, Wei-Yin Tam, and his father are athletic coaches in Hong Kong.


A Thanksgiving Week Busier Than Usual
THANKSGIVING usually means a gap in the concert calendar, but this year is different.
For starters as Chamber Music Plus offers "Gypsy Genius," bracketing the week with performances of Haydn's "Gypsy" Trio in G; the Duo for Violin and Cello by Zoltan Kodaly, based in large part on Magyar folk melodies, and Brahms's G minor Piano Quartet, with its rollicking "Rondo alla Zingarese" finale.
There are three opportunities to hear these masterworks of three centuries, today at 4 in the Church of St.
John's on the Green in Waterbury, at 8 P.M. on Saturday at the Pomfret School, and next Sunday at 3 in the Cathedral Theater in Hartford.
The performers, in addition to the founders of Chamber Music Plus, Harry Clark and Sanda Schuldmann, are the violinist Renee Jolles and violist Lois Martin.
For information call 232-0085.


Dartmouth Pummels Princeton For Title
Dartmouth pushed Princeton around for most of 60 minutes today and left no doubt about which was the best football team in the Ivy League this season.
The Green won the game, 31-13, and the league championship, Dartmouth's 15th in 35 years of Ivy competition, on a gray but temperate day before a crowd of 11,230 spectators here at Memorial Field.


Karen M. Rettig Is to Be Married
Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Ralph Rettig Jr. of El Paso have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Marie Rettig to Mark Nicholl Rogers, a son of Nancy Rogers of Millbrook, N.Y., and the late Howard Rogers.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Rettig, 28 years old, is an associate with the Phoenix law firm of Fennemore Craig.
She is a graduate of the University of Texas at El Paso and Arizona State University College of Law.
Her father is a manager of state governmental affairs for El Paso Natural Gas.
Mr.
Rogers, 26, is a third-year law student at New York University and plans to join Fennemore Craig next fall.
He is a magna cum laude graduate of Brown University, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
His mother is a librarian at the Millbrook (N.Y.) Free Library.
His father was a special-education high school teacher in New York public schools.


Japanese Charity Gives Millions to U.S. Groups
A new source of philanthropy has opened for Americans with a made-in-Japan label.
The Center for Global Partnership of the Japan Foundation began its gift-giving on Wednesday with 40 grants totaling $5.4 million to educational, research and cultural organizations in the United States.
In Tokyo, 11 Japanese organizations received another $1.3 million from the charity created by the Japanese Government.


1992 Prediction: A Landslide of Presidential Memorabilia
Who was Charles J. Guiteau, and why did hundreds of people pay $1 for prints of a photograph he took of himself in 1881?
"Charles Guiteau assassinated President Garfield," explained Paul Perlin, a Chicago wheat trader whose vast collection of Presidential memorabilia will be auctioned Dec. 12 at Sotheby's in New York.
"He shot Garfield twice in the back in the Washington railroad station on July 2, 1881. That photograph of Guiteau is my favorite item in the collection."


Candlewood Readies a New 'Golden Boy'
A LONG-DELAYED reworking of the 1964 musical "Golden Boy" is ready to begin previews at the Candlewood Playhouse -- give or take $100,000.
Still, the management of the nonprofit theater in New Fairfield is looking for donors to help it meet the show's estimated budget of $275,000 and for investors to come up with an additional $1 million to $1.2 million needed to take the production to Broadway, said the Candlewood's executive producer, Rick Belzer.
In one of several under-the-wire pleas for funds, a backers audition was held in Manhattan as recently as Nov. 4, the day that rehearsals began.


Lori G. Stern, A Lawyer, Wed
Lori Gwen Stern, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome L. Stern of Brooklyn, was married last night to Bradley Mark Feldman, a son of Jaclyn E. Feldman of East Rockaway, L.I., and Henry A. Feldman of New York.
Rabbi Marc Dissick officiated at Temple Judea in Massapequa, L.I.
Mrs.
Stern, 25 years old, is an associate in the New York law firm of Seward &amp; Kissel.
She graduated magna cum laude from the State University of New York at Albany, and received a law degree from Albany Law School.
Her father is the director of the Queens office of the New York State Unemployment Insurance Tax Service.
Her mother, Evelyn Stern, is a secretary for the New York State Industrial Board of Appeals.
Mr.
Feldman, 26, is a junior technical market analyst for Prudential Securities in New York.
He graduated summa cum laude from SUNY at Albany, and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
His mother is a giftware manufacturers' representative.
His father is a C.P.A. in New York.


Frequent-Flyer Bonus: A Couple of Victories
With their longest road trip of the season behind them, the Knicks returned home yesterday with renewed optimism.
Their 99-90 victory over the Detroit Pistons on Friday night ended a memorable day.
Patrick Ewing and Charles Oalkey got the contract extensions they were seeking.
Mark Jackson got his first triple-double of the season.
And the Knicks got two victories out of a five-game road trip that began in disastrous fashion.


Connecticut Developers Challenge the Power of Local Zoning
THE basic power that Connecticut towns have relied on to define themselves and guide their growth -- the control, through zoning, of what can be built -- is being challenged in a series of housing cases aimed at introducing affordable housing into expensive suburbs.
A state law that took effect last year enabled local zoning decisions to be appealed.
Now officials must justify rejecting proposals that include affordable housing.
And if they cannot show that concerns about health or public safety -- as opposed to esthetics or local character -- outweigh the need for the housing, a judge can order it built.


Wall Street; The Lag in the Legg Mason List
For a dozen years, the "Thanksgiving List" from the brokerage firm of Legg Mason Wood Walker in Baltimore has become a holiday institution.
Last Thursday, with the usual banners and fanfare, the firm released its 1992 list, a roster of 12 stocks that are supposed to represent excellent long-term value for the year ahead.
And last Friday, as usual, many newspapers gave the list considerable attention, prominently featuring the performance of the stocks Legg Mason had included on the 1991 list, announced this time last year.
The statistics for last year's list, at first glance, do look impressive.
Among the big winners was Johnson Controls, up almost 48 percent from the year before.


CAMPUS LIFE: Texas, Austin; Sleep-Out Group Walks in Shoes Of the Homeless
Walking along Austin's downtown streets last week with empty pockets and a bedroll tucked beneath her arm, Dawn Jones, a sophomore at the University of Texas, could have easily been one of the city's estimated 3,000 homeless people.
But the night that Ms.
Jones spent on the street meant only a brief separation from her comfortable campus-area apartment.
As part of the student campaign to focus on the city's homeless, Ms.
Jones and five other women decided to gain first-hand knowledge of what is fast becoming a nationwide crisis.


Pam Duca Wed On Barbados
Pamela Jean Duca, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Duca of Southboro, Mass., and Claiborne Thornton Marshall, the son of Judith C. Green and Thornton W. Marshall, both of New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Gibson, an Episcopal priest, officiated at Marriott's Sam Lord's Castle in Barbados.
The bride and bridegroom, both 27 years old, graduated from Skidmore College.
Mrs.
Marshall, who is known as Pam, is the marketing manager for Epoch Data Inc., a New York computer sales company.
Her father is the president of First Data Systems, a computer consulting concern in Marlboro, Mass.
Her mother, Maria Duca, is a career-development specialist for Metro South/West Career Center in Needham, Mass.


Restitution Plan Aids Crime Victims
IN addition to their monthly bills for utilities and rent, 600 convicted offenders on probation in Westchester have a new bill each month under a year-and-a-half-old county program.
As part of their sentence for committing a crime or misdemeanor, these offenders have been ordered to pay restitution to the people they victimized.
Since the beginning of this year, 853 crime victims in the county have received $1,147,397.71 in restitution for damages or losses sustained because of a crime.


CAMPUS LIFE: Iowa; Despite Uproar, Homoerotic Film Has 2d Screening
The critically acclaimed German film "Taxi zum Klo" was shown last week for a second time at the University of Iowa, despite statewide uproar over the homoerotic acts depicted in the film.
The screening was sold out.
University officials had tried to ban the showing of the film, then backed down after the State Attorney General's office said that such a ban would violate the First Amendment.
Unlike the first screening of the film, the second screening did not contain a scene the county attorney said violated a state child abuse law.


Meg Goldman, Stylist, Marries
Meg Goldman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Goldman of New York, was married last evening to Geoffrey Goldstein, a son of Ruby Goldstein of East Meadow, L.I., and the late Isadore Goldstein.
Rabbi Harvey Tattelbaum performed the ceremony at Temple Shaaray Tefila in New York.
Ms.
Goldman, a 31-year-old freelance fashion stylist in New York, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is the chairman of Financial Partners Capital Management in New York.
Her mother, Phyllis Goldman, is a freelance writer and dance critic.
The bridegroom, 40, is an account executive at the Bank of New York Financial Corporation in New York.
He graduated from Hofstra University.
His mother is a buyer for K &amp; F Enterprises, a home-furnishings retailer in Port Washington, L.I.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.
His father was the corporate controller for the Slavenburg Corporation, a commercial finance company in New York.


Fleeing Haitians Fear Army More Than the Perils at Sea
Roger Emilien says his decision to leave his country aboard a rickety boat for the United States was made this month, when he saw soldiers on his street corner in a Port-au-Prince slum order an arrested man to sit, and then shot him, leaving him for dead.
Like scores of other Haitians who have decided that the risks of drowning or detection on the high seas are better than the misery and fear they face at home, the 56-year-old Mr.
Emilien said the brutality of the army since the coup that overthrew President Jean-Bertrand Aristide nearly two months ago had clinched his decision to seek a new life in America.


Again, Sihanouk Seeks A Delicate Balance
PRINCE NORODOM SIHANOUK Cambodia's master political showman and greatest survivor, its charming, confounding peacemaker and one-time god-king -- has brought his remarkable half-century-long career full circle.
He has not only returned to Cambodia in triumph under a United Nations peace plan; he has also managed to win back the title of head of state, 21 years after it was taken from him in an American-backed military coup, and to begin to exact revenge on his erstwhile allies in rebellion, the Khmer Rouge.


PEARL HARBOR IN THE MIND OF JAPAN
If it is somehow duplicitous of the Japanese to moan about their punishment and forget their crimes, as Steven R. Weisman suggests in his article "Pearl Harbor in the Mind of Japan" (Nov. 3), it is just as wrong for Americans to pretend that the Pacific war started at Pearl Harbor and to ignore the century of gunboat diplomacy and Western expansionism that led up to it.
In conceding that Japan went to war "to expel rival colonial empires from Asia," Weisman still misses the point: Japan established its colonial empire as a response to the West.
Japan would have become one of Europe's colonies had it not quickly and deliberately and for that very purpose developed the military-industrial juggernaut that enabled it to resist encroachment and that -- inevitably -- took control of the country and embarked on war.


Susie Rubin Weds Phillip Schein
Suzanne Karen Rubin, the assistant to the director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and Phillip Allen Schein, the asociate art director for research and product development at the Stanley H. Kaplan Educational Center, in New York, were married last evening in New York.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein officiated at the St.
Regis Hotel.
Mrs.
Schein, 24 years old, is known as Susie.
She graduated from New York University and is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Rubin of New York, where her father owns several parking garages.
Mr.
Schein, 29, graduated from Syracuse University and has a master's degree in fine arts from the School of Visual Arts.
His father owns Universal Self Volcanizing Company, a tire supplier in Burden, N.J.


Start of Condom Distribution Fails to Faze Many Students
This week, several New York City high schools will begin handing out condoms to students who ask for them.
The schools will be inaugurating the first large-scale program of its kind in the nation, intended to reduce the spread of AIDS among sexually active teen-agers in a city with the largest number of AIDS cases in the nation.
Students who want condoms will be able to get them even if their parents object.
Cloak of Secrecy
Mindful of the historic nature of the program and the international curiosity about it, the administration of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez has proceeded with great caution and, in recent weeks, with a Pentagon-like cloak of secrecy.
Possible protests by Roman Catholic and other demonstrators, who argue that the plan will encourage sexual promiscuity, are a particular worry.


Eurailpass 1992 Prices
The 1992 prices for Eurailpasses, good for train travel in 17 European countries, increased in most categories from 10 to 20 percent over this year's rates.
The passes include a new Youth Flexipass, good in second class for 15 days in a two-month period, that is being introduced Jan. 1.
It costs $420 and replaces the present two Youth Flexipasses, used for 15 or 30 days days in second class within three months.
Youth passes are available to travelers under age 26.
Other Eurailpasses are for first-class travel.
A 10 percent handling fee is added to the price of each pass.
The new rates per person are: Eurail Flexipass for 5 days of travel during 15-day period, $280; 9 days during 21 days, $450; 14 days during 1 month, $610; 15-day pass, $430; 21 days, $550; 1 month, $680; 2 months, $920; 3 months, $1,150.


Plant Blast Kills Worker
One worker was killed and another critically injured by an explosion inside a chemical plant here Friday.
The blast at the PCR Inc. plant, which makes plastics and other products, was attributed to a chemical reaction.
The worker who was killed was identified as Thomas Paul Turner, a 34-year-old chemical technician.
James Creighton, 31, a chemical technologist, suffered internal and external burns and is in critical condition.


Andrea Kupferberg and Bruce Brown Marry
Andrea Sharon Kupferberg, the daughter of Siegmund and Mildred Kupferberg of Sands Point, L.I., was married last night to Dr.
Bruce Allen Brown, a son of Gerald and Rosalie Brown of Wilmette, Ill.
Rabbi Donna Berman officiated at Temple Judea of Manhasset on Long Island.
Mrs.
Brown, 26 years old, is an associate in the corporate finance group at Bankers Trust Company in Chicago.
She graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in business management from Northwestern University.


Organic Farming Increasing In State
ALTHOUGH farmland in New Jersey is the costliest in the nation and grocery store prices for farm products are considered high given the current recession, a small group of natural organic farmers and their supporters have begun carving out a niche for themselves in the state's agricultural market.
The modest but consistent growth of natural organic farming became evident recently when more than 2,000 people showed up on a rainy Saturday for the state's first Organic Farmfare, held in Pennington.


Lamar Alexander's Self-Help Course
ONE DAY LAST SPRING, WHEN THE SUNLIGHT SPARKLED ON broken glass and Manhattan streets had already begun to smell of summer, Andrew Lamar Alexander Jr., at the age of 51, went to school.
At the Holy Cross School in Hell's Kitchen, children in magenta plaid uniforms sang for the new Secretary of Education, stood up when he entered their classrooms, and greeted him in singsong unison.
Later, the tall, soft-spoken Alexander sat with the principal and superintendent and pulled out a green spiral notebook.
"Is there anything I ought to know?" he asked, and took notes as the Catholic educators described how much the school's largely working-class parents would benefit from his proposal to let taxes pay for Catholic school tuition.


Tech Notes; Easier Breathing for Firefighters
Scientists at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory have developed a lightweight respirator that can protect firefighters from inhaling airborne particles and carbon monoxide while working outdoors.
The mask received its first field testing recently as a helicopter crew fought a brush fire near Vina, Calif., about 90 miles north of Sacramento.
Made of polycarbonate plastic and rubber, the full-face respirator is equipped with two blunt antennae-like protrusions, which contain electrically charged fiberglass filters and activated-charcoal cartridges.
These air-purifying elements prevent the inhalation of smoke particles, vapors from burning plants and acid gases.


Haitians Ask Embargo's End As Aid to Talks With Aristide
Haitian lawmakers called for the lifting of a trade embargo today as they continued talks with Haiti's deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, on solving the crisis caused by his ouster in a military coup.
The legislators, many of whom are critical of Father Aristide, said a suspension of the embargo would aid their negotiations with the exiled President.


Finding Bargains and Discounts on Ski Lift Tickets
LAST year, Aspen, Colo., broke the $40 barrier for daily lift tickets, and this season, several other ski areas have followed suit.
The daily price at Vail, Colo., and the weekend and holiday rate at Mount Snow, Vt., will be $40; at Deer Valley, Utah, it will be $41 every day ($44 over the Christmas holidays), while at Okemo, Vt., it will be $41 on weekends and holidays.
One notable exception to the increases is Aspen Highlands, Colo., which had a $40 ticket last season and reduced the price to $30 for this winter.
"We're doing this to attract volume," said Mike Minarski, marketing director for the ski area.
"Lift ticket price is extremely critical in getting people to ski."


British Import


Why We Must Help Russia at Brink of Abyss
To the Editor:
Zbigniew Brzezinski may be right in criticizing the Bush Administration for its pro-Gorbachev bias (Op-Ed, Nov. 10).
However, his own anti-Gorbachev bias is dangerously misleading.
He advocates a "league of sovereign states to replace the fading Soviet center." Otherwise, he thinks, the United States might be opting for "a showdown between Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin." He recommends the United States must deal directly with the republics, thus undercutting the Soviet Government, whose "international responsibilities and nuclear weapons will be inherited by the Russian state."


Routing the L.I.R.R. Inside New York City
There is a third option to better serving Long Island Rail Road and other area rail passengers than either stuffing more trains into Penn Station or by building a $2.7 billion East Side terminal  [ "L.I.R.R. Caught in Tug-of-War Over Space in Penn Station," Oct. 13 ]  and that is to route inner-suburban L.I.R.R. trains over existing New York City Transit Authority tracks via the 63d Street tunnel.
As the article correctly points out, Penn Station is at the edge of the midtown central business district.
Horrendous subway platform crushes, aggravated by the poor platform layout at the 34th Street-Penn Station stop on the IND line, where passengers must dash up and down stairs between local and express tracks, have deterred the L.I.R.R. from reaching its ridership potential.


Rates Cut At Marriotts
Marriott Hotels is offering room rates that have been cut by up to 60 percent to holiday season travelers who pay at least 14 days in advance.
During the Thanksgiving holiday and in parts of December and January, more than 180 hotels in the group in the United States and Canada are participating.
The reduced nightly rates, nonrefundable, are $49, $59 or $69 a room, depending on the location.
Holiday rates will be available seven days a week through Dec. 2, and from Dec. 13 to Jan. 5.
A "Kids Eat Free" program offers complimentary meals for children six years and under who are accompanied by a registered guest.
Marriott, (800) 228-9290, says its holiday rates are offered on a limited basis and most hotels do not offer them on New Year's Eve.
They are also not available at the group's Courtyard, Residence Inn and Fairfield Inn properties.


Data Bank/November 24, 1991
Housing Starts
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,096
1,033
1,056
Merchandise Exports
Sept.
Aug.
July
In billions
$35.4
$34.3
$35.2
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$42.2
$40.9
$41.1
3-Month Treasury Bills
Nov. 22
Nov. 15
Nov. 8
Rate in percent
4.43
4.57
4.62
Steel Production
Nov. 15
Nov. 8
Nov. 1
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,814
1,753
1,795
Auto Production
In units, weekly total
125,924
122,763
132,984
Truck Production
In units, weekly total
90,509
79,643
72,872
Weekly Jobless Claims
Nov. 8
Nov. 1
Oct. 25
In thousands
493
454
421


David Mills to Wed Ms. Levenstein
Mr. and Mrs.
Earle H. Levenstein of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cairistin Kerney Levenstein, to David Winthrop Mills, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Willis N. Mills Jr. of Wilton, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Levenstein, 24 years old, graduated from Princeton University, as did her fiance.
Until recently, she was a program coordinator for the Muscular Dystrophy Association in Long Beach, Calif.
Her father is the vice president of consumer marketing for Henredon Furniture Industries in Morganton, N.C.
Her mother, Mary Kerney Levenstein, leads cancer support groups for patients and families at the Medical Center at Princeton.
Her maternal grandfather, the late James Kerney Jr., was an editor and publisher of The Trenton Times.


Hardaway Extension
A season after becoming the youngest player selected for the National Basketball Association All-Star Game, Golden State point guard TIM HARDAWAY has agreed to a contract extension that will allow him to grow older, if not exactly old, with the Warriors.
The three-year extension will keep Hardaway with Golden State through the 1995-96 season, or until he is 29.
No financial terms were disclosed for the deal, which extends a four-year contract Hardaway signed in August 1989.


Political Talk
Stan Who?
Even though recent election results show that the recession has made it a bad time to be an incumbent, Stan Lundine might like it if a few more people knew he was in office.


Getting to the Best Part: Turkey Stuffings
THE best part of the Thanksgiving turkey, in my view, is the stuffing.
It is even better the following morning, eaten cold for breakfast.
While some people like to experiment with exotic flavorings, combining chorizos with dried apricots or adding jalapenos to corn bread, I prefer conventional stuffings.
When I was growing up, we used two stuffings in our turkey: chestnut at one end, sausage and apple at the other, and these remain my favorites.


Tough Choices as Bush Tries to Break His Slide1
After one of the most battering weeks of his Presidency, George Bush faces crucial decisions on starting up his re-election campaign, the political viability of his chief of staff and how to heal a division that threatens the Republicans' image as the party best able to manage the economy.
The President, who was at Camp David today consulting by telephone with political associates, hopes to start his political rebound on Monday with the first of a quick series of damage-control trips intended to show that he does not have a detached attitude about domestic problems.


Roger Ferri, Architect, Dies at 42; Integrated Nature Into Structures
Roger C. Ferri, an architect known for his theories about integrating nature into buildings, died on Thursday in the New Milford Hospital, New Milford, Conn.
He was 42 years old.
He died of AIDS, said Channing Blake, his longtime companion.


Report of Man's Rape at Barnard Is Disputed by Police Investigators
A 19-year-old male visitor at Barnard College reported to the police that he was raped in an off-campus dormitory early Friday morning, but the police say that no rape occurred and that they are investigating it as sodomy, which is illegal in New York State.
The incident has prompted Barnard security officials to post warning fliers across campus and students to say that they are worried about campus safety.


Ms. Dobrota To Wed in April
Dr. and Mrs.
John S. Dobrota of Saucon Valley, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Ann Dobrota to Douglas Evan Klinger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman A. Klinger of Plymouth Meeting, Pa.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Dobrota, 25 years old, is the corporate development coordinator at Rosenbluth Travel in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father is a gastroenterologist in Sellersville, Pa.
Mr.
Klinger, 26, is a vice president and director of corporate-markets management at the Provident Institutional Management Corporation in Wilmington, Del.
His father is a lawyer in Norristown, Pa.


Gong of the Earth


Nuts and Bolts Vs. Martinis
To the Editor:
For years I have been looking for a decent place to put money in.
After reading the article on "Nick and Nora," I'm staying in the hardware business.
E.
RABINOWE Santa Fe, N. M.


CAMPUS LIFE: Northwestern; 'Sexist' Newsletter Provokes Outrage At Campus Rally
A Northwestern University "Speak Out on Sexism" last week turned into a shouting match over the publication of a newsletter and a calendar of Northwestern women that many on campus are denouncing as sexist.
Some 150 men and women, students and professors converged on the basketball court near the fraternity quads for the forum on sexual harassment and assault.
But many in the crowd shouted and hissed as participants of the forum, which was sponsored by the Women's Coalition, took turns criticizing the newsletter as "offensive" and the calendar as "dehumanizing."


France
To the Editor: A footnote to the very fascinating article by Henry Kamm on Carpentras and Cavaillon (Travel, Sept. 15 ): When I visited Carpentras some years ago I was advised by the caretaker of the synagogue there that the Torahs and other critical pieces were buried in a nearby cemetery by Christian members of the town to protect them from the Nazis.
They were dug up and restored after World War II.
Accordingly, Christians of Carpentras acted according to the best Christian traditions, again safeguarding "the Pope's Jews." RICHARD WEINMANN Great Neck, L.I.


From the Heroic to the Horrific
He was barred from the Louvre for fighting in the Grande Galerie.
His teacher called him a madman.
An affair with his aunt, who bore him a child, caused a scandal.
He was obsessed with translating the most politically sensationalist events of his day into controversial large-scale history paintings.
It was fitting that he died in the same year as Byron, the poet whose fiery temperament so resembled his own and whose writing inspired several of his works.
It is also fitting that such an extraordinary artist as Theodore Gericault is being celebrated on the occasion of the bicentennial of his birth with such an extraordinary retrospective as the one here at the Grand Palais, through Jan. 6.
Not in recent memory has there been a more thrilling and compelling exhibition, or one more filled with images of psychological extremes.
It presents roughly 300 paintings, drawings, prints and a remarkable sculpture.
Many of the works have rarely been on public view.


Lisa Archer Weds
Lisa Nicole Archer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Archer of Woodbury, L.I., and Brad Michael Goldman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Goldman of Syosset, L.I., were married last evening by Rabbi Morris Appleman at the East Nassau Hebrew Congregation in Syosset.
Mrs.
Goldman, 33 years old, is a vice president of trading at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York and a cum laude graduate of the State University of New York at Albany.
Mr.
Goldman, 36, is a vice president of marketing at the Oppenheimer Capital Corporation in New York and a cum laude graduate of Columbia University.


From a Polish Sewer, War Memories
"sewer. An artificial, usually subterranean, conduit to carry off water and waste matter."
For 14 months during World War II, the rat- and fear-infested sewers of Lvov, Poland, served as home and sanctuary for 10 Jews, including two children, who miraculously lived to tell the story of their escape from the Nazis.
It is the only known wartime episode of long-term endurance in sewage squalor.


PRETORIA EXAMINES ROOTS OF VIOLENCE
A painful sequence of hatred and death is being dissected in a room at the Dutch Reformed Church's offices here, the most concerted effort so far to expose the roots of politically motivated violence in South Africa.
The hearing on the killings in the black township of Thokoza is being conducted by a subcommittee empaneled by Justice Richard Goldstone, a senior judge appointed by President F. W. de Klerk last month to head a commission looking into the violence.


Q and A
Dialysis While Traveling
Q.
I am a patient of kidney dialysis.
Are there facilities for me to take these treatments in Europe and Asia?
What are the costs?
Will my medical benefits cover these charges? -- Joel Beier, New York, N.Y.


What Do the Creatures Do in Winter?
IT was a mouse's nest, at least that is what it appeared to be.
The evidence was taken to two natural-history buffs.
They confirmed the suspicion: a mouse had been at work.
The material was an accumulation of chewed-up leaves, tiny bits of tree bark and dainty pieces of gnawed wood.
The gnawed wood was the giveaway.
This is how it was discovered.
There had been a frost one night, and the impatiens growing in several redwood tubs was killed; by morning the showy annuals were a sad looking mess.


Howard Takes Heisman Pose With 93-Yard Punt Return
Desmond Howard, the junior wide receiver considered to be the leading candidate for the Heisman Trophy, had the longest punt return in Michigan history and finished with 213 all-purpose yards today in a 31-3 rout of Ohio State that clinched the Big Ten Conference championship outright.
Michigan is No. 5 in The New York Times's computer ranking and Ohio State is 21.


Patients Trust Woman-to-Woman Care
A NEW KIND of medical center -- where comprehensive care is provided to women, mostly
by
women -- is gaining popularity in Connecticut.
One such center operates in Cheshire; another opened this fall in Groton, and a third is scheduled to start next year in Vernon.
"I think it's a coming trend," said Dr.
Carolyn D'Avanzo, a professor of nursing at the University of Connecticut in Storrs.
"It's giving women what they want, and it's meeting their needs."


New &amp; Noteworthy
NORTH OF HOPE, by Jon Hassler. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A priest bringing Roman Catholicism to a forlorn Indian reservation in northern Minnesota has a surprise meeting with the one woman who has ever been able to compete with his love for God.
Last year our reviewer, Richard Russo, called this Jon Hassler's "most ambitious novel."
LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN: The Duty of Genius, by Ray Monk. (Penguin, $15.95.) Does language mirror reality, or is it the other way around?
This is the question that haunted Ludwig Wittgenstein as he took up gardening, teaching, soldiering, architecture -- trying in vain to keep from leading the one life he most reviled, that of a philosopher.
In this biography, the story of Wittgenstein is "well told," Anthony Kenny said here last year.
"The narrative is vivid, clear, sympathetic and credible."


Sports of The Times; Steve Smith Is Making His Point as a Rookie With the Heat
WHEN Steve Smith was growing up, and growing up, and growing up, in the playgrounds around Detroit, his goal was to play point guard just like his idol, Magic Johnson.
Smith got the height nearly right -- 6 feet 8 inches -- and he got the college career right, becoming the leading career scorer at Michigan State.


17 Die in Shelling by Rebels In Regional Capital in Sudan
Rebels fighting for autonomy in the southern part of the Sudan have shelled the regional capital, Juba, killing at least 17 people, travelers from the town said today.
They said the Sudan People's Liberation Army had bombarded the heavily guarded town for at least three hours on Wednesday and Thursday afternoon, hitting the airport area, the administrative district, the hospital and two refugee camps.


POSTINGS: Preservationists' Reception; Landmarks Hail and Farewell
In recognition of a changing of the guard at New York City's Landmarks Preservation Commission, neighborhood preservationists and historians from all five boroughs honored recently appointed and outgoing commission members at a reception last week.
The citywide Historic Districts Council was the host at the gathering at the Universalist Church on Central Park West and 76th Street.
"This reception gives us a chance to get to know new members of the commission in an informal atmosphere," said Eric Allison, president of the council, "and also to thank the commissioners who are leaving."


Vietnam Hopeful on Ties After Talks in the U.S.
The leader of a Vietnamese delegation that has been meeting American officials says Vietnam hopes that it will be able to establish normal diplomatic relations with the United States in the next six months.
The Vietnamese official, Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai, said in an interview on Friday that his discussions at the United States mission to the United Nations on Thursday with Richard H. Solomon, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, were "quite productive and constructive." He added that he had invited Mr.
Solomon to come to Hanoi for the next round "at any time convenient to him."


Libya Says Aides Will Study Charges in Pan Am Bombing
Libya said today that justice officials would "study and evaluate" American charges that two Libyans had bombed a Pan Am airliner in December 1988, killing 270 people.
Libya has denied any role in the midair explosion that destroyed the plane over Lockerbie in Scotland.
Britain and the United States have named two men they said planted the bomb.


James A Cathcart 82,Ex-Insurance Official
James A. Cathcart Jr., retired president and chairman of the General Reinsurance Corporation, died last Sunday at his home in Hilton Head, S.C.
He was 82 years old.
His family said he had been in failing health and had died of natural causes.


Since When Is Sex a Crime?
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson's column on Magic Johnson ("Sorry, But Magic Is No Hero," Nov. 14) drags out the old cliche that promiscuity is somehow immoral, not simply dangerous.
Are we not allowed to remember a time when AIDS was nonexistent and sleeping around was par for the course?
Certainly, Johnson put himself at risk during the 1980's.
But for Anderson to take the man to task for having multiple sex partners is nothing short of puritanical pomposity.
Having a (overly?) healthy appetite for sex when one is young is nothing to be ashamed of, nor is it abusive to the opposite, or same, sex.
One of the great tragedies of AIDS is that this kind of acceptable (in my view) behavior is no longer possible if one wishes to live rather than die.
ROBERT BENT Newport, R.I


Sunday Outing; On Fifth Avenue, the Design Academy's Treasures
One of the jewels of Fifth Avenue's museum mile, the National Academy of Design is heralding the holiday season with a special exhibition honoring the bicentennial of the birth of Samuel F. B. Morse.
A selection of Morse's paintings, drawings, manuscripts and published documents from the academy's own collection opened this week, and will be on view through March 12.
Morse, best known for inventing the telegraph and the Morse code, was a leading portrait and history painter in November 1825 when he helped to establish the Drawing Association, which became the academy two months later; he was its first president.


Poison Liquor at Festival in India Has Shantytown Awash in Grief
In the worst incidence of poisoning from illicit liquor that India has seen in recent years, more than 200 people have died since the beginning of the month in a poor neighborhood on the edge of the Indian capital and in nearby areas.
"You will not find a lane that has not seen tragedy, death and pain," said Pandit Niranjan Sharma, who owns a video store in Jehangirpuri, the outlying neighborhood where the deaths are concentrated.


A House Is a Home, but It's Something Else, Too
It's the architecture of the large and expensive new buildings -- the glass-roofed museums, the granite-faced office towers, the glamorous hotels -- that catches the media's, and the public's, attention.
But all the institutional, commercial and industrial buildings put together account for less than half the money spent on new buildings every year.
The rest is spent on a single category: residential construction.
And more than two-thirds of this category consists of a building type that's so ordinary it's almost invisible -- the single-family house.
About one million new single-family houses are built annually across the country, the vast majority by merchant builders.
Though there are currently about 120,000 individual builders in the United States, American housing is marked by uniformity rather than diversity.
This fact was recently brought home to me when I took part in judging the 1991 Builder's Choice Design and Planning Awards, an annual event organized by Builder, the leading magazine of the American home-building industry; in reviewing several hundred submissions, I was struck by the frequency with which similar designs cropped up.
The homogeneity of American housing is due in part to similar building codes and standardized technology, and in part to the mobility of consumers, but it's also the result of an industry that is increasingly driven by trends and fashions -- what merchandisers call pushing the hot buttons.


Bankruptcies Increase Sharply as the Stigma of Filing Fades
ACCELERATING a four-year trend of increasing numbers of bankruptcies in the state, residents and businesses have filed more than 18,000 bankruptcy petitions this year and are expected to file hundreds, perhaps thousands, more by the end of 1991, Federal Bankruptcy Court officials say.
With a record number of petitions already filed -- the vast majority for personal bankruptcy -- experts say the trend is reflective of more than just the fallout from the nation's vexing economic slump.


For the Two New Yorks, Two Fiscal Standards
THE aphorisms abound, the ones about practicing what you preach, doing unto others and physicians healing themselves.
They are invoked ever more frequently these days by officials of New York City, which is straining under the stricter half of a double standard that New York State would never hold itself to and which shares with other localities the burden of paying for programs and regulations imposed by the state in its own version of the New Federalism.
"The state's attitude toward localities is, 'Do as we say, but don't do as we do,' " said State Comptroller Edward V. Regan.


Managing; Hanging On to Diversity in the 90's
Some were acting from conscience.
Others were forced by consent decrees.
And many were responding to the demographic certainty that white men would be a work force minority by the century's end.
Whatever the reason, American corporations spent much of the last two decades hiring women and minorities -- and much of the last few years losing them.
As Faith A. Wohl, a director of human resources for E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, put it, "We were all so focused on recruiting them that no one thought about how to keep them."


Tracy Lenihan Has Wedding
Tracy Jean Lenihan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Lenihan of Avon, Conn., and Myles Patrick Gibbons, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John M. Gibbons Jr. of Hartford, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Thomas Ginty officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ann in Avon.
Mrs.
Gibbons, 23 years old, is a tax specialist in the Hartford office of Arthur Andersen &amp; Company.
She graduated from Colgate University and is studying for a master's degree program in accounting at the University of Hartford.
Her father retired as a marketing manager for the International Business Machines Corporation in Hartford.
Mr.
Gibbons, 27, is a workers' compensation supervisor at Travelers Insurance Company in Hartford.
He graduated from Ripon College.
His mother, Mary Gibbons, is a trustee at the Wadsworth Atheneum and a regent of the University of Hartford.
His father is a professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Connecticut Health Center in Farmington.
He is also director of medical affairs and the chairman of the department of obstetrics and gynecology at St.
Francis Hospital in Hartford.


100-Yard Interception Return Is Big Boost for Ithaca
Jay Zunic returned an interception 100 yards for a touchdown in the fourth quarter as Ithaca defeated Glassboro State, 31-10, yesterday afternoon at South Hill Stadium in Ithaca, N.Y., in the opening round of the Division III playoffs.
In the next round, the Bombers (9-1) will play host to undefeated Union (10-0), which crushed previously undefeated Lowell (10-1), 55-16, at Frank Bailey Field in Schenectady, N.Y.


Through Paris With Mozart
Club France, a frequent traveler program created early this year by the French Government Tourist Office and the Friends of Vieilles Maisons Francaises are sponsoring Mozart's Paris tour.
The club is aimed at Americans who often travel to France.
The Friends is a New York-based nonprofit group involved in the preservation of France's architectural heritage.
Together, the two groups plan a series of French visits, each with a theme and featuring first-class accommodations.
The program's first effort, from Dec. 3 through 7, will coincide with the closing events of the Mozart bicentennial year and retrace the composer's footsteps through Paris and Versailles.
Accommodations, for four nights, are at the France et Choiseul Hotel on the Rue St.-Honore.
The cost of the tour, $2,365, includes air fare, transportation for all program activities, some meals, private tours of museums, palaces, private homes and other historic landmarks as well as performances of Mozart's music.
More information on joining Club France and the Mozart's Paris tour is available at (212) 757-0229, the Club France line at the French Government Tourist Office, or through France-Tourisme, a tour company, (800) 882-2344.
The club has an annual membership of $65.


Navratilova and Seles: Legal Muggings
There was nothing leisurely about the way Martina Navratilova and Monica Seles spent the hours less compulsive human beings often devote to Saturday brunch: they punched in at Madison Square Garden yesterday and demolished their opponents in the semifinal round of the Virginia Slims Championships.
Navratilova, using her volley like voodoo pins, paralyzed Jana Novotna, 6-1, 6-4.
Seles, whose whiplash delivery seems to grow more homicidal with each passing round, walloped Gabriela Sabatini, 6-1, 6-1, to reach her 16th consecutive final for 1991.
A sellout crowd of 18,229 fans was on hand to view the legalized muggings that transpired, in speedy succession, on the royal blue tennis court.


The Changing Profile Of Patients With AIDS
MIRRORING and in some cases surpassing a national trend, AIDS in Westchester is increasingly a disease of families.
As more women and children become infected, health-care workers say they are facing a battery of new social and medical problems.
There have been 968 cases of AIDS in the county, according to the County Health Department.
The Federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta reports that 195,718 cases of AIDS have been documented in the United States.
Nationally, 10 percent of those patients have been female, with a 5.6 percent rate of heterosexual transmission.
In Westchester, 18 percent of AIDS cases have involved females, with a heterosexual transmission rate of 8 percent.


Mineola 'El' Would Add Noise and Crime
I represent over 400 families who live in a cooperative apartment complex bordering the Long Island Rail Road tracks and Roslyn Road.
Road bridges or elevated tracks would ruin the property values, severely increase the noise pollution and shaking on our homes, and make the entire area an ugly scene.
It would provide room for graffiti and the homeless.
It would require the demolition of houses and businesses along the way, putting people out of their homes and out of work, and take much-needed tax dollars off the rolls.


John Cheever's Brighter Side
To the Editor:
Mary Gordon's review of "The Journals of John Cheever" (Oct. 6) well describes America's appetite for dirty news about deceased public figures.
I can shed some light on the brighter side of Cheever's personality.
In 1966, my roommate from Georgetown University and I phoned Cheever to ask him a few questions about his novel "The Wapshot Chronicle." He responded with an invitation to discuss this work at his estate.


Tentative Step Toward Indy-Car Unification
At a meeting on Nov. 6, the Indy-car team owners who make up the board of Championship Auto Racing Teams got their first formal look at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway's plan to reorganize their series, and their reaction was that the plan had a lot to recommend it but needed work.
The owners decided to send CART's chairman, A. William Stokkan, to negotiate with Tony George, the speedway's president and the chief backer of the reorganization plan, to seek a more acceptable proposal.
Talks between the two, and another owners meeting, are expected in the next several weeks.


Will the Recession Always Be With Us?
A year ago, when the economy tipped into recession, most economists were quick to say the downturn would be atypically short and shallow.
They forecast a couple of quarters of negative growth brought on by uncertainty in the Persian Gulf and the looming war with Iraq.
The recession was on the shortish side, as Mickey D. Levy, chief economist at CRT Government Securities and Donald Ratacjczak of Georgia State University predicted 10 months ago in this space.
It lasted barely three quarters before the White House declared it over, though the National Bureau of Economic Research -- the official referee of recessions -- has yet to make the call.


Paint Your Wagon and Your Wardrobe
Tight, ripped or baggy, denim jeans will always be a staple of the fashion conscious.
The newest denims have lost their calculated tears and been turned into canvasas by designers who paint them and adorn them with crystals and semiprecious stones.
Leslie Hamel of Los Angeles, a former costume designer, said she began painting on jeans two years ago after she found some leftover ones backstage after a David Lee Roth concert.
Her decorated jeans were first made popular by Madonna and the comedienne Sandra Bernhard.
Now, she says, they appeal to people who might wear them with anything from a T-shirt to an Armani blazer.
"I always figured people would like them," she said.


February Wedding for Mariana Ng
February wedding plans have been announced for Mariana Kwai Po Ng, director of marketing and business development for the American Express Company in Taipei, Taiwan, and David Scott Meyerson, senior vice president of the Shearson Global Financial Services Company in Taipei.
Miss Ng, 34 years old, graduated from Sydney University in Australia.
She is a daughter of So Lee Ng of Hong Kong and the late Sau Ming Ng, who was president of the Wah Chang Trading Company in Hong Kong.


Out of Slavery


On Not Teaching Children the Wrong Economics Lessons
To the Editor:
As a parent of twin 8-year-old sons, I enjoyed "With Allowances, Every Parent Differs" (Consumer's World page, Nov. 2).
However, as a lawyer, I have to note that following the suggestions about interest and taxes would send inaccurate, misleading and confusing messages.


Four-O-Seven-Seven


CRIME
Check out these mean streets in Stuart Woods's highfalutin procedural NEW YORK DEAD (HarperCollins, $20): Park Avenue, the Upper East Side, Turtle Bay, Gramercy Park and trendy eateries all over town.
Some cops might flinch at having to plow this crime turf, but not Detective Stone Barrington.
The inherent class and impeccable social connections of this paragon make him just the dude to investigate the apparent suicide of Sasha Nijinsky, a top television anchor ("bigger than Barbara Walters") who takes a dive from her terrace just as Stone is strolling by on his way home from Elaine's.
Mr.
Woods works up plenty of flashy material for his slick and mostly silly plot, which bares its sensationalistic soul when the ambulance carrying the victim is hit by a fire engine and the corpse disappears.
To prove his theory that the hardy Sasha survived her 12-story fall and is hiding out from a killer, Stone must endure contact with such rough customers as a writer for Vanity Fair, an editor at The New York Times, a society mortician, a celebrity psychic and a gorgeous network executive who becomes the detective's lover and wardrobe consultant.


Rochester Institute Will Maintain Controversial Ties With the C.I.A.
The trustees of a university that drew international attention because of its relationship with the Central Intelligence Agency today reaffirmed the school's ties to the agency.
A statement by the trustees of the university, the Rochester Institute of Technology, said "there is nothing inherently inconsistent with R.I.T.'s academic mission in accepting funding from the C.I.A.," having C.I.A. employees on campus, "or in conducting research or studies on behalf of the C.I.A."


Dario Fo's Outraged Housewives
DARIO FO is Western Europe's most widely produced playwright.
This phenomenally successful Italian satirist, actor, painter, musician, cinematographer, director, set and costume designer and political activist has been in the forefront of world theater for the last 40 years.
His creative social commentary has been condemned by groups as divergent as the Vatican, the Italian Communist Party and our own State Department, which continues to deny Mr.
Fo a visa on the grounds that his presence is powerful enough to constitute a "clear and present danger" to the stability of the United States.


Cindy Magid Plans to Wed in April
Dr. and Mrs.
Alvin J. Magid of Pepper Pike, Ohio, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cindy Ellen Magid, to Dr.
David Joel Leffell, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
A.
Bernard Leffell of Montreal.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Magid, 28 years old, is a renovation and new construction project planner at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in business management from Northwestern University.
Her father is a dentist in Cleveland.


'Messiah' Meets the Millennium
Here it is: the first space-age, computer-generated, user-friendly, mix-it-yourself "Messiah." Tired of searching endlessly for "the original version" of this great masterpiece?
Here are no fewer than nine original versions -- those of Handel's autograph score, the first performance in Dublin in 1742, the first performance in London in 1743, the Covent Garden performances of the 1740's and 1750 and so on -- all programmable by deftly sequencing the tracks on your CD player.
Or at least that's the notion behind Nicholas McGegan's new recording, out just in time for the work's 250th anniversary (Harmonia Mundi France HMU 907050/2; three CD's; two cassettes).
There could scarcely be a more distinctive fin-de-(20th-)siecle product than this alliance of hard-line musical purism with high-tech wizardry.
The supposedly authentic new performing edition has even been generated for a Handel database. (Though where is the unanimously missing note near the start of "Every valley?" Was that the byte that got away?) There is a handy chart in the booklet outlining the contents of each of the three disks, detailing which tracks (shaded in gray) you should replace with tracks from an appendix at the end of the disk to recreate whichever of Handel's nine original versions you want.


PEARL HARBOR IN THE MIND OF JAPAN
Weisman too casually dismisses the American oil embargo against Japan in 1941 as merely a "provocation," instead of the overt economic act of war that it was.
Indeed, a principal reason that the United States went to war in the Middle East this year was to protect against a prospective reduction in its oil supplies and those of its military allies.
In the late 1940's, a small band of American revisionist historians built a case that Franklin D. Roosevelt used his economic club on Japan knowingly and provocatively to force Japan to strike the first blow.
The President's first priority was, in fact, to get America into the war with Germany; he used the Pearl Harbor attack as his "back door" to engage Germany.
STEWART HALSEY ROSS Norwalk, Conn.


Things That Go Splat and Squish in the Night
I suppose the generic term for the odd doings of the trio called Blue Man Group in "Tubes" is performance art.
But as soon as you say "performance art," you're obliged to deliver learned commentary about its meaning, its antecedents and its general place in the esthetic cosmos, and frankly I'm not up to it this morning.
And even if I were, I'm not sure I wouldn't be leading you down the wrong path.
Whatever the intellectuals may make of "Tubes," a lot of it strikes me as a wild extension of timeless frat house behavior -- food fights, hazing rituals and "T.P.ing," which is, of course, "toilet-papering" or the practice of filling up an unsuspecting victim's room with roll upon roll of bathroom tissue.


In Finance and Politics, Lenin's Heirs Bid for Credit
IN the increasingly desperate search for national credibility, the failing Soviet empire last week could offer the valued name of Eduard A. Shevardnadze, back as Foreign Minister.
But the finance monitors visiting here from the leading industrial nations were stressing that, at this threadbare stage of post-Communist trauma, gold was far more bankable.
The events were theoretically separate, but both were rooted in a dearth of belief -- a shortage of financial credit in the case of the visiting experts of the Group of Seven (G-7) nations who helped the Soviets avoid defaulting on their foreign debt, and of personal credit in the case of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


CORRECTION
An article on Nov. 3 about the Fleetwood section of Mount Vernon, N.Y., rendered the name of an elementary school incorrectly.
It is Traphagen.


Bridge
For practicing bidding, it is an advantage to live in the same town as your partner.
Examples of this are the six Icelanders, all of whom live in Reykjavik, who won the Bermuda Bowl in Yokohama, Japan, last month, and Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco, the star Brazilian partners who have won numerous world titles and both live in Rio de Janeiro.
Conversely, it is difficult to form a strong bidding partnership with a player who lives on the other side of a continent.
But there are always exceptions, and two of them are Sue Picus of Manhattan and Sharon Osberg of San Francisco, who played a key role in the American victory in the Venice Cup in Yokohama.
They were a model of steadiness throughout 11 days of world championship play.


There's Still Some Flab In the Dow
Even for Laszlo Birinyi's consulting firm, which watches historical trends as closely as anyone, it took a while to figure out that the Dow's 120-point drop Friday a week ago was only the 134th-largest percentage decline in the history of that index.
But if the Nov. 15 squall presaged no hurricane, neither did fair weather return.
With the economic outlook still dark, the market fell another 40 points to 2,902 by week's end.
In recent years, sharp drops like the Nov. 15 one have presented buying opportunities.
But so far, the brave souls have held back.
Some analysts think it's simple: even after the drop, stocks are still pricey.
And, as the Birinyi Associates research implies, a 3.9 percent drop, although painful, is just not all that huge.
Remember that the Dow dropped 22.6 percent in the 1987 crash, 6.9 percent in October 1989.


POSTINGS: Facelift for the McAlpin; In Pursuit of Original Elegance
The days are long gone when the Hotel McAlpin was the largest in the city.
But it still looms large over Herald Square -- massive, dark and imposing.
It appears, however, that it will be considerably less brooding by next summer, when a major facade rehabilitation is finished.
A swath on the 34th Street side that has already been steam-cleaned shows the bricks to be a soft orange color, dramatically brighter than the sooty gray tone they assumed over the years.


THE JOY OF OLD
Rembar writes that only one talent of a lawyer "diminishes with age: the capacity to absorb a large mass of facts." But it has been my experience as a lawyer for more than 55 years that maturity of understanding, which comes with experience, makes it easier for me to differentiate between the relevant and the irrelevant.
Therefore, even though the assemblage and evaluation of substantial detail may tire me, nevertheless, I now have the finer ability to separate the wheat from the chaff.
MORTIMER JAY GOODSTEIN New York, N.Y.


An Amicable Parting
When JOE BRANDI started coaching PETE SAMPRAS early last year, Sampras was ranked No. 81 on the world list and hadn't won a major tournament.
Eight months later, he became the youngest man ever to win the United States Open singles championship, and now, more than a year after that, Sampras, who just won the Association of Tennis Professionals Tour world championship singles title (and $1 million) in Frankfurt, is ranked No. 6.
If that suggests the foundation for a lasting player-coach relationship, Sampras and Brandi would like to suggest otherwise.
Brandi said that he and Sampras had parted "on amicable terms," and that Sampras would henceforth be coached by JENNIFER CAPRIATI'S former coach, TOM GULLICKSON. (AP)


Holyfield Aiming at Those Who Doubt
Not long ago, Evander Holyfield was ruminating on his legacy as a heavyweight fighter.
"I'm the kind of guy that when I retire, I think that's when people are going to appreciate me," said the 29-year-old Holyfield, who defended his title against Bert Cooper here tonight.


Target: Boomers and Their Babies
The baby-boom generation has a clean little secret: it grew up watching animated films and remembers them with great, if covert, affection.
That secret has been the basis for two of the rare, unmitigatedly upbeat film events in recent years: "Little Mermaid," which in 1989 marked the Walt Disney Company's first open attempt to court parents along with their children, and now "Beauty and the Beast," in which this strategy has been taken even further.
In combining live-action directorial techniques with animation, devising a story that reflects adult attitudes and recalling baby boomers' fond memories of the traditional Broadway score, Disney has made its target audience clear.
And in catering overtly to that audience while still working hard to attract children, the studio has engineered a spectacular two-tiered marketing coup, one that is every bit as ingenious as the film itself.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE SCRAP DOLL.
By Liz Rosenberg.
Illustrated by Robin Ballard.
Charlotte Zolotow/HarperCollins. $13.95. (Ages 4 to 8) There is no money for a store-bought doll, but Lydia's mother offers her daughter a battered old scrap doll as a substitute.
Repairing the "Ugly Old Thing," Lydia learns to love it, and a new doll emerges.


Miss Leibsohn Wed
Kimberly Sue Leibsohn, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joel Leibsohn of Mission Hills, Kan., was married last evening in Kansas City, Mo., to Jonathan Flint Klein, a son of Joan Palma of Manalapan, N.J., and Mark Klein of Westfield, N.J.
Rabbi Alan Cohen officiated at Beth Shalom Synagog.
Mrs.
Klein, 23 years old, graduated from Smith College.
Mr.
Klein, 24, graduated from Amherst College, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and is a third-year law student at Harvard University.


Tax Protesters Vent Anger at Hartford Hearing
One man yesterday identified himself only as "a tax slave from Wallingford." Another stood and shouted like a prophet: "November's coming! November's coming!" A third told state lawmakers to show some spine and not be swayed by "Gestapo threats and tactics."
It was the first of three public hearings on what should be done with Connecticut's three-month-old income-tax law, and it was clear that the lawmakers holding the hearing were braced for the worst from the 500 taxpayers on hand.


Study on Court Bias: Law Journal's Role
The Oct. 13 article "Handling of Study on Court Bias Faulted" was excellent, although incomplete on one key point.
The article dealt with a controversial study commissioned by the New Jersey Supreme Court that found that a significant number of judges and court managers perceive a "substantial bias" against minorities in the state's justice system.
The article said the study had become the focus of intense interest in the state not only because of its conclusions but also "because of the recent disclosure in the New Jersey Law Journal that the study has been available since 1989 but has not yet been released to the public."


Iraq Frees Briton as London Unlocks Some Assets
Iraq freed a long-imprisoned British businessman today in return for the unfreezing of blocked funds in London, and the Baghdad Government also agreed to allow the United Nations to continue its humanitarian efforts in the country for another six months.
But officials said that Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, the United Nations negotiator now visiting Baghdad, had been unable to persuade the Iraqi authorities to start selling oil to pay for imports of badly needed food and medicine and to compensate victims of the Kuwait invasion as the Security Council had ordered under the terms of the agreement ending the Persian Gulf war.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bellport 94,900
62 Beaver Dam Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 3-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,500.
Commack 142,000
35 Calvert Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35- year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200.
Coram 95,000
5 Loretta Court  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 20-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, enclosed porch; taxes $1,400.
East Northport 175,000
8 Joseph Court  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.
North Patchogue 99,000
36 Jefferson Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, dining room, den, basement; taxes $1,300.
Sayville 138,000
46 Tariff Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33- year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, fireplace; taxes $4,400.
OTHER AREAS Chappaqua, N.Y. 449,000
251 Millwood Road  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 39-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, family room, screened porch, 1.25 acres; taxes $9,354.
Bloomfield, Conn. 232,500
1 Haviland Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 50-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 0.33 acre; taxes $2,911.
Howell, L.I. 200,000
37 Driftwood Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, family room, deck, patio; taxes $4,243.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Bedford, N.Y. 412,000
Cedar Hill Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 23-year-old ranch; slate floor, brick fireplace, family room, patio, 4 acres; taxes $7,915.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 449,000
251 Millwood Road  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 39-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, family room, screened porch, 1.25 acres; taxes $9,354.
South Salem, N.Y. 348,000
4 Hastings Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old colonial; family room, pantry, dining room, Jacuzzi, screened porch, deck, brook; taxes $7,215.
Bloomfield, Conn. 232,500
1 Haviland Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 50-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 0.33 acre; taxes $2,911.
Centerbrook, Conn. 205,000
85 Main Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 90-year-old riverfront, Victorian farmhouse; glassed-in porch, barn w/loft; taxes $1,738.
Old Lyme, Conn. 85,000
81 Boston Post Road  4-bedroom, 1 bath, 80-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, 1.1 acres; taxes $1,141.
OTHER AREAS North Patchogue, L.I. 99,000
36 Jefferson Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, dining room, den, basement; taxes $1,300.
Sayville, L.I. 138,000
46 Tariff Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33- year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, fireplace; taxes $4,400.
Howell, N.J. 200,000
37 Driftwood Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, family room, deck, patio; taxes $4,243.


KHMER ROUGE LEFT OUTSIDE COALITION
Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia announced today that his royalist party would form a coalition government with the current Vietnamese-backed Cambodian regime, a move that would solidify the former monarch's authority at the expense of the dreaded Khmer Rouge.
The Prince, who in recent days has been restored as Cambodia's head of state, said at a news conference in Phnom Penh that his son -- Prince Norodom Ranariddh, head of the royalist party -- and the current regime would "form a bipartite government within a week."


Soviet Aide Asserts Gold Reserves Were Sold Off
MOSCOW, Nov. 23 --
On the suspicion that plunder goes hand in hand with chaos, Aleksandr K. Orlov, a deputy in the forgotten national Parliament, has begun tracking missing masses of the Soviet gold supply and in the process uncovered secret Kremlin bank accounts worth 52 billion rubles.
"Neither the President nor the Parliament knew of this money -- it did not even exist statistically," Mr.
Orlov said, sounding like a cosmologist tracking glitter across the swirling mess of post-Communism.


Michael Jackson in the Electronic Wilderness
Of all the bizarre apparitions in current popular music, none is stranger than Michael Jackson singing ordinary love songs on his first album since 1987, "Dangerous" (Epic 45400; all three formats).
He can barely choke them out.
He gets across a word or two, just a syllable sometimes, before he gulps for breath; when he tries again, his voice quivers with anxiety or drops to a desperate whisper, hissing through clenched teeth.
While he gasps out those broken phrases, machine-made music pounds and crackles around him, at times nearly drowning him out.
The sampled sounds are unyielding, the beat relentless, claustrophobic.
Give him a treacly sentiment about brotherhood or self-esteem, and his voice turns smooth and sure on a posh cushion of supportive music.
But the love songs sound like they're being extracted under torture.
Twisted as it seems, "Dangerous" only reinforces Jackson's place as the most paradoxical superstar in pop history.
After making the best-selling album to date, "Thriller" (1982), he works to secure vast popularity, with his face promoted around the world, while he guards a reclusive privacy.
He is a great dancer, yet his songs proclaim a terror of the body and of fleshly pleasures; the title track of "Dangerous" is only his latest song about a predatory lover: "I felt taken by lust's strange inhumanity," he recites.


What's a Hero?
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson misses the point.
No one says Magic Johnson is a hero because he had sex with countless women (that is stupid, not "sexist").
No one claims he is a hero because he tested HIV positive.
Everyone knows that unprotected sex and testing HIV positive are very human.
A hero steps out of his regular life at a point of crisis and does something beyond what is morally expected of a human.


Holliston Hill, Actress, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Hill of Hendersonville, N.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Holliston H. Withrow Hill to Christopher Walton Hurd, a son of Peter Hurd of Huntington Bay, L.I., and Imogene Hurd of West Islip, L.I.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Hill is an actress as well as the head of the New York office of the Hill Financial Group, a money-management concern m based in Hendersonville, of which her father is the chairman.
She graduated from Simmons College.


Belated Thanks
True, the New York City real estate market isn't what it used to be, but who would have thought it would take two years for Joseph H. and Carol Reich to persuade the city's school system to accept a free building and $1 million?
Last week, the Board of Education bestowed the Reichs with the gratitude so often lacking as they negotiated the red tape (number of windows per room, height of urinals, etc.) that city bureaucrats kept unwinding in their path.
Donated at the Reichs' behest by Pfizer Inc., the building, in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, will house an elementary school aimed at giving a head start to the area's poorer children, many from families of Hispanic immigrants.
Pfizer will also give $500,000 in renovation and start-up costs; the Reichs will come up with the rest.
"It's hard to turn a big organization around, but when it starts to move in one direction it keeps going," Mr.
Reich said.


Ava Caldwell Wed in Queens
Ava Caldwell and Floyd David Herring were married yesterday in Jamaica, Queens.
The Rev.
Victor T. Hall officiated at Calvary Baptist Church.
Mrs.
Caldwell-Herring, 36 years old, is the director of the Self-Taught Empowerment and Pride Program of the New York City Department of Corrections.
She graduated from Princeton University and has a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Audrey Caldwell of Irvington, N.J., a passenger-services representative for the New Jersey Transit Authority, and the late Avery Caldwell.
Mr.
Herring, 33, is an assistant district attorney in the trial bureau of the Queens District Attorney's office.
He graduated from Rochester Institute of Technology and St.
John's Law School.
He is a son of Mattie B. Herring of Highland, N.Y., and the late John Herring.


Alyssa Alper Weds Joseph Wallen
Alyssa Ellen Alper, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Merlin L. Alper of Stamford, Conn., was married last evening to Joseph Wesson Wallen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Wallen of Kaneohe, Hawaii.
Rabbi Chaim Etrog officiated at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Wallen, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan, from which she also received an M.B.A..
She is a financial analyst at Citicorp in New York.
Her father is a vice president and an assistant controller of the I.T.T.
Corporation in New York.


Stacy Plotz Is Wed
Stacy Faith Plotz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan R. Plotz of Dix Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Elliot Mitchell Maza, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Joseph Maza of South River, N.J.
The groom's father officiated at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Maza, 26 years old, graduated from Emory University and is a third-year law student at St.
John's University.
Mr.
Maza, 26, is a vice president in the investment banking division of Bankers Trust Company in New York.
He graduated from Touro College and the University of Pennsylvania Law School.


A Pause To Refresh Memories
Aretha Franklin was singing her heart out on tape that "things go better with Coke."
Anita Goldschmidt, a visitor from Buenos Aires, her arms filled with tea towels, coasters, souvenir bottles and one giant oven mitt, all emblazoned with the Coca-Cola logo, was saying, "Fantastic, fantastic things."


RECORD BRIEF
Southside Johnny and the Asbury Jukes: 'Better Days'
Impact/MCA 10445; cassette and CD.


Communists Facing Muslims In Election in Tadzhikistan
Tadzhikistan, the poorest of the 12 Soviet republics, votes on Sunday in a presidential election that will pit the Communist old guard against a resurgent Islamic movement.
Rakhmon Nabiyev, the republic's Communist Party leader from 1982 to 1985, is favorite to win the first presidential election in the mountainous Central Asian republic, which borders Afghanistan and China.


IN SHORT/SMALL PRESSES: NONFICTION
MY WELL-BALANCED LIFE ON A WOODEN LEG Memoirs.
By Al Capp.
Foreword by John Updike.
John Daniel &amp; Company, $15.95.


Behind Bars, but Filling the Front Line for Tourism
If North Carolina had a booster club, Cornelia Margaret Gonzalez would be well qualified to be its president.
Instead, she channels her enthusiasm into answering inquiries from people who telephone North Carolina's toll-free number for tourist information.
Yet the 53-year-old Ms.
Gonzalez had never set foot in this state until about four years ago, when she was brought here from Florida in handcuffs.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My bathroom vanity is made of cultured marble, with the sink molded in as part of the top.
The area around the drain has become very worn.
I tried touching it up with a porcelain paint, but the result is not very attractive and the paint does not last long.
I hate to replace the entire vanity, as this would ruin the surrounding wall covering.
Is it possible to cut out the sink and then install a regular porcelain one in the same top?
A.
Assuming that the vanity's top material is structurally sound, I see no reason why you could not cut an opening in the top to accept a new sink.
The opening would have to be slightly larger than the existing sink, and so you would also have to buy a sink that was larger than the current one.
The new sink should be the kind that has a rim that will overlap the existing counter top when dropped into the new opening from above.
This rim will thus overlap and conceal the edges of the opening.


Croatian-Americans Send Aid to Victims Of Yugoslav Battles
The overstuffed cartons passed quickly down the human chain: a line of 30 men leading to the open bay of a tractor-trailer.
"Everyone wants to help here," said the Rev.
Slavko Soldo as he watched the motion of arms outside the St.
Cyril and Methodius Croatian Roman Catholic Church on the corner of 10th Avenue and 41st Street in Manhattan.
"They come here and they feel like they are accomplishing something. It's their way of easing the feeling of helplessness."


Allison Bottom To Wed in April
Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot B. Bottom of Edinburg, Tex., have announced the engagement of their daughter Allison Bottom to Thaddeus Ives Gray, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cleve Gray of Cornwall Bridge, Conn.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Bottom, 30 years old, is a decorative artist in New York.
She graduated from Rhodes College and attended Ecole de Peinture in Brussels.
Her father is the president of First State Bank and Trust Company in Mission, Tex., and the Border Bank in Hidalgo, Tex.
Mr.
Gray, 31, is an investment analyst at Abbott Capital Management, an investment advisory firm in New York.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and has an M.B.A. from New York University.
His mother is the writer Francine du Plessix Gray.
His father is a painter.


Review/Film; Metaphysical Equation in 'The Double Life of Veronique'
"The Double Life of Veronique" was part of the recent New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 20, 1991.
The film opens today at Lincoln Plaza Cinemas.
Krzysztof Kieslowski's "Double Life of Veronique" exemplifies a very distinctive kind of contemporary European film.
Intellectually well bred, it bewitches the eye.
It introduces a lovely new actress named Irene Jacob and, in a series of alternately haunting and opaque sequences, examines a metaphysical equation whose symbolism and practical application would seem to be of no urgency whatsoever.
The screenplay, written by Mr.
Kieslowski with Krzysztof Piesiewicz, considers the mystical bond between two identical young women (Miss Jacob), one Polish, one French, neither of whom is aware of the other, though each has intimations of the other's existence.


Getting to the Best Part: Turkey Stuffings
THE best part of the Thanksgiving turkey, in my view, is the stuffing.
It is even better the following morning, eaten cold for breakfast.
While some people like to experiment with exotic flavorings, combining chorizos with dried apricots or adding jalapenos to corn bread, I prefer conventional stuffings.
When I was growing up, we used two stuffings in our turkey: chestnut at one end, sausage and apple at the other, and these remain my favorites.


Bush at a Crossroads
After a battering week, the President hopes to rebound with a series of domestic trips, which themselves pose a question: whether they will underscore the White House's decision to treat the economy as essentially a public relations problem.
Article, page 32.


SENATOR POTHOLE
In Elizabeth Kolbert's article "Senator Pothole" (Oct. 27), a conversation between Senator Alfonse D'Amato and me is put in quotation marks.
We were talking about the New York Public Library's request that the Federal Government join the city and state governments in helping the library build a science, industry and business research library that would serve the city, the state and the nation.
The Senator had been very helpful in convincing the Congress that it should indeed help.
I am certain that Senator D'Amato did not finish that conversation by asking me, "O.K., baby? What are you going to do for me now?" To the best of my memory, he actually finished by asking me whether or not there was anything more he could do to help the library.
TIMOTHY S. HEALY President, New York Public Library New York, N.Y.


SWEET DREAMS
ONCE A BED GETS INTO the act, there's always a chance for tumult, for conflict amid desire.
The leftover birthday cake beckons.
Should you succumb or not?
Well, maybe have the cold spaghetti first. . . .
As the hour grows later, food takes on greater weight: an indispensable ritual in preparation for the abyss of night, an important sense of satiation at day's end.
But bedtime snacking has to be done right or it will get out of hand.


What Do the Creatures Do in Winter?
IT was a mouse's nest, at least that is what it appeared to be.
The evidence was taken to two natural-history buffs.
They confirmed the suspicion: a mouse had been at work.
The material was an accumulation of chewed-up leaves, tiny bits of tree bark and dainty pieces of gnawed wood.
The gnawed wood was the giveaway.
This is how it was discovered.
There had been a frost one night, and the impatiens growing in several redwood tubs was killed; by morning the showy annuals were a sad looking mess.


Everex Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3


Verdix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dividend Meetings


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Aames Financial Corp., 1.45 million common shares. Oppenheimer &amp; Co.


Leah Silberzan Sayles Abortion Counselor, 61
Leah Silberzan Sayles, a leader in the movement to legalize abortion in the United States, died on Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 61 years old and died of a brain tumor, her family said.


Yugoslavia Sanctions Can Only Do Harm
To the Editor:
Re "Serbia's Spiteful War" (editorial, Nov. 6): I would like to offer my opinion as a writer who is American and Yugoslav, and has just returned from months in Yugoslavia.
My interest is not to discuss who is right or wrong in this sad, murky civil war.


Quotation of the Day
"You never quit being an Indian just because your tribe has been terminated." DELORES PIGSLEY, the Siletz tribal chairwoman.  [ D10:2. ]


Helix Circuits reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


BOXING: Sports Of The Times; Holyfield Is Taught A Smoky Lesson
AS soon as Evander Holyfield survived Saturday night's street brawl with Bert Cooper, the doubt hung above the Omni ring: If the heavyeight champion had that much trouble with an unranked challenger, how can he hold off Mike Tyson if such a title bout materializes?
"Bert got me into a fight I didn't want to be in," Holyfield said.
"I'd fight Mike differently."


Coming Back; Clear New York's Bloodstream
New York City's incomparably complex transport system ties together its scattered population and maintains its contacts with the outside world.
Without the vast network of air, sea, land and subsurface transportation links, New York's offices would be empty and its world trade and tourism would wither.
New York has made great recent strides in revamping its subways and streets.
But key elements of the transportation network are still deteriorating.
For the city to climb back to economic health, it needs, as much as anything, to clear its circulatory system and invest in transportation.


Cardiac Control Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


General Sciences Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


ISRAELIS ANGERED BY AMERICAN MOVE ON MIDEAST TALKS
As Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir returned home today from an American journey, Israelis attacked the United States for his reception there, accusing Washington of having humiliated him -- and by extension, their country -- in the way it fixed the next round of Middle East peace talks.
Angry Cabinet members charged that the Americans had deliberately insulted Israel, demonstrating basic bad faith in the peace process.
Phrases like "bullying tactics" and "double cross" were invoked by several officials to characterize Bush Administration actions.


Homestyle Buffet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 9


Leak-X Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-13  ISRAELIS CRITICIZE WASHINGTON
As Prime Minister Shamir returned home from an American journey, Israelis attacked the United States for his reception.
Page A1 YELTSIN'S RISKY PATH
News Analysis: President Yeltsin's huge Russian republic has signaled that it intends to enter on the risky path of economic reform with or without other republics.
A1 JAPAN TO IMPORT PLUTONIUM
Japan will start to import plutonium next year in lightly defended convoys, which some Americans and Japanese fear may become an irresistible target for terrorists who want to make atomic bombs.
D8 HAITIAN TALKS END IN STALEMATE
A weekend of face-to-face talks between Haiti's deposed leader and his legislative foes failed to produce an accord on ending the country's political and economic crisis.
A3 MEXICO GRAPPLES WITH POLLUTION
As seems to happen annually in Mexico City, new steps were announced to combat air pollution, but once again, scientists and environmentalists called them inadequate.
A5 BOTHA BACK IN THE PUBLIC EYE
Former President P. W. Botha of South Africa resurfaced to try to distance himself from the reforms of his successor, F. W. de Klerk.
A6 PRESSURE FOR REFORM IN KENYA
President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya, one of Africa's most prominent remaining autocrats, is facing unparalleled pressures for political reform from abroad and at home.
A9 EUROPEANS INDIFFERENT TO UNITY
Two weeks before a crucial meeting on their economic and political future, many Europeans fail to understand what is at stake and how their lives will change.
A12  Yugoslavia's warring parties took tentative steps toward peace.
A3 London Journal: Many tourists look the wrong way before crossing.
A4 U.N. plans to start a fund for peacekeeping operations.
A9 Environmentalists and far-rightists gained in Belgian elections.
A13 NATIONAL A14-17, D8, 10-11 PESSIMISM ABOUT BANKS
Federal regulators have had to move more slowly in seizing weak banks because of the depletion of the deposit insurance fund, and the premiums that banks pay to the fund are likely to rise sharply next year, the new chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation says.
A1 A DEAL ON CRIME PACKAGE
House and Senate negotiators approved a package that calls for a five-day wait to buy handguns and authorizes the death penalty for about 50 Federal crimes.
A1 TRAGEDY AND TRIUMPH
What happens to a little town after disaster strikes and the television crews and investigators have gone?
Twenty-five workers were killed on Sept. 3 when fire flashed through a factory where chicken was cooked for fast-food chains.
Remarkable things have happened since, some ugly, some wonderful.
A1 RECOVERING THE PAST
In the 1950's, the Federal Government disbanded a number of Indian tribes, stripping them of tribal status and reservation land in exchange for token payments.
It was 1970 before the Government repudiated this policy, and some tribes have been trying ever since to get their status restored.
The Siletz tribe on the Oregon coast won its fight and has made an amazing comeback.
A1 HUNGRY DEMOCRATS
The six Presidential candidates enjoy the problems of Republicans and maneuver for political position in the Midwest.
D10 What does the David Duke phenomenon say about race relations?
A14 MASTER OF MEA CULPA
C.
Boyden Gray, the White House counsel at the center of the political storm over the Administration's stance on affirmative action, says he made a mistake.
His critics wonder if he means it.
A16 A SECRETARY IS ABROAD
Louis W. Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, has been traveling in Sweden, Algeria and Italy while Congress decides major issues of health policy.
The Office of Management and Budget has increased its control.
A14 TROUBLE AT TEXAS A&amp;M
An independent fact-finding panel has found that female cadets are subject to pervasive harassment and discrimination.
A17 CRUSADER FOR SAFETY
A transportation lobbyist has a personal reason for pushing for air bags in cars as Congress debates a transportation bill.
A16 The space shuttle Atlantis is launched on a military mission.
D8 METROPOLITAN Digest, B1 GIRLS TURNING TO VIOLENCE
More girls are in gangs, more are in the drug trade and more are carrying guns and knives, say experts who work with young people.
As a result of peer pressures, less supervision and the breakup of families, there is an upsurge in crimes by girls who are 17 years old or younger.
A1 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Sports C1-10  Boxing: A scare for Holyfield.
C3  Column: Anderson on Holyfield-Cooper.
C3  Vecsey on Simms.
C7  Features: Sidelines.
C2  Question Box.
C4  Football: Giants win but lose Hostetler.
C1  Jets defeat Chargers.
C1  Howard sprints, Miami stumbles.
C4  Injuries hit Giants hard.
C6  Cowboys send Redskins to first defeat.
C7  A day for upsets.
C8  Thomas finds the goal line.
C9  Hockey: Few apologies for Islanders.
C2  Olympics: Ethics report critical of Helmick.
C2  Soccer: Yale eliminates Seton Hall.
C5  Tennis: Seles wins Virginia Slims.
C1 Obituaries D12  Freddie Mercury, lead singer of rock group Queen  Frederick C. Barghhoorn, professor of Soviet affairs at Yale Arts/Entertainment C13-20  "Addams Family" surprises at box office.
C13  Theater: "Pericles, Prince of Tyre." C13  Shakespeare's "All's Well That Ends Well." C14  Music: Oslo Philharmonic.
C13  Dance: Urban Bush Women.
C13  Dance In Review.
C14  Word and Image: "M*A*S*H" retrospective.
C18  Sidney Sheldon sequel.
C18  Critic's Notebook.
C18  Third volume on Nixon.
C20 Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials A18  New York's bloodstream.
The D.C. plantation Topics: Franking.
Letters A18  William Safire: The Bushwhackers.
A19  Anthony Lewis: Government by cabal.
A19  Yelena Khanga: No
matryoshkas
need apply.  A19  Felicia Lamport: It's Longfellow, by George!  A19


Chemfix Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


International Remote Imaging reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Akorn Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; An Unusual Reading Of Shostakovich
I first heard the Soviet-born conductor Mariss Jansons only recently, in a performance of a Shostakovich symphony at Tanglewood last summer.
Some of the playing was coldly unforgiving, but the conductor had an unmistakable presence, creating a carefully etched musical architecture with extraordinary technical control.
Mr.
Jansons trained at the Leningrad Conservatory and in Vienna, but the most powerful stylistic influence seemed to be that of Herbert von Karajan, with whom he studied in Salzburg, winning the Karajan Competition in 1971.
Even some of Mr.
Jansons' EMI recordings have hints of Karajan's control and detached comprehension.
Mr.
Jansons, who has been music director of the Oslo Philharmonic since 1979, has received relatively little critical attention, given his abilities.
So when he led his orchestra on Saturday night at Carnegie Hall, my interest was high.
And in fact, the performance of the first movement of Shostakovich's Seventh Symphony (the "Leningrad") was an impressive achievement, giving an unusual reading to music that is deceptively simple.


Broad Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Japan's Quiet Plan to Import Plutonium Brings a Shudder of Nuclear Anxiety
Amid great secrecy, the Japanese Government will start importing shipments of plutonium sometime next year in lightly defended sea convoys, each containing enough material to make 100 to 150 atomic bombs.
The purpose is not to make nuclear weapons -- a step Tokyo has forsworn since the end of World War II -- but to take a major step toward energy independence.
The plutonium, fabricated in Europe from Japan's spent nuclear waste, will fuel conventional nuclear power plants and a small group of reactors that "breed" more plutonium for re-use.


Istec Industries &amp; Technologies Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Need for Action by U.S. Is Debated
With long-term interest rates seemingly stuck around 8 percent, a long-dormant debate has revived about whether the Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board should try to influence the bond market.
Talk about the issue has intensified as the yield curve, the interest rate differential between 30-year bonds and short-term notes and bills, has widened.
Indeed, short-term interest rates have fallen to levels not seen since the early 1970's.


Stoneridge Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Official Tells of Progress on Trade
Trade negotiators have made progress on textile, arbitration, patent and trademark issues, but differences persist in agriculture, telephone service and wine labeling, a senior United States trade official said on Friday.
The outcome of the talks could transform many American industries, leading to layoffs in industries that lose protection from imports and to extra jobs in industries that win access to foreign markets.
The stalemate over farm subsidies has been the most prominent issue in the negotiations; the American official, who insisted on anonymity, provided a detailed view of other issues to be addressed.


Burundi's Team Absorbs a Lesson
Over the weekend, Burundi's newly created national basketball team -- which includes students, an accountant, a bank clerk and an electrical engineer -- finished a tour of the United States without a victory.
But winning isn't everything.
Burundi is an east-central African nation about the size of Vermont, with about 5.5 million people, and no indoor basketball courts.
The baskets they do have don't have netting.
But CRAIG MADZINSKI, a 24-year-old graduate assistant at Loyola of Chicago, learned through the Institute for International Sport that Burundi's team needed a coach.


METRO DIGEST
UNDER PRESSURE, GIRLS TURN TO VIOLENCE
A combination of peer pressures, less supervision and the breakup of families has resulted in an increase in crime by girls who are 17 years old or younger.
People who work with children say there are now more girls in gangs, more girls in the drug trade, more girls carrying guns and knives, more girls in trouble.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY A FEUD SIMMERS, THEN EXPLODES
A feud between three youths at a foster home in the Bronx over the theft of a donation box simmered for several weeks.
On Saturday it erupted, leaving one teen-ager dead, another wounded and two others in jail.
B3.
REPORT CRITICIZES CARE AT CITY HOSPITALS
The care at New York City's public hospitals has become unacceptable and even chaotic at times as a result of extensive city budget cuts and rising health-care costs, a draft of an internal report prepared by the Health and Hospitals Corporation says.
The report says the cuts have sharply increased the time patients must wait for medical care and have sometimes compromised the treatment they receive.
B3.
NEW REQUIREMENTS FOR CUNY STUDENTS?
An advisory panel has recommended that students admitted to the City University of New York should be required to have completed a tough college-preparatory curriculum including four years of English, four years of social sciences, three years of mathematics, two years of a foreign language and two years of science.
B4.
A NEW OPENING GETS MIXED REVIEWS
For the first time, motorists who park on the street in the midtown Manhattan theater district have to use newly installed parking meters.
On opening night on Saturday, the 896 new meters, located between 43d and 56th Streets, from Fifth to Eighth Avenues, got mixed reviews.
B3.
IT COSTS MORE, BUT LOOK AT WHAT YOU GET
If a transit fare increase is approved by the end of the year, the New York City Transit Authority will introduce a new subway token on Jan. 1 in an effort to thwart hoarders of the current token and to confound counterfeiters, a spokesman for the agency said.
B3.
ASKING CUOMO THE WRONG QUESTION
For weeks now, people have been asking whether Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is running for President, when the real question is, will he withdraw?
Already a candidate by most conventional standards, the Governor has hurdled every potential obstacle expect one, New York's projected budget gap, and yesterday even that did not seem insurmountable.
Metro Matters, B3.
AN UNUSUAL MOTION IN KAHANE TRIAL
In an unusual legal maneuver, prosecutors in are trying to bar questions intended to support the defense theory that Meir Kahane, founder of the Jewish Defense League, was killed by someone within his own movement, perhaps over money.
B10.
Dinkins tells a Brooklyn church of his trip to South Africa.
B4.
REGION ENVIRONMENT VS.
PLANNING
Almost by default, environmental regulations have begun to dictate the physical shape and priorities of the region.
From the most ambitious bridges to the smallest playground, legal requirements and protests rather than planning now orchestrate nearly every decision a builder or government can make.
B1.
FACULTY STRIPS R.O.T.C.'S STRIPES
The faculty at Alfred University has voted to strip R.O.T.C. classes of academic credit by the fall of 1996 unless the Defense Department acts by next fall to stop barring homosexuals from military service.
While a few universities and colleges have taken actions to end R.O.T.C. programs, the university in Allegany County, New York, appears to be the first to try to deny them academic credit.
B6.
A MUST READ IN WEST HARTFORD
The police refer to it simply as "The Book" -- a black binder containing information that police officers in West Hartford, Conn., seized in a raid on a prostitution ring last January.
Since it was made public earlier this month, townspeople have been lining up to pore over its 420 pages of transactions between an escort service and its clients.
West Hartford Journal, B6.
The Traffic Map B6


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Rivalries Give Way To Ratings
On Wednesday night, ABC will present what its executives consider to be its biggest and best special of the fall season.
In fact, the network will be celebrating a competitor.
The special will mark the 10th anniversary of MTV, a cable network that competes for viewers every night with ABC in about 60 percent of American homes.
But ABC's program executives say they have no hesitation about throwing a party for MTV, especially since MTV has the young audience that ABC and all of network television so sorely needs.


London Journal; Britain Puzzles Over a Peril: Crossing the Street
It is a familiar if somewhat chilling scene, played out regularly at intersections across London.
A group of tourists approach a busy street, glance to their left and then confidently step off the curb -- and nearly into the path of a bus bearing down on them from the right.
With its right-hand traffic flow, this city has always been tough on foreign pedestrians, who can often be observed at street corners wearing the slightly startled look of deer edging alongside a freeway.
It was for them, mostly, that London officals years ago began painting reminders along curbs suggesting that pedestrians "look left" or "look right" before venturing into the street.


Down by Two Goals, Yale Rallies to Win
Seton Hall was unable to overcome the disadvantage of playing a man short for 57 minutes and was eliminated by Yale in overtime in the second round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association soccer tournament here this afternoon.
Taking advantage of the ejection of Seton Hall's John Silva for retaliation, Yale posted a 4-3 triumph over the Pirates to advance to the quarterfinals of the N.C.A.A. tournament for the first time.


New Yorkers Suffer Fallout From Bank Bailout
To the Editor:
This year, the Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency created by Congress to manage the savings and loan institutions bailout, announced its policy to evict nonpurchasing, rent-regulated tenants of cooperative buildings in their portfolio, overriding longstanding New York State laws that protect tenants from such arbitrary evictions in New York City and neighboring counties.


Alta Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Theater; 'Pericles' Hints at Shakespearean Things to Come
People may not hold their noses at the mere mention of the title "Pericles, Prince of Tyre," but at the very least they shrug their shoulders.
It is the only one of Shakespeare's 37 plays that failed to be collected in the First Folio of 1623, and it is welcomed no more warmly on the contemporary stage, where productions of it are few and far between.
The first two acts are no longer even attributed to Shakespeare but are thought instead to be the mundane cobbling of one or several hacks who were the Jacobean equivalent to the staff writers of, say, "Columbo."
Yet there is a case to be made for "Pericles," both as myth-laden spectacle and as a touching gateway into the great romances that follow it in Shakespeare's final period.
The play has everything, really, except coherence: a valiant prince whose windswept odyssey bats him from one colorful Mediterranean location to another, a couple of onstage tempests at sea, hired assassins, a kidnapping by pirates, a god-sent miracle or two, a gritty whorehouse sequence and, finally, a father-mother-daughter reunion that anticipates the spellbinding denouement of "The Winter's Tale" even as it recapitulates the powerful finale of "King Lear."


Police Investigating Man's Rape Report
A complaint by a visitor to Barnard College that he was raped by another man in an off-campus dormitory early Friday is being investigated as a case of forcible sodomy, the police said yesterday.
The police had previously said that the man's story was inconsistent and that they were investigating the incident as a case of sodomy, which is illegal under New York State law.
But they did not say at the time whether force was involved or whether they were classifying it an assault.


Nobody's Perfect, and Neither Are Redskins
Well before the Dallas Cowboys arrived here in Robert F. Kennedy Stadium this afternoon, long before the kickoff and their first snap against the Washington Redskins, their coach had decided that his team would play this football game in only one way.
"From the very start, we were going to be aggressive," said Jimmy Johnson.
"We were going to be aggressive in all three phases and we would be aggressive in the play-calling."


Smokin' Bert Stuns Holyfield, but Only for a Moment
On the back of the black satin jackets that Bert Cooper's handlers wore into the ring Saturday night were these words: "The Smoke Is No Joke."
Talk about truth in advertising.


Remorse Over Bronx Theft Is Tied to Youth's Slaying
A crisis of conscience by a Bronx youth accused of robbery apparently led to a dispute on Saturday that left one teen-ager dead, another wounded and two others in jail, the director of the foster home where all four youths lived said yesterday.
A feud among three of the four had been simmering for several weeks, since they were involved in the theft of a donation box from a Wendy's restaurant, said Patricia Johnson, director of Crossroads, a city-run foster home for troubled teen-agers.
The theft was reported to counselors by another resident of the home, but only one of the youths, Jusino Evangelas, 16 years old, would admit his involvement, she said.


Using Birds as Shopper Incentives
With turkey prices at their lowest level in years, many supermarkets are giving away turkeys to lure shoppers.
At Pathmark stores, for instance, a shopper who buys $50 of groceries gets a 12-pound turkey; those who spend $100 get a larger bird.
Waldbaum's stores are offering coupons that cut turkey prices nearly in half for people who spend $25 on other goods.


Sketches of Atlantis's Crew Members
Col. Frederick D. Gregory Mission Commander
Colonel Gregory, a 50-year-old Air Force pilot and veteran of two shuttle flights, made his first trip into space seven years ago.
He commanded the shuttle mission, the Discovery, in 1989.


Arista Investors Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Murdoch's Company Wins Extension on Bank Loans
The News Corporation, the global media conglomerate controlled by Rupert Murdoch, announced yesterday that its banks had agreed to delay its principal payments on more than $3.2 billion in loans for an additional three years.
The company also said it planned an international offering of $450 million in stock and $300 million in long-term debt to investors.
It said it had filed plans for the offering with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Inland Gold &amp; Silver reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cerbco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dreco Energy Services reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Diane Dresdale, Lawyer, Weds
Diane Elizabeth Dresdale and Adam Charles Rogoff, lawyers in New York, were married yesterday by Rabbi Gerald A. Goldman at Fiddler's Elbow Country Club in Far Hills, N.J.
The bride, an associate at Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan, graduated from Brown University and the University of Connecticut School of Law.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Frank C. Dresdale of Plainfield, N.J.
Her father is an internist in Plainfield and a member of the clinical faculty of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.


A New President at Putnam
David Shanks has been named president of the Putnam Berkley Group Inc.
The promotion is to be announced today by Phyllis Grann, the chief executive, who is taking on the additional title of chairman of the book publishing company.


Hey, Get Your Upsets Here! Get Your Remarkable Upsets!
Dolphins 16, Bears 13
CHICAGO, Nov. 24 (AP) -- There were upsets all over the National Football League today as all six division leaders lost.
None of the upsets was more stunning than the one that occurred here.


Fittingly, Seles Has Final Say In 1991
"She is not your run of the mill human being," said the rather stoic loser, Martina Navratilova, of the rather blase winner, Monica Seles.
"She walks to a different drummer, but I guess that's part of why she's the No. 1 player in the world as well."
Seles, worries about her weight and her credit-card bills, doesn't think her record $2,457,758 in winnings is worth boasting about, believes the fact that she can't do more than three push-ups per session is worth being embarrassed about, and finds no meaning in a final unless she wins it.


A Thanksgiving Celebration at the Bronx Zoo


Shuttle Atlantis Is Launched With Military Satellite
With a fiery blast that turned night into day, the space shuttle Atlantis late Sunday hauled aloft a type of military payload once shrouded in secrecy but now, for the first time, openly advertised.
It is a giant satellite meant to spot missile launchings from space.
The flight had been delayed five days while technicians replaced a faulty navigational unit meant to guide the satellite into high orbit.


Gelbaugh Makes It By Selling Himself
Be careful what you wish for, you might get it.
STAN GELBAUGH, who was selling copying machines a year ago, got his wish yesterday when he started at quarterback for the Phoenix Cardinals against the Philadelphia Eagles.
"I would rather face the best blitz in football than go on a cold call to a secretary," the quarterback said.


As Leaders Stand at Door to Future, Europe Puzzles Over What's Beyond
Just two weeks before European Community leaders hold a crucial meeting to determine the region's economic and political future, many Europeans say they have difficulty understanding what is at stake and how the outcome will change their lives.
People across Europe have been told repeatedly that something important is in the works, that the next stage of regional integration could lead to the creation of a single European currency and perhaps of a European army, and that several governments approve the eventual goal of a federal Europe.


Expect No Spills; Horror and Hoops
All 18 of baseball's Gold Glove award winners will be in the same place at the same time tomorrow night.
Proceeds of the dinner at the Vista Hotel in Manhattan, sponsored by the Rawlings equipment company, are spread among five charities.
Perhaps the most noted New Yorker involved in the affair is a former outfielder for St.
John's University.
He is better known these days as Gov.
MARIO CUOMO, and is an honorary committee member. . . .
Behind all that hair and fuzz, a former Seton Hall and Los Angeles Lakers' basketball player is making believe he is the Big Foot character on the TV series "Harry and the Hendersons." DAWAN SCOTT, who is 6 feet 9 inches tall, played for the Hall in 1978 and briefly in Los Angeles in 1980 before going overseas.
His next roles will be equally challenging: an abominable snowman and a werewolf.


CHRONICLE
Drumming is a universal language that crosses all barriers, says MICKEY HART, a drummer with the Grateful Dead.
For 10 years he has dreamed of a percussion concert tour with other prominent drummers from around the world.
"It's the dream of every percussionist to play with the best in the world, but only now do we have the audiences that recognize music as more than the output of four European countries from 1600 to 1900," he said yesterday from Los Angeles.


Vernitron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Budget Cuts Are Hurting Care At Hospitals, Draft Report Says
The care at New York City's public hospitals has become unacceptable and even chaotic at times as a result of extensive city budget cuts, a draft of an internal report prepared by the Health and Hospitals Corporation says.
The draft, which was distributed to members of the corporation's board on Thursday, says that $156 million in cuts this year, coupled with rising heath-care costs, have drastically increased the time patients must wait for medical care and have sometimes compromised the treatment they receive.


Islanders Pick Strategy Over Outcome
After the Penguins scored two late goals to salvage a 2-2 tie with the Islanders at the Civic Arena in Pittsburgh on Saturday night, the Islanders made few apologies for salvaging only a point in the standing in a slow-paced game at the home of the defending Stanley Cup champions.
"We controlled most of the game and we deserved to win," said Uwe Krupp, the defenseman who showed shot-blocking among his many skills.
"We kept Pittsburgh on their heals for most of the game."


QUESTION BOX
Cy Young and M.V.P.s
Q.
Last year, the Pittsburgh Pirates had both the National League Cy Young award winner (Doug Drabek) and the league's most valuable player (Barry Bonds) on their roster, and the Oakland Athletics had the two winners (Bob Welch and Rickey Henderson) in the American League.
How many other teams have
achieved this double honor in the same year?
TXT&gt;
A.
In the 36 years baseball has bestowed both awards, there have been a total of 12 different teams (counting Pittsburgh and Oakland) with this distinction, including the Dodgers, who started the whole thing and never seem to stop.
Pitcher Don Newcombe captured both honors in Brooklyn in 1956, the first year of both awards, and so did pitcher Sandy Koufax in Los Angeles in 1963.
Other Dodger doubles occurred in 1962 (Don Drysdale and Maury Wills), in 1974 (Mike Marshall and Steve Garvey) and in 1988 (Orel Hershiser and Kirk Gibson).
That's a total of five times the Dodgers have managed the feat, and no other team has done it more than twice.
Over all, the one-team, two-award trick has been turned 22 times, most recently this month, when Terry Pendleton of the Braves was voted the National League m.v.p. a week after his Atlanta teammate, Tom Glavine, was named the league's 1991 Cy Young winner.
Bats Righty, Throws Lefty
Q.
Brian Hunter, the left fielder-first baseman for the Atlanta Braves in the World Series last month, is one of those rare players (pitchers excluded) who bats right-handed but throws left-handed.
Rickey Henderson of the Oakland Athletics is another.
Is he the most famous one?
A.
Let's put it this way: Henderson's the only righty-swinging, lefty-throwing player to be voted his league's most valuable player award and someday he's likely to be the first of his kind voted into the Baseball Hall of Fame.
When it comes to being famous, most New York Mets' fans would make a case for still another left fielder who fits into this group of major leaguers: Cleon Jones.
When the Mets won their first pennant and World Series in 1969, Jones batted .340, third best in the National League.
In his 13-year career, Jones averaged .281.
Yet another left-handed outfielder, Johnny Cooney, put up some decent numbers batting right-handed during a career, primarily with the Boston Braves and Brooklyn Dodgers, that ended in 1944 with a .286 career average.
But Cooney reached the majors in 1921 as a pitcher, then was converted to a fielder.
One other player among this left and right handful deserves mention: Hal Chase.
This stylish-fielding first baseman batted .291 over a 15-year career that began with the New York Highlanders (now Yankees) in 1905 and that included a National League-leading .339 average for the Cincinnati Reds in 1916.
That's the only time a player who swung from the right side and threw from the left won a batting title.
Touchdown Drought
Q.
Before they scored one against the New York Jets on Nov. 10, the Indianapolis Colts had gone five straight games without a touchdown.
Has a team ever gone an entire season in the National Football League without a touchdown?
A.
It's never happened, but the Cincinnati Reds of 1933 took the best shot at it.
While winning three of their 10 games (3-6-1) and finishing fourth in the five-team Western Division, the Reds managed only three touchdowns.
For the season, their first in the N.F.L., the Reds scored 38 points, allowed 110 and lost a bundle.
The next year, after dropping their first eight games while scoring 10 points and allowing 243, the Reds were suspended by the league for defaulting on payments.
Cincinnati did not rejoin the N.F.L. for 36 years, when the Bengals entered as part of the merger with the American Football League in 1970.
One Singular Sensation
Q.
Helen Wills Moody of the United States and Suzanne Lenglen of
France are both in the Tennis Hall of Fame.
How did they do in matches against each other?
A.
Advantage, Lenglen.
She was a 6-3, 8-6 winner in the over-ballyhooed final of a tournament in Cannes, France, on Feb. 16, 1926.
She won the point score in each set, 31-19 and 52-46, respectively, in a match, The New York Times reported, "which made continents stand still." Lenglen was 26 years old and single.
Wills was 20 and single.
It was their only singles meeting.
Readers are invited to submit questions concerning any aspect of sport: statistics or strategies, rules or records.
The address is Question Box, SportsMonday, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Questions not published cannot be answered individually.


AG-Bag International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Critic's Notebook; When the Public Business Is the Stuff of Mini-Series
Does television deserve a medal or a court-martial for its part in sparing Vice Adm.
John M. Poindexter and Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North the discomforts of a Federal prison cell, or in bringing public humiliation on Senator Alan M. Cranston?
How much responsibility does the medium bear for turning the confirmation hearings of Justice Clarence Thomas into an R-rated mini-series?
Does the opportunity for voter education make up for television's tendency to present Congressional hearings as entertainment?
Some sorting out seems in order.
To begin with Poindexter and North, the independent prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, warned the Iran- contra Congressional committee that granting them immunity for their testimony would create difficulties for the prosecution in the cases to come.
Would the committee have been so eager to go ahead if constituents had not been demanding to see the accused on their screens and if the committee members had not craved all that free time in people's living rooms?
Where is the officeholder who can just say no?


ABS Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


3 Yankee Teams in Tourney
Delaware, New Hampshire and Villanova, the three Yankee Conference teams that ended in a first-place tie, were included yesterday in the 16-team Division I-AA post-season tournament by the National Collegiate Athletic Conference's selection committee.
Delaware (10-1 over all) will be host to James Madison (8-3) on Saturday at Newark, Del., and 9,000 tickets were sold in advance before the Blue Hens knew who their opponent would be.
New Hampshire (9-2) will be at home against Samford (10-1) of Birmingham, Ala.
Villanova (10-1) will be on the road at Youngstown State (8-3) in Ohio.
James Madison, Samford and Youngstown State are I-AA independents without a conference affiliation.


Consumers Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Sidney Sheldon 'Midnight' Sequel
The future of television can very possibly be discerned in "Sidney Sheldon's Memories of Midnight," and on the whole there's little cause for celebration.
Here, glossily inert, is the kind of international project currently being extolled by producers searching desperately for financing packages in the world marketplace.
Being distributed in syndication, the four-hour "Memories of Midnight" is being shown on Channel 11 in two parts, tonight and tomorrow at 8.
The story is a sequel to Mr.
Sheldon's 1974 novel "The Other Side of Midnight," which, according to news releases, sold 16 million copies in 55 languages.
It was then turned into a completely forgettable 1977 movie.
Now Mr.
Sheldon returns to the character of Catherine Alexander (Jane Seymour) who, it turns out, was not killed in Greece after all.
Suffering from amnesia after a near-drowning, she has been recuperating in a Carmelite convent.
Her benefactor is the self-made billionaire shipping magnate Constantin Demeris (Omar Sharif).
In fact, as becomes apparent 10 minutes into this epic adventure, Constantin is a ruthless killer who wants to make sure that Catherine's amnesia is permanent.


A Day of Injuries and Upsets


Frederick Barghoorn, 80, Scholar Detained in Soviet Union in 1963
Frederick C. Barghoorn, a longtime Yale professor who became the center of an international incident when Soviet officials jailed him in Moscow on espionage charges and released him only under pressure from President John F. Kennedy, died Wednesday night.
He was 80 years old.
He died at Willows Convalescent Home in Woodbridge, Conn.
The cause of death was respiratory failure, his family said.


Democrats Win On Major Issues In Deal on Crime
Over the angry objections of Republicans who attacked it as soft on criminals, House and Senate negotiators tonight approved an anti-crime package that could force President Bush into the uncomfortable position of deciding whether to veto legislation on an issue that is sure to be potent in the 1992 elections.
The vote, which was along partisan lines, came after the negotiators agreed to language in the Senate version that called for a five-day waiting period for handgun purchases but killed another Senate provision that would ban 14 semiautomatic assault-style weapons.
Democrats got their way on major elements of the wide-ranging bill, which would also authorize the death penalty for an expanded list of about 50 Federal crimes.


Duke May Seem to Be Wallace of '91, But Both Times and the Risks Differ
The speaker and his agenda may be new, but the scene at the David Duke rally at Evangeline Downs here earlier this month provoked a sense of political deja vu -- the same angry white men in baseball caps and jeans, the same railing against out-of-touch big government and high taxes, the same thinly veiled racial appeals.
Mr.
Duke is tapping into the same frustrations and same constituency that former Gov.
George Wallace of Alabama did in his campaigns for President in 1968 and 1972.
But significant differences exist between now and then, both in the degree of frustration and in which political party is most at risk.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Basketball  National Basketball Association  BOSTON CELTICS -- Waived Kevin Pritchard, guard.
CHICAGO BULLS -- Waived Rory Sparrow, guard.
Activated Scott Williams, forward, from the injured list.
DENVER NUGGETS -- Activated Anthony Cook, forward, from the injured list.
Waived Jerome Lane, forward.
Football  National Football League  DENVER BRONCOS -- Waived Darrell Hamilton, offensive tackle.
Added Shawn Moore, quarterback, from the practice squad.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Activated Reyna Thompson, defensive back, from injured reserve.


Is a Whopper in Turkey's Future?
Riding on the tail feathers of the chicken, turkeys have surged in popularity in the last decade, and now turkey farmers have their eyes on a glittering prize: the potentially lucrative market of fast-food chains and restaurants.
Dreaming of McTurkey, turkey farmers are grinding up meat and experimenting with spices and seasonings in the quest for a place on America's menus.
The industry needs a lift, as overenthusiastic growers have produced too many turkeys, driving prices to their lowest level in recent memory.


Goal Systems International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Budd Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Not Will Cuomo Run; Will He Stop?
Tonight, I quit these walls,  The thought my soul appalls,
But when stern Duty calls,  I must obey. -- The Pirates of Penzance, Or, The Slave of Duty


Larson-Davis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


GW Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lancer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The D.C. Plantation: Freedom Soon?
The effort to grant statehood to Washington, D.C., could well become a campaign issue in 1992.
A bill that would admit the District to the Union as New Columbia, the 51st state, was introduced in the Senate on Thursday.
And hearings on the House version of the bill saw a welcome burst of enthusiasm.
Three Democratic Presidential candidates testified in favor of statehood.
That's as it should be.
The District's treatment is a scandal, albeit one with a long history.
The Federal Government runs the city like a plantation, denying it a voting representative in Congress, forbidding it even rudimentary self-rule and limiting severely its ability to raise revenue.


INSIDE
Unity? Europeans Confused
Two weeks before a crucial meeting on their economic and political future, many Europeans have difficulty understanding what is at stake and how their lives will change.
Page A12.
Peace Steps in Yugoslavia
The warring parties in Yugoslavia took tentative steps toward carrying out a United Nations-brokered cease-fire, but fighting continued, if at a somewhat slower pace.
Page A3.
Haitians Reach Stalemate
Haiti's deposed President met with his legislative foes for the first time since he was ousted, but failed to reach a compromise that would resolve the country's crisis.
Page A3.
Military Shuttle Flight
In a mission that drops a veil of secrecy, the Atlantis carried six astronauts aloft on a 10-day journey to deploy a giant satellite meant to spot missile launchings.
Page D8.
Dinkins and the Media
New York's Mayor came back from South Africa buoyed by his trip -- and embittered by what he sees as unfair coverage.
Political Memo, page B1.


Knoth &amp; Meads Selected To Promote Jet Fighter
An account to advertise the Air Force's new advanced tactical fighter, the F-22, to Washington decision makers has been awarded to Knoth &amp; Meads, San Diego, the agency of record for the General Dynamics Corporation, one of four contractors involved in the project.
Billings were not disclosed.
General Dynamics and the others -- the Boeing Company, the Lockheed Corporation and the Pratt &amp; Whitney Company -- conducted the review, which involved each company's agency of record: the incumbent, McCann-Erickson Los Angeles , Lockheed; Cole &amp; Weber, Seattle, Boeing, and Mintz &amp; Hoke, Boston, Pratt &amp; Whitney.
Advertising executives considered Knoth &amp; Mead the dark horse because it was the smallest shop in the review.


Dinkins Tells of Pain and Pride He Saw on South African Trip
Amid shouts of "Teach! Teach!" Mayor David N. Dinkins stood yesterday afternoon before a Brooklyn congregation and, like an older brother who has come home to tell of his travels, talked of the pride and poverty, the hope and the pain that he saw on his weeklong trip to South Africa.
"I cannot begin to tell all of you, my brothers and my sisters here today, what a powerful experience it was for me as an African-American to visit the continent of my ancestors," he said to a congregation of 200 people gathered at the House of the Lord Pentecostal Church in Boerum Hill, where the Rev.
Herbert Daughtry is pastor.
"Deep inside me, I will bear the indelible mark of what I saw with my eyes and what I felt in my heart for the rest of my life."


How to Get the Bats Out of Your Apartment
To the Editor:
"A Large Birdlike Shape Circled the Bedroom" (letter, Nov. 12), on bats in a New York City apartment, is very entertaining, but not a useful guide to others who may have the same problem.
Allow me to share the definitive way to remove bats from living quarters.
It is used by the police in our area, who answer calls for such help constantly.


Car Mart Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Galagraph Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


World Economies


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday Auto Sales . . .
Mid-Nov.
Home Sales . . .
Oct.
Tuesday None Wednesday Personal Income . . .
Oct.
Durable Goods . . .
Oct.
Trade Balance . . . 3d Qtr.
Farm Prices . . .
Nov.
Weekly Jobless Claims Thursday None Friday  None


Topics of The Times; Sophisticated Franking
The House Administration Committee has a new scheme to help members target voters.
What it amounts to is an effort to marry high technology to the privilege of flooding constituents with free mail, known as franking.
It's a bad deal for taxpayers.
Earlier this year, the committee's chairman, Representative Charlie Rose of North Carolina, and its ranking Republican member, Representative William Thomas of California, quietly approved a $250,000 "developmental loan" to a leading campaign software vendor.
The unusual deal, disclosed recently in the Capitol Hill newspaper Roll Call, called for Aristotle Industries to compile voter registration lists on computer disks.


Discovery Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Check Express Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fielder Joins a Notable Crowd
The home run may be the defining moment in baseball, but it doesn't necessarily get you a most-valuable-player vote.
CECIL FIELDER was angry and disappointed, again, last week after he failed to win the American League's m.v.p. award despite 44 home runs and 133 runs batted in.
Last year, Fielder missed even though he had 51 homers.
But sluggers with 50 homers have never been shoo-ins for most valuable player.


Cybernetics Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jill H. Katz Weds Aubrey Martin Sharfman
Jill H. Katz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot S. Katz of Pittsburgh, and Aubrey Martin Sharfman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome E. Sharfman of West Orange, N.J., were married yesterday by Rabbi Michael Shmidman at the Westin William Penn Hotel in Pittsburgh.


Independent Entertainment Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Freedom for British Businessman Held by Iraq


A New Regime In New Rochelle
JERRY WELSHhas Potsdam, N.Y., written all over his heart.
"I coached at Potsdam State for 22 years," he said.
"A nice town. I'm from there. My mom's from there. My wife's mom's from there."


Cascade International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Political Memo; Dinkins Lets His Bitterness Show
Mayor David N. Dinkins returned to New York City from South Africa last week buoyed and emboldened by the homecoming to the continent of his heritage, but also deeply embittered.
He blamed the press for singling him out for unnecessarily negative coverage.
Mr.
Dinkins typically speaks softly but sometimes seems to carry a big chip on his shoulder.
Since his trip, he has pumped up the volume and more than once has given voice to deep resentment that he usually suffers in silence.


Dr. Ann Kay Weinbaum Is Married
Dr.
Ann Kay Weinbaum, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander S. Weinbaum 3d of Philadelphia, was married there yesterday to William Bennett Sacher, the son of Philip Sacher of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Esther Sacher.
Rabbi Ira Grussgot performed the ceremony at the Rittenhouse Hotel.
Mrs.
Sacher, 27 years old, is a resident in surgery at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Barnard College and received her M.D. from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is the director of the business, science and industry department of the Philadelphia Public Library.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Drexler Scores 48  Clyde Drexler scored 48 points, the highest total in the National Basketball Association this season, as the Trail Blazers beat the San Antonio Spurs, 116-111, in Portland, Ore.
Drexler, who was 2 points short of his career high and 3 short of the team record, also had 3 blocked shots and 5 steals. (AP) SKIING Another Tomba Victory  Alberto Tomba, master of the second run, came from behind for the second consecutive day to beat Paul Accola of Switzerland and win a World Cup slalom yesterday in Park City, Utah.
Saturday, the Italian beat Accola in the giant slalom.
Yesterday, Tomba beat him by 16-hundredths of a second after completing two runs in 1 minute 43.38 seconds.
Tomba completed his second run in 51.75 seconds.
Accola, who raced after him, was 36-hundredths of a second slower. (AP) SOCCER  U.S.
Routs Taiwan  The United States, which got five goals from Michelle Akers-Stahl, beat Taiwan, 7-0, and reached the semifinals of the FIFA women's world championship in Foshan, China.
The United States will face Germany in the semifinals Wednesday.
In the other matches, Sweden defeated China, 1-0; Norway beat Italy by 3-2 in overtime, and Germany downed Denmark, 2-1, in overtime. (AP) TENNIS  No. 1 Team Takes Title  The top-seeded team of Anders Jarryd of Sweden and John Fitzgerald of Australia beat third-seeded Ken Flach and Robert Seguso of the United States, 6-4, 6-4, 2-6, 6-4, yesterday to win the Association of Tennis Professionals Tour world doubles championship in Johannesburg.
The winners received $325,000, including a $100,000 bonus for being ranked No. 1.
The runners-up got $205,000. (AP) GOLF Nelson Ends Drought  American Larry Nelson scored his first victory in two years in a four-man, four-hole sudden-death playoff yesterday in the Dunlop Phoenix tournament in Miyazaki, Japan.
Nelson, who earned $227,000, finished in a tie at 12-under-par 276 with fellow American Jay Don Blake, Spain's Seve Ballesteros and Japan's Isao Aoki after 72 holes of regulation play.
Nelson clinched his first victory since the 1989 Suntory Open in Japan with a par on the fourth extra hole. (AP) Grady Wins by 3: Wayne Grady shot a two-under-par 69 for a three-stroke victory in the Australian P.G.A. championship in Sydney.
The Australian finished the tournament at 13-under-par 271.
Brett Ogle, the defending champion, was second at 274. (AP) HORSE RACING  A Golden Victory  Golden Pheasant, the only American entry and with Gary Stevens aboard, beat Magic Night of France by 2 1/2 lengths in the Japan Cup at Fuchu.
The 5-year-old covered the mile-and-a-half turf course at the Tokyo Race Course in 2 minutes 24.7 seconds.
The victory was worth $1.2 million from the total purse of $2.77 million. (AP) SWIMMING  Backstroke Record Set  Martin Zubero, who holds dual Spanish and United States citizenship, set a world record in the 200-meter backstroke Saturday at the Alabama long course invitational in Tuscaloosa.
Zubero was timed in 1 minute 56.57 seconds during the preliminaries, breaking his record of 1:57.30 set on Aug. 13. (AP)


Mexico City Emits More Heat Over Pollution
It has become an annual rite of the hemisphere's most polluted city: As the first snaps of cold weather hint at the winter smog to come, the gauze of putrid air that usually smothers the Mexican capital sets a few new seasonal records for danger.
In a rising chorus, scientists warn that the mix of automobile exhausts and industrial emissions, chemical poisons and airborne human wastes is slipping further from the Government's control.


ATNN Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


At I.B.M., Refocusing Yet Again
In what has become an annual ritual, I.B.M. is preparing another overhaul of its operations, again ushering out a stream of employees and trying to free areas of potential high growth, like personal computers, from the smothering effect of more venerable lines of business like large systems.
The struggling computer maker might also take another large charge against earnings in the fourth quarter, industry executives say.


Addamses Startle at the Box Office, Too
Brandon Tartikoff, the chairman of Paramount Pictures, awoke this morning, read the weekend box-office results for "The Addams Family" and said he was "stunned." Anjelica Huston, one of the film's stars, observed, "I guess people are ready for something out of the ordinary." And Scott Rudin, the movie's producer, laughed and said, "I'm on the floor, and I don't plan to get up until after Thanksgiving."
What amazed the film industry today -- and was the talk of the town -- was the unexpected weekend ticket sales for "The Addams Family," which will place it at a near-record for a nonholiday weekend. .
Executives at Paramount and other studios are saying, based on Friday and Saturday box office receipts and estimates for Sunday, that the film will gross anywhere from $23 million to $26 million this weekend.
In current Hollywood box-office returns, such a figure is "startling," Mr.
Rudin said.
The largest nonholiday weekend opening on record was that of "Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles," in March 1990, which earned $25.4 million.
"Billy Bathgate," a recent flop, had an opening weekend of $4 million.
On the other hand, "City Slickers," a major success last summer, opened at $13 million.
The biggest hit in years, "Terminator 2," opened over Fourth of July weekend this year at $52.3 million.


Thomas Finds Way To Elusive End Zone
The way Blair Thomas burst through the line to score what appeared to be his first rushing touchdown of the year, you might have thought he had been doing that kind of thing all year long.
The way he did it again from the 6-inch line after the replay official declared the first attempt short, you might have thought he was Brad Baxter, who has a team-high eight rushing touchdowns.


CMI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Appliance Recycling Centers of America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judging a Book's Sales By the Cover's Color
In a literarily sartorial statement, Norman Mailer has switched jackets, slipping off a staid businessman's gray for a hot red number.
Mr.
Mailer himself is still appearing in public in his usual ensemble of a slightly rumpled blue blazer with tan pants.
But "Harlot's Ghost," his best-selling novel about the C.I.A., is now attired in a shade that Random House describes as raspberry red.


International Mobile Machines Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crowley, Milner &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Northwest Teleproductions reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Nuvision Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Another Prisoner White House Wanted Silent
To the Editor:
"Was This Prisoner Silenced?" (editorial, Nov. 13) asks if Brett Kimberlin, the prisoner who claimed to have sold marijuana to Dan Quayle, had been silenced.
You note, "It appears to be unprecedented for a solitary confinement order to come from the Bureau of Prisons director in Washington." The inference lies in Mr.
Quayle's relationship with President Bush.


CHRONICLE
DEBORAH NORVILLE says radio is O.K., but she wants back on television.
"Television is in my future, despite everyone who says I definitely have a face for radio," said Ms.
Norville, who is the host of a syndicated radio talk show from her home.


Kahane Trial Prosecutors Seek to Bar a Defense Tack
Prosecutors in the Meir Kahane murder trial are trying to bar questions intended to support the defense theory that the Jewish Defense League founder was killed by someone within his own anti-Arab movement, perhaps over money.
In an unusual motion now before Justice Alvin Schlesinger of State Supreme Court, the Manhattan District Attorney's office contended that lawyers for the defendant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, should be "entirely precluded" from engaging in "wild speculation" for which they lacked any credible evidence.


Abroad at Home; Government by Cabal
When the White House last week circulated and the next day withdrew a directive canceling the fair employment regulations of the last 20 years, many saw the episode as an example of President Bush's uncertainty on domestic affairs.
But there was another, deeper reason for concern.
A drastic change in long-established policy was prepared in secret in the office of the counsel to the President, C. Boyden Gray.
There was no consultation along the way with concerned Cabinet departments, much less with Congress.


Alfred U. Moves to Bar Credit to R.O.T.C.
The faculty at Alfred University has voted to strip R.O.T.C. classes of academic credit by the fall of 1996 unless the Defense Department acts by next fall to stop prohibiting homosexuals from serving in the military.
But the university's president says only the trustees can take such an action.
While a handful of universities and colleges have taken other actions to end their R.O.T.C. programs, Alfred appears to be the first to try to take away academic credit.


Lucy Frost Wed To D. W. Lewis
Lucy Lincoln Frost, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick G. Frost 3d of Narragansett, R.I., and David William Lewis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Lewis of Westport, Conn., were married yesterday in Governor's Harbour on Eleuthera Island in the Bahamas.
The Rev.
Daniel Burke, an Episcopal priest, and the Rev.
Patrick Johnson, an Anglican priest, officiated at St.
Patrick's Church.
Mrs.
Lewis, 25 years old, is an owner of Pinner-Lewis, a New York glove designing company.
She graduated from Tulane University and the Parsons School of Design.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the A. T. Wall Company, a maker of metal products Warwick, R.I.


W.R. Strickland, 77, A Conductor, Is Dead
William R. Strickland, a conductor and composer who promoted American music in the United States and abroad, died on Nov. 17 at his home in Westport, Conn.
He was 77 years old.
He died of lung cancer, friends said.


Talks on Haitian Crisis End in Impasse
Talks between Haiti's deposed President and his legislative opponents ended today in a stalemate, and with no concrete plans for further negotiations to resolve the country's crisis.
The weekend of meetings at this Caribbean resort marked the first occasion on which the ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, has sat face to face with his foes since he was ousted in a coup on Sept. 30.


Dance in Review
'Three Voices'
Merce Cunningham Studio
Of the three choreographers who presented a program called "Three Voices" on Saturday night, only Hsiao Mei Ho came close to having a distinctive style of her own.


Ethics Report Criticizes Helmick
The former president of the United States Olympic Committee, Robert H. Helmick, repeatedly violated committee rules by participating in business deals that were not properly disclosed and profiting from them, according to a harshly critical report made to the committee here this weekend.
Arthur I. Burns, the New York lawyer who led a 10-week investigation that resulted in the report, told reporters this morning that in six business relationships detailed in the study, Helmick created the perception that he was "trafficking on his Olympic position for the benefit of private clients."


Information Solutions reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


4 Giants Join Growing Ranks of Injured
One of the attractions of professional football is the violence that comes when a strong young man smashes his 250 or 300 pounds into an opponent with the same bulk and strength and determination.
It is scary.
It can be tragic, as it was last Sunday when 290-pound Mike Utley of the Detroit Lions fell on his head and damaged his spinal cord.
Utley is paralyzed below the chest, and doctors hold out little promise of recovery.


Bridge
A year ago in San Francisco two experts who had never before played together won the Life Master Open Pairs.
On Saturday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals they successfully defended the title.
Hugh Ross of Oakland, Calif., who has won two world team titles, played with Zia Mahmood, a globe-trotting Pakistani star who lives primarily in Manhattan.
They surged in the final two sessions, and moved into the top position in the last round of play to win by almost a board.
The standings were: First, Ross and Zia, 1330.93 match points; second, Larry Cohen, Little Falls, N.J., and David Berkowitz, Old Tappan, N.J., 1298.46; third, Dan Morse, Houston, and Mike Moss, Manhattan, 1225.57; fourth, Mark Itabashi, Murrieta, Calif., and Mike Smolen, Torrance, Calif., 1208.88; fifth, Norman Kay, Narberth, Pa.., and Edgar Kaplan, Manhattan, 1199.77.


Chancellor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Theater; Surrealism Meets Feminism Meets Shakespeare
"All's Well That Ends Well" is one of the more problematic of Shakespeare's problem plays.
The virginal heroine Helena is helplessly in love with a count who radiates callowness and inattention.
To secure his love, she must resort to a deceit that stretches credibility to the breaking point.
Nevertheless, the play has a mature wit, and Shakespeare has made Helena into one of his noblest creations, a feminist far before her time.
At the Hartford Stage, Mark Lamos has wisely looked beneath the play's surface and located a fairy tale, in which a sleeping prince, or in this case a count, is led to discover a woman's inner beauty.
The director takes a surrealistic approach to an historical romance.


Political Memo; An Early Report Card On the Democrats' Trail
Democrats are now enjoying the unusual experience of watching Republicans in disarray, but sooner or later the Democratic Party will have to pre sent an alternative -- not a simple Bush basher, but a full-blown Presidential nominee.
This weekend, the six major contenders for the job engaged in a kind of rolling cattle show that began in Chicago, where the state Democratic leaders were meeting, continued in Des Moines before the Iowa Democratic Party's Jefferson-Jackson Day dinner, and ended up at the South Dakota Democratic Party steak fry in Sioux Falls.


Lawmakers Still Split on Interstate Banking
With time running out and no progress made in weekend talks, Congress today appeared headed toward adopting a stripped-down banking bill this week that would primarily provide $70 billion in taxpayer loans for the nearly empty fund that protects bank deposits.
The House and Senate have already rejected most of the sweeping proposals made in February by the Bush Administration to repeal Depression-era banking laws.
The Treasury Department had recommended giving banks greater authority to enter the securities and insurance businesses and to be owned by industrial enterprises like General Motors and I.B.M.


Custom Chrome reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Comdata Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BGS Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


PLM Equipment Growth Fund III L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Interferon Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


What Bombs On Opening? Coin Parking For Theaters
For an opening night in the midtown Manhattan theater district, it got mixed reviews: a pan from motorists like Meredith Zeigar, who was annoyed that she did not have enough quarters in her handbag, and a rave from city officials, who were delighted by the first installment on an estimated $430,000 a year in revenue.
Saturday was the first night that motorists who parked on the street in the theater district had had to use the newly installed parking meters, 896 of them between 43d and 56th Streets, from Fifth to Eighth Avenues.
They operate only between 7 P.M. and 1 A.M., Monday through Saturday.
On Sunday, they start at 8 A.M.
They will accept coins for up to six hours of parking.
The cost is $1 an hour, in 15-minute increments of 25 cents apiece, cheaper than a garage but still enough to annoy Ms.
Zeigar.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Federal regulators are moving more slowly in seizing banks because of the depletion of the deposit insurance fund, and the premiums that banks pay to support that fund are likely to rise sharply next year, the new chairman of the F.D.I.C. said.
Both comments reflect a sharp departure from previous remarks by top regulators, and each bodes ill for the public purse.  [ Page A1. ]


Covington Development reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; For Simms, No Practice Makes Nearly Perfect
PHIL SIMMS did not want to stand on the pedestal.
He physically balked at mounting the green platform in the clubhouse, and when the mob of reporters talked him into it, he stumbled getting up.
"I don't like this, guys," he said, once he was head and shoulders above the crowd.


American Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Congress Goes Wrong On the Death Penalty
To the Editor:
Members of the House of Representatives and Senate will soon meet to reconcile their versions of this year's omnibus crime bill.
Unless the conferees seriously alter -- or abandon -- the House and Senate bills, the United States will increase the use of the death penalty, placing it squarely counter to a worldwide trend against capital punishment.


CSM Environmental Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Simms Return Sparks Giants To Victory
Where do you start to tell about today's game between the Giants and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers?
Do you start with the frightening injury to Jeff Hostetler, the Giants' quarterback, that turned out not to be as serious as it appeared, or the injuries that knocked such Giants starters as Mark Collins, Doug Riesenberg and even Lawrence Taylor out of the game?


ADAC Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Riddell Sports Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fighting Slows Under Yugoslav Truce
The warring parties in Yugoslavia took tentative steps today toward carrying out a United Nations-brokered cease-fire, but fighting continued, if at a somewhat slower pace.
The truce, the 14th since the war began late in June, is viewed skeptically by diplomats and military analysts here.
Signed Saturday by the leaders of Serbia, Croatia and the Serbian-led national army, it offers the chance of a United Nations peacekeeping force.


Sunshine Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bomb Goes Off in Ulster Jail, Killing Inmate, Wounding 8
An explosion killed one prisoner and wounded at least eight others today in a high-security jail that houses rival militants from Northern Ireland's guerrilla conflict.
The blast, probably caused by a bomb, ripped through a dining room at the Crumlin Road jail in Belfast, in a wing holding Irish republicans opposed to British rule in Northern Ireland and members of Protestant paramilitary squads fighting for continued links with London.


For Gold Earrings and Protection, More Girls Take Road to Violence
For Aleysha J., the road to crime has been paved with huge gold earrings and name-brand clothes.
At Aleysha's high school in the Bronx, popularity comes from looking the part.
Aleysha's mother has no money to buy her nice things so the diminutive 15-year-old steals them, an act that she feels makes her equal parts bad girl and liberated woman.
"It's like I don't want to do it, but my friends put a lot of pressure on me," said Aleysha, who spoke on condition that her full name not be used.
"Then I see something I want so bad I just take it. The worst time, I pulled a knife on this girl, but I never hurt anybody. I just want things."


Clinical Data reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fed Governor Is Confirmed Despite Regional Resistance
The Senate has confirmed Lawrence B. Lindsey as a governor of the Federal Reserve Board, despite criticism by some members that as a New Englander he is not qualified to represent the First Federal District, which covers part of the Southeast.
Mr.
Lindsey, a Harvard economics professor who has been on leave to serve as an adviser to President Bush, was nominated in February and approved by the Senate Banking Committee in July.


Universal Medical Buildings L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Russia Acts: Going It Alone; Economic Reform Plan Not Waiting for Others
In a series of recent actions, Boris N. Yeltsin's huge Russian republic has signaled that it intends to enter on the risky path of economic reform with or without other republics, taking many former central institutions with it.
A package of economic reforms decreed by Mr.
Yeltsin last weekend and a debt agreement with major industrial powers on Thursday demonstrated a new readiness by the Russian republic to take an active role as locomotive for critically needed reforms.


Chippewa Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Inverness Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Just in Time, Togetherness Pays Off for Jets
The Jets' November schedule featured four teams with losing records.
It dangled the promise of playoffs before the Jets if they could keep from tripping over their growing estimations of themselves and keep from sinking to the level of their competition.
After two needlessly close victories sandwiched around an embarrassing loss to Indianapolis, it wasn't until this afternoon that the Jets finally did what they were supposed to do to the weaklings that littered their schedule this month.
They crushed an inferior team early and refused to let it up off the mat to make it close in the end.


Cosmetic Center Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. BANK BAILOUT HURT BY WEAKNESS OF INSURANCE FUND
Federal regulators have had to move more slowly in seizing weak banks because of the depletion of the deposit insurance fund, the new chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation said this weekend.
William Taylor, who was sworn in four weeks ago to replace L. William Seidman, also said that the premiums banks pay to the fund are likely to rise sharply next year.


A Counsel With Sway Over Policy
He has been accused of having a political tin ear, but C. Boyden Gray quickly heard the chorus of disavowals that greeted his draft of a Presidential statement that appeared to repeal 25 years of affirmative action policies in Federal employment.
"It's the political season, and I made a mistake," Mr.
Gray, the White House counsel, said after the immediate furor over the statement, later revised, died down.
"If we hadn't had the leaks, I think the mistake would have been corrected in the course of reviewing the draft."


Greyvest Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judith Ripka Has Wedding
Judith Ripka and Ronald J. Berk were married yesterday at the Stanhope hotel in New York.
Rabbi David Posner officiated.
Mrs.
Berk is the president of Judith Ripka Designs, a jewelry manufacturer in New York.
She attended Hunter College and the Parsons School of Design.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Coke Escalates Cola Wars In International Campaign
THE COCA-COLA COMPANY is introducing advertising campaigns that shift the focus of its sales pitches from the United States, where it is under fire from Pepsi-Cola, to the world, where it outsells Pepsi 4 to 1.
The commercials begin running tonight.
Produced by the company's three lead agencies -- McCann-Erickson Worldwide, Lintas Worldwide and the Lowe Group -- the ads require only minimal changes from country to country.


Jann Wenner Changes and His Empire Grows
Jann Wenner is feeling cocky.
He has just held a news conference to announce that he is starting a magazine for men.
Now he is talking animatedly about the success of his other magazines, his company's sleek new football-field-sized glass office, his children, his love of skiiing and hiking and how terrific he feels at 45 years old.
Suddenly he stops.
A look of panic crosses his ruddy face.
Mr.
Ebullient has just remembered that he has given up smoking.


Once Abolished by U.S., Tribe Forges Future
Deep inside the coastal forest of Oregon, a small American Indian tribe is building the reservation of the future.
After clearing a swath in the woods, the Siletz Indians have constructed a new community of big homes and broad streets.
Unemployment is well below the national average.
Drugs and alcohol are not allowed.
And the budget, enriched by tribal businesses and a portfolio of outside investments, is showing a healthy surplus.


Sorry, Token Hoarders, But You're Out of Luck
If a transit fare increase is approved by the end of the year, the New York City Transit Authority will introduce a new subway token on Jan. 1 to thwart hoarders of the current token and to confound counterfeiters, a spokesman for the agency said yesterday.
The spokesman, Jared Lebow, said it was "almost definite" that the new token would be used.
Despite vociferous public opposition, the authority has proposed raising the subway and bus fare from $1.15 to $1.40 to help close a projected 1992 operating deficit of $263 million.


Microtel Franchise &amp; Development reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Electro Brain International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Miscellany
*
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Co., Wilmington, Del., announced Friday that its 1992 advertising, public relations and associated communications budget will be reduced by 15 percent, or $46 million, to about $260 million.Du Pont plans to reduce the number of agencies it works with to fewer than 10 from 65.
Among the firm's agencies are Ayer Inc., New York; BBDO Worldwide, New York; Ketchum Communications Inc., Philadelphia; Lyons Inc., Wilmington; Tomases &amp; Ellick Inc., Wilmington; Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide, New York, and Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., New York and Wilmington.


Imetec reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Medical Waste reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Abrams Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Eateries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Energizer Bunny Is Jumping Into Print
E.B., the Energizer battery bunny, is about to cross over into print, in a completely different form.
For the last two years, the pink rabbit has been seen in award-winning commercials created by Chiat/Day/ Mojo Inc. that parody other commercials for products like soap and coffee.
The device is meant to illustrate that the Eveready Battery Company's Energizer brand is so powerful, E.B. is "still going," escaping from Energizer's spots into other companies'.


Macy Helped by Creditor
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company, which operates Macy's, I. Magnin and Bullock's department stores and several specialty stores, has received an early holiday gift from a creditor, which deferred an interest payment by a month.
Prudential Securities Inc., which holds mortgage loans used to finance the leveraged buyout that took Macy private in 1986, postponed an interest payment due on Nov. 2, a Macy spokesman said yesterday.


For a Peek in This Book, The Townsfolk Line Up
One of the biggest local attractions for this clean-cut Hartford suburb is not its towering First Congregational Church, nor the larger-than-life monument to the lexicographer Noah Webster nor even its sprawling Westfarms Mall.
It is a black binder containing information that police officers seized in a raid on a prostitution ring last January.
The police refer to it simply as "The Book."


National Security Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


HARASSMENT CITED IN CADET PROGRAM
An independent fact-finding panel has found that female members of the Texas A&amp;M University Corps of Cadets, one of the largest military training programs in the country, are subject to pervasive harassment and discrimination.
The panel was appointed Oct. 4 by William H. Mobley, the university president, after several women complained that they had suffered abuse from male cadets who resent their presence in the corps.


Kenneth W. Reese, 61, Tenneco Official, Dies
Kenneth W. Reese, the vice chairman of Tenneco Inc., died Saturday at his farm near Brenham, Tex.
He was 61 years old and lived in Houston.
A company spokesman said Mr. Reese died of a heart attack.


Ex-Pretoria Leader Seeks Tape of Mandela Talks
In the 27 months since he was shoved into retirement from the pinnacle of white minority rule, former President P. W. Botha has been little remembered or missed by South Africans, who are preoccupied with his more popular successor, F. W. de Klerk.
Now, Mr.
Botha, whom subordinates unaffectionately nicknamed the Great Crocodile for his irascible belligerence, has resurfaced to confirm that he secretly taped a confidential meeting with Nelson Mandela on July 5, 1989, while the African National Congress leader was in prison, and is demanding the tape from the Government.


PLM Equipment Growth Fund L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Learning, Memory Precedes Understanding
To the Editor:
Maria A. de Icaza and James A. Robinson (letters, Nov. 6) condemn what they perceive as an emphasis on memorization in American secondary schools and universities.
Ms. de Icaza lauds European secondary schools for teaching critical thinking and analysis, as opposed to those in the United States, which she says emphasize rote learning.


On Eve of Talks With Aid Donors, Kenya Is Under Pressure to Democratize
On the eve of a meeting between Kenyan officials and donors of vital foreign aid, President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya, one of Africa's most prominent remaining autocrats, is facing unparalleled pressures for political reform both at home and abroad.
Domestically, an opposition newly emboldened by democratic movements elsewhere in Africa has seen its support grow visibly as it confronts the repression by the Moi Government.


Bio-Technology General reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PLM Equipment Growth Fund II L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; Blacks' Realities by Urban Bush Women
"Draw or Die" is the divine imperative received by the painter who is the heroine of "Praise House." When a grandmother spirit shouts this command to the granddaughter she has nurtured, she closes a celebration of personal visions in a dance-theater piece that is close to visionary in itself.
Jawole Willa Jo Zollar, the choreographer and director of the Urban Bush Women troupe, has been exploring the folk traditions and the reality of black women's experience in a variety of theatrical forms since 1984.
"Praise House," her new and vibrant collaborative venture for Urban Bush Women, arrived at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Saturday night for only two performances after touring the country since its premiere in 1990 at the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. in Charleston, S.C.
The piece has moments when simplicity is confused with the simple, but it is nonetheless the only truly experimental work seen so far in this season of the academy's Next Wave Festival.


International Broadcast Systems Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mob Suspected in Slaying
A middle-aged man was shot and killed in Brooklyn last night in what investigators say they suspect was a Mafia slaying.
The man, whom the police did not identify, was shot several times in the head at 6:30 P.M. as he sat in a red 1989 Lincoln Continental parked in front of a Dunkin' Donuts on Emmons Avenue at East 28th Street in Sheepshead Bay, a police spokesman, Sgt.
Edward Burns, said.
Five shells from a 9-millimeter pistol were recovered.
The victim had a .38-caliber handgun with him, but he had not fired it.
Witnesses said they saw a man wearing a ski mask running away after the shooting.


Anaren Microwave Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Environmental Rules: How They Dictate Region's Agenda
For decades they have been little more than fantasies: Automated people movers gliding swiftly between New York's airports, and electronic fare cards shepherding drivers effortlessly through the city's tolls.
Nice ideas, it has often been said, but hopeless.
Yet, for an unlikely reason, the visions have recently come alive.
They are now considered essential because rigorous new air quality standards demand them.


Jennifer Convertibles reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Imre Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.N. Leader Seeks A $1 Billion Fund For Peace Missions
In an effort to resolve the latest financial crisis to grip the United Nations, Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar will ask governments, private corporations and wealthy individuals on Monday to set up a $1 billion Peace Endowment Fund to help pay for future United Nations peacekeeping operations.
In addition, Mr.
Perez de Cuellar will ask the General Assembly to authorize him to start charging governments interest on unpaid contributions they owe.
He also plans to more than double the United Nations reserve fund and allow him and his successors to take out loans from commercial banks to plug budget gaps.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about layoffs at the Nynex Corporation misstated the company's plans for its software-writing subsidiary in Britain.
Nynex is consolidating several offices of its BIS Group in London.
It does not plan to terminate its operations.


DANCE IN REVIEW
New York City Ballet
New York State Theater
George Balanchine's "Episodes," presented by the New York City Ballet on Friday night at the New York State Theater, was considered un orthodox at its premiere in 1959.
Now a staple of the City Ballet repertory, today it looks like a formidably plotless dance stripped bare even of expectable human motivation.
Movement flows out of the dancers from one isolated body part to another, giving them an almost disembodied look in the first "episode," performed by Stephanie Saland, Jukka Aromaa and a corps of six men and women, and in the hauntingly dark, anomic duet that follows, danced by Helene Alexopoulos and Leonid Kozlov.


Kelley Oil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Information International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Essay; The Bushwhackers
Foot-in-mouth disease has become so rampant in the Bush Administration that Mikhail Gorbachev is trying to think of ways to help his friend shore up the center in Washington.
The White House counsel, trying to give conservative coloration to a surrender on quotas, circulates a policy that the President has not even seen; and the new Attorney General, after the political trouncing of the old, is shown to be out to lunch.


Delta Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lisa Eggert Marries
Lisa Susan Eggert and Joel M. Litvin, lawyers in New York, were married yesterday by Rabbi Jerrold Levy at the Boca Raton (Fla.) Resort and Club.
The bride, 30 years old, is an associate with Friedman, Wang &amp; Bleiberg.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from George Washington University.
She is the daughter of Donna Mann of Boca Raton and the late Jacob H. Eggert, an electrical engineer.


Dance in Review
Jennifer Muller/The Works  Joyce Theater Through Sunday
Known especially for choreography that flings sleek, polished dancers into the air, Jennifer Muller has often used energy with less dramatic edge than keen kinetic sense.
The second of the three programs in the current season of her modern-dance company, Jennifer Muller/The Works, offers a surprise in this respect.


Benjamin Hunningher, Retired Professor, 88
Benjamin Hunningher, a retired Columbia University professor and an expert on drama and Dutch culture, died on Thursday at his home in Southbury, Conn.
He was 88 years old. He died of pneumonia, his family said.


Plutonium to Japan
Japan will start to import plutonium next year in lightly defended sea convoys, which some fear may become an irresistible target for terrorists who want to make atomic bombs.
Article, page D8.


Boston Digital reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Health Issues at Fore, Not Secretary
Until a few months ago, the issue of national health insurance seemed to have low priority in the Bush Administration.
But as the issue has risen to the fore, the Secretary of Health and Human Services has not.
Instead, the Secretary, Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, has been traveling much of the time, and the director of the White House Office of Management and Budget has emerged as the dominant figure in shaping health policy for the Administration.


Called Killer, A Colombian May Go Free
On a rainswept street in Queens two months ago, a squad of Federal agents captured a young Colombian described by the South American police as one of the most vicious killers in the cocaine trade.
But the young man, identified by the Colombian police as Dandeny Munoz-Mosquera, had broken no laws in the United States when 10 agents with drawn guns surrounded him -- and after weeks of investigation the authorities have been unable to charge him with anything more serious than lying to a Federal officer when asked to give his name.
Back to Colombia?
With his trial scheduled to begin today in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, experienced lawyers say that, at worst, Mr.
Munoz-Mosquera may spend a few more months in jail in New York before being deported to Colombia, where he has twice escaped from prison.


In Aftermath of Deadly Fire, A Poor Town Struggles Back
What happens to a place like this after disaster strikes and the television crews and investigators have come and gone?
About 8 A.M. on Sept. 3, fire flashed through the decrepit brick factory where Imperial Food Products Inc.  cooked chicken for fast-food chains.
With all means of escape locked or blocked, except the main entrance, 25 workers died and 56 were injured.
The 164 other employees were left without jobs because the plant closed.


In Learning, Memory Precedes Understanding; We Need Even More
To the Editor:
In two letters (Nov. 6), Maria A. de Icaza and James A. Robinson decry our American educational system for demanding too much memorization and too little understanding.


Reviews/Television; Hawkeye and Company In a 'M*A*S*H' Salute
"The nervousness of the network," says Alan Alda, "was kind of a clue that we were on the right track."
The actor, taped in London during a stage engagement in "Our Town," is of course talking about one of CBS's most successful and distinguished series, the one being saluted this evening at 9:30 with a retrospective special called "Memories of 'M*A*S*H.' " The show was, as someone notes in passing, television's first dramedy.


Topics of The Times; Autumn Investment
In these uncertain times, when no one can be sure which season is going to come when, prudent gardeners are investing in bulbs.
They have little else to spend time on now, except cleaning up the place, and nothing much to cash in on except the chrysanthemums they put in last April.
Their investment, planted before the ground freezes, will pay dividends quickly.
Whether spring comes in January or April, it will be welcomed by the crocuses, certified harbingers of the season, followed by a reliable succession of daffodils and tulips.
Future payoffs are guaranteed.
Over the years, the crocuses will compound themselves.
Each daffodil will spin off three or four new bulbs and a tulip, planted deep enough, will produce blooms for years.


Fighting Slows Under Yugoslav Truce; Hopes for a Peace Force
Senior United Nations officials said today that they were hopeful that the cease-fire agreed to on Saturday would hold and that warring the Serbs and Croats could agree next week on how and where a peacekeeping force could be deployed.
But both Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar and his special envoy for Yugoslavia, Mr.
Vance, emphasized that no troops would be sent unless the truce became lasting and effective.
Even if both sides agree on where United Nations peacekeepers should be stationed, the composition and sending of a force needs approval by the Security Council.


Religious Bookstores Thrive As They Move to Diversify
The showroom has marbled floors, polished chrome and glass cases with blue neon trim.
On display are hand-painted mezuzahs, Batman and Ninja Turtle yarmulkes, and gold and silver menorahs.
J.
Levine &amp; Company is not the typical old-fashioned religious bookstore.
"I've found that people are looking today for presentation or atmosphere," said Danny Levine, the owner of J. Levine &amp; Company, a Manhattan store that specializes in Jewish books and a variety of Judaica.


Mass Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Treasury to Sell Two- and Five-Year Notes
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings this holiday-shortened week includes today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, along with an auction of two-year notes, also today.
The Government is auctioning five-year notes tomorrow.
The two-year auction has an 11 A.M. deadline for noncompetitive bids and a noon deadline for competitive bids.


Canadian Manoir reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rightist and Ecology Parties Gain in Belgian Vote
Environmentalist and far-right parties made big gains in Belgium's national elections today as a significant number of voters turned away from the country's leading parties.
It appeared from incomplete returns that all the parties in the center-left governing coalition led by Prime Minister Wilfried Martens, a Christian Democrat from the Flemish-speaking north, would lose some seats in the new Parliament.
But it was also expected that the new coalition government would include the alliances of parties that have controlled Belgian politics since World War II -- Christian Democrats with either Socialists or Liberals.


Books of The Times; Nixon in the Aftermath of Watergate
Nixon Ruin and Recovery, 1973-1990  By Stephen E. Ambrose  Illustrated. 667 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.
In this third volume of his biography of Richard M. Nixon, Stephen E. Ambrose continues the monumental exercise in ambivalence that he began in "Nixon: The Education of a Politician, 1913-1962" (1987) and continued in "Nixon: The Triumph of a Politician, 1962-1972" (1989).
Both his admiration and his disdain grow more pronounced in "Nixon: Ruin and Recovery, 1973-1990." Yet they remain in balance.
The question is, with all that has been written on the last phases of Mr.
Nixon's career, including many books by the former President himself, is it worth plowing through 600 more pages to experience this peculiar balance?


USA Waste Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Little Enthusiasm For GTE Shares
THE GTE Corporation is the sixth-largest telecommunications company in the world with $18.4 billion in 1990 revenue.
Yet it has had a difficult time getting the attention of investors, despite a return on equity that outperforms others in the telecommunications group and its strong growth prospects.
Of course, it could be something in the tone of the analysts' recommendations.
"It's a weak buy," said Charles W. Schelke, an analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
"Nobody is pounding the table for the stock." And Joanne C. Smith, an analyst at Nomura Research Institute, said, "Sure, the company is doing everything right, but it's already reflected in the stock."


Recoton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Tougher College Preparation Is Planned for City University
Students admitted to the City University of New York should be required to have completed a tough college-preparatory curriculum including three years of mathematics and two years of a foreign language, an advisory panel to the university's chancellor has recommended.
The university's open-admissions policy now guarantees placement to any New York high school graduate.
The advisory panel would require college-preparatory credits including four years of English, four years of social studies, two years of science, a year of performing or visual arts and the math and foreign language requirements.


Enzon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Horizon Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Grease Monkey Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BSN Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Duramed Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bill on Transit Becomes Personal Pitch for Safety
For the last two weeks, Peter A. Peyser Jr., a lobbyist who specializes in transportation, has been making the rounds on Capitol Hill with an intensely personal pitch for automobile safety.
House and Senate conferees are debating a six-year bill on transportation programs under tremendous pressure to have a measure passed before Thanksgiving.
One of the sticking points is whether to include new automobile design standards that the Senate favors but that the House has not approved.


Higher Demand for Oil Is Expected
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries will begin its annual year-end meeting in Vienna on Tuesday amid renewed indications that demand for oil will continue to increase gradually this winter despite the global recession.
And virtually all oil industry experts anticipate slightly higher oil prices this winter, in light of higher demand and a decline in Soviet oil output, regardless of any policy adopted by OPEC at the gathering.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Duke Power Co., Charlotte, N.C., is offering $150 million in 8 3/8 percent first-mortgage bonds due 2021, at 96.375, to yield 8.717 percent, through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Nonrefundable for five years, the bonds are expected to be rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Commodore Environmental Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Continental Health Affiliates reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Argonauts Capture the Grey Cup And Hope Fans Don't Catch Cold
Donald Crump, commissioner of the Canadian Football League, trotted out to the 55-yard line today in his bright yellow parka and shook mittens quickly with the two captains.
Another Grey Cup championship was officially under way.
This certainly was not the Super Bowl in Tampa, Fla.
It was minus-six degrees Farenheit at Winnipeg Stadium in what is arguably the coldest big city in the world, and the C.F.L. was about to stage its 82-year-old showcase game.


Howard Sprints in Heisman Run
There may be endless debate over a national champion, but Desmond Howard has left little doubt as to who the Heisman Trophy winner should be.
Michigan's all-purpose wide receiver put on another electrifying performance Saturday as the Wolverines defeated Ohio State, 31-3.


Vantage Point Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NBC Names Head of Unit
NBC announced a series of appointments in its stations division yesterday, naming John Rohrbeck president of the division, replacing Albert D. Jerome.
Mr.
Jerome announced last week that he was leaving NBC to become president of Spectradyne Inc.


ABC's Bunny Hop Cheapens 'World'
You're watching what looks like a promo for "ABC's Wide World of Sports," with Jim McKay's voice in the background, when from the left of the screen marches the cymbals-clanging Energizer battery bunny.
The campaign that features the percussive hare is meant to dupe viewers into thinking a spot is for one product when it is actually for Eveready.
Generally, the spots interrupted by the bunny have been for fake products.
But "Wide World" is a real program, last time I checked TV Guide.


Classical Music in Review
Dmitri Alekseyev  Pianist Metropolitan Museum of Art
It is surprising that Americans do not know Dmitri Alekseyev better.
The 44-year-old pianist made impressive showings in several international competitions in the late 60's and early 70's and has since appeared in the West more regularly than some relatively familiar Russian performers.


Bank Regulator Makes Plea For $70 Billion in U.S. Aid
As lawmakers from the House and Senate held their first official meeting on competing banking bills, one of the nation's senior regulators urged Congress to lay aside its differences and provide $70 billion in taxpayer loans promptly to keep the nearly empty bank insurance fund afloat.
At the emergency hearing called by the Senate Banking Committee, Wiliam Taylor, the new chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, said he could not guarantee that the $70 billion in new money would ultimately be enough to handle the industry's growing crisis.


Atom by Atom, Scientists Build 'Invisible' Machines of the Future
SCIENTISTS are beginning to gain the ability to manipulate matter by its most basic components -- molecule by molecule and even atom by atom.
That ability, while now very crude, might one day allow people to build almost unimaginably small electronic circuits and machines, producing, for example, a supercomputer invisible to the naked eye.
Some futurists even imagine building tiny robots that could travel through the body performing surgery on damaged cells.


New Animal Vaccines Spread Like Diseases
SCIENTISTS in North America, Europe and Australia say they believe that a new family of genetically engineered vaccines will soon be perfected as powerful weapons against such epidemics as rabies, as well as animal pests like rats and rabbits.
Biologists say that new vaccines under development can not only halt epidemic diseases among wild animals, but will provide a humane method for drastically reducing populations of rabbits in Australia, rats in Indonesia, white-tailed deer in the United States and other rapidly multiplying species that threaten the environment.


Economy Needs Return to I.R.A. Deductibility
To the Editor:
In "Blame Bush for the Recession" (Op-Ed, Nov. 12), Jude Wanniski's argument for reducing or eliminating the capital gains tax to stimulate the economy is based on a specious analogy.
We are asked to think of a horse race in which a 40-to-1 long shot wins but those who bet on it are stripped of all but $4 of their winnings by Internal Revenue Service agents, creating "an even-money payoff."


Serenade of Color Woos Pollinators to Flowers
MANY flowering plants woo their insect pollinators and gently direct them to their most fertile blossoms by changing the colors of individual flowers from one day to the next, a researcher has found.
Through color cues, the plant seems to signal to the insect that it would be better off visiting one flower on its bush rather than another.
The particular hue tells the pollinator that the flower is likely to be far more engorged with nectar than are neighboring blooms; that nectar-rich flower also happens to be sexually ripe and ready to either dispense its pollen or to receive pollen the insect has picked up from another flower.


Instead of Hospitals For the Mentally Ill
To the Editor:
The prohibitive costs and abuses of psychiatric hospital programs compel society to find alternative treatments for the mentally ill.
More than 25 years ago, I was associated with a National Institute of Mental Health-financed clinical research project that demonstrated family and home-based treatment as equally effective to and more economical than psychiatric hospitalization for more than 90 percent of patients who are acutely mentally disturbed.
Home-based treatment carries less stigma, maintains the patient at home and in the community, and returns the individual to function as breadwinner, homemaker or student more quickly than hospital-based treatment.
Finally, the cost of this alternative is one-third to one-fourth that of psychiatric hospitalization.
Other scientific clinical studies have since then yielded similar results.


Soviet Pact: U.S. Banks Little Affected
Last Thursday's agreement by the seven leading industrialized democracies to grant debt assistance to the Soviet Union could mean American banks will have to wait longer to receive loan repayments, a senior Treasury official said today, but the amount involved is small.
To the irritation of international bankers, the agreement that deferred principal payments owed through the end of next year on loans from the seven Governments, known as the Group of Seven, also encouraged the Soviet republics to seek comparable treatment from commercial banks, corporations and other governments.


Classical Music in Review
Music Today
Merkin Concert Hall
Speculation about jazz's influence on European composers should begin with the fact that Stravinsky's first jazz was written without his ever having heard a note of it.
His models were sheet music obtained in this country: skeletal black-and-white exemplars, untroubled by idiomatic nuance, on which Stravinsky could impose his own sensibilities and traditions.


Accounts
*
Conagra Inc., Omaha, to Grey Advertising Inc., New York, from D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, St.
Louis, for its Banquet and Kid Cuisine brands of frozen foods.
Billings were not disclosed.


Fiat Chief's Brother Viewed as Successor
Gianni Agnelli, the 70-year-old chairman of Italy's Fiat Corporation, seeking anew to dispel speculation about his likely successor, said in an interview published over the weekend that he had "not the slightest doubt" that his younger brother Umberto was "perfectly prepared" to take over from him.
The issue of the succession at Italy's Turin-based corporate giant has raised frequent questions in the past, particularly following power struggles in the late 1980's between senior executives and Cesare Romiti, managing director, who has also been mentioned as a possible interim successor.


New Yorkers Giving Dinkins Low Marks
Nearly halfway through his term, Mayor David N. Dinkins's political support has slid sharply, with fewer than a third of all New Yorkers approving of the way he is handling his job, and two-thirds saying it is time to give someone else a chance, according to a citywide New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.
Battered by the city's fiscal crisis, rising social problems and the dashing of many of the high expectations that greeted his narrow victory as the city's first black mayor, Mr.
Dinkins has an approval rating of 29 percent, with 58 percent disapproving -- almost exactly the reverse of his ratings in mid-1990.


The New Official Drink At Shea Stadium: Coke
Effective with next year's baseball season, the Coca-Cola Company will replace the Royal Crown Cola Company as the advertiser and soft-drink supplier at Shea Stadium in New York, Coca-Cola and the New York Mets said yesterday.
Coke will erect signs in the stadium, run ads in the Mets' yearbook and support promotional programs, said James Ross, the Mets's vice president of marketing.
The deal puts Coke in 25 of the 26 Major League Baseball stadiums, the exception being Wrigley Field in Chicago.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about Dr.
Abu Hayat, who is accused of having mishandled abortions, referred imprecisely to the length of time New York State health officials knew about a case in which a woman died.
They learned of the matter in the spring of 1991.
A further report about the case appears today on page B1.


T.W.A. to Buy A Pan Am Unit
Trans World Airlines said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the assets of Pan Am Express, a commuter carrier operating out of John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York and Miami International Airport.
The $28 million deal will let T.W.A. expand its domestic service from Kennedy, while also feeding passengers to Pan American World Airways Inc.'s Latin American operations on flights into Pan Am's Miami hub.
The Miami flights will "ultimately be used by T.W.A. as part of an expanded Florida and Caribbean operation," T.W.A. said in a statement.


Martin R. Himmel, Who Marketed Dull Brands Into Gold, Dies at 66
Martin Richard Himmel, a marketer who made a tidy fortune turning cast-off brands like Doan's backache pills and Lavoris mouthwash into household names, died yesterday in Memorial Sloan-Kettering Hospital.
He was 66 years old.
Mr. Himmel died of prostate cancer, said his son, Jeffrey.


Casting Doubts: Economy Stinging Bush
A striking loss of confidence in President Bush's economic leadership is leading Americans to reassess the Bush Presidency, setting the stage for a competitive election next year, according to the latest nationwide New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Only one American in four now approves of Mr.
Bush's handling of the economy, a level of discontent unmatched since the days of double-digit inflation under President Jimmy Carter.
Mr.
Bush's overall job approval rating is now at 51 percent, a drop of 16 percentage points since mid-October.
The declines seemed to reflect a month of bad economic news and turmoil in the White House.


Corrections
A sports article yesterday about the United States Olympic Committee's ethics report on Robert Helmick, its former president, misidentified the lawyer who led the investigation.
He is Arnold I. Burns.


Home Is on Their Minds
Congressional leaders in both parties are trying to adjourn this session by Tuesday night or early Wednesday, if they can complete action on a few remaining issues in both houses.
As this rancorous session seems to have run out of legislative steam, leaving town before Thanksgiving has been an increasingly attractive objective.
Out of Washington, the lawmakers will rest, hold hearings, raise campaign money and generally plan for the next Congressional session as well as next fall's elections.


Morris Goldberg, 88, Rabbi of a Temple In Theater District
Dr.
Morris M. Goldberg, the rabbi of Congregation Ezrath Israel in the theater district in Manhattan, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 88 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Patterns
American St. Tropez?
Greetings from Miami Beach, America's hottest new style center, where you can barely walk down the street without running into camera crews, models, hairdressers and fashion editors.
It's practically fashion gridlock.
There was Jenny Capitain, a fashion director of Vogue, towing a group of hairdressers, stylists and the model Elaine Irwin (the one with the blond hair and black eyebrows), for a fashion shoot over the weekend.


Books of The Times; Lives Encapsulated in Margaret Atwood Stories
Wilderness Tips  By Margaret Atwood 227 pages. Nan A. Talese/Doubleday.
In her last novel, "Cat's Eye," Margaret Atwood described the curvature of time, how it "turns back upon itself, like a wave." That same sense of time's fluidity and motion informs this dazzling collection of stories.
Whole lives are encapsulated in each of these tales: in a few brief pages, we see how characters move from the insecurities of adolescence into the passions of young adulthood, into the sobering ambiguities of late middle age.
Indeed, Ms.
Atwood writes about her characters' inner lives with the sort of authority and assurance usually associated with autobiographical novels: the reader has the sense that she has complete access to her people's emotional histories, complete understanding of their hearts and imaginations.


Israel Held Likely to Agree To U.S. Site for Peace Talks
Israeli officials said today that they were all but certain to agree to resuming peace talks in Washington next week, but added that they want the meetings to be brief, confined to procedural matters and then moved to a new location in or near the Middle East.
As expected, Israel let the day pass without formally answering a United States request for a yes or no to its invitation to get direct negotiations going again with neighboring Arab states and the Palestinians, this time in Washington on Dec. 4.


A Bigger Jeep Wagon Lifts Hopes at Chrysler
The Jeep Grand Cherokee, which begins production early next year, represents an important bet for the Chrysler Corporation, which has invested $1 billion in a new plant to build it.
The roomier wagon will expand Chrysler's Cherokee offerings and price range and give the company a larger four-door, four-wheel-drive model that it desperately needs to win back sales lost to the hot-selling Ford Explorer.
In an effort to persuade outsiders that its future looks good, Chrysler wants its lenders and shareholders to know that help is on the way, with the new Jeep set to go on sale in April.
The company has been inviting industry analysts and journalists to view and drive the new models.
The company has taken similar steps with the L/H series of midsized cars it plans to introduce later next year: the Eagle Vision, Chrysler Concorde and Dodge Intrepid.


Electronic Monitoring Is Planned for Detainees
With electronic monitoring bracelets strapped to their legs, 500 New York City inmates awaiting trial are to be released from jail next year in a new effort to reduce prison overcrowding, officials said yesterday.
In January, the city plans to release the first batch of inmates in a type of home-arrest supervision.
In each case, a judge's approval would be required.


Bradley Wins Award
PAT BRADLEY, who won four tournaments, earned $763,118 and made the Ladies Professional Golf Association Hall of Fame by winning her 30th career tournament, was named the Rolex Player of the Year yesterday at a ceremony in New York City.
"I never thought at this point in my career, 1991 would be so special," said the 40-year-old Bradley, who had 21 top 10 finishes in 26 events this year.
"But it turned out to be the year of all years." (AP)


Student Identifies Gunman At Kahane Murder Trial
A college student yesterday became the first witness at the Meir Kahane murder trial to identify the defendant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, as the killer of Rabbi Kahane.
The witness, Ari Gottesman, 21 years old, a junior at Touro College, testified in State Supreme Court in


Buechele to Scout Area
Pending an offer from the Yankees, STEVE BUECHELE plans to take a tour of the Bergen County area of New Jersey this weekend to see how he might like living in the New York area, his agent said yesterday.


Ex-Hostage Joyfully Returns to the U.S.
With his granddaughter on his arm, a little girl whose birth he had learned about from a Beirut newspaper, Thomas M. Sutherland arrived back in the United States tonight for a joyful family reunion and the end of a nightmare.
"Hello, America, and thank you," he said, with a broad smile and the soft lilt of his native Scotland in his voice.
"We're going to have a very, very happy Thanksgiving."


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press in the Company News columns of Business Day on Friday about the spinoff of the GFC Financial Corporation from the Dial Corporation misstated their profit forecasts.
Dial held to its earlier forecast that 1992 profits for the two companies together would increase by as much as $28 million next year as a result of the spinoff; it did not reduce the profit estimates for next year.


Jets' Thomas Runs Away From Any Talk of a Slump
Blair Thomas scored his first two rushing touchdowns of the season against San Diego on Sunday, and after the game he rushed out of the locker room without talking, leaving reporters to trail him outside.
And then he had little to say.
A day later, here in the locker room at the Jets' practice facility, Thomas said he was reacting to the criticism from the media that he was in a slump.


Kurdish Talks Frozen, Iraqis Advance Anew
Kasim Rashid, a Kurdish rebel swathed in bandoleers and carrying a Kalashnikov automatic rifle, stood at one end of a four-lane bridge spanning the Zab River.
A driver who had just passed through the Iraqi Army roadblock on the other side of the bridge, just outside this northern Iraqi city, pulled to a stop and told the guerrilla commander, "The soldiers say you must leave or they will attack."


TRANSACTIONS
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Promoted Rich Rogers to vice president of marketing and broadcasting.
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Signed Gerald Henderson, guard.
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Traded Tyrone Corbin, forward, to the Utah Jazz, for Thurl Bailey, forward, and a 1992 second-round draft choice.
Continental Basketball Association
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Traded Melvin Newbern, guard, to Yakima for a fourth-round, 1992 draft choice and an undisclosed amount of cash.
MID-MICHIGAN GREAT LAKERS -- Signed Jim Paul, center. Waived Andre Reyes, center.
YAKIMA SUN KINGS -- Fired Dean Nicholson coach.
Named Bill Klucas coach.
Global Basketball Association
RALEIGH BULLFROGS -- Signed Michael Morrison, guard. Released Damon Green, guard.


Shift at I.B.M. Alters Succession Outlook
In what is expected to be the first step in a far-reaching shake-up at I.B.M., an executive widely viewed as a potential successor to the chairman, John F. Akers, yesterday was handed what many industry executives called a demotion.
George H. Conrades, senior vice president of I.B.M.'s struggling United States business, was named to what is considered a lower-ranking position, senior vice president for corporate marketing and services.


Miller Lawyers Ask for Dismissal of Charges
Defense lawyers in the fraud trial of Assembly Speaker Mel Miller of New York argued yesterday that the judge should dismiss the charges against Mr.
Miller and a top aide.
Judge Raymond J. Dearie, who was waiting for additional papers, did not rule on the arguments.
The case focuses on charges that Mr.
Miller and his co-defendant, Jay Adolf, who were law partners, cheated clients investing in cooperative apartments.


Whitney Group Head Sees Overseas Growth
With the continued globalization of Wall Street, even the consultants to the financial industry have begun casting their eyes overseas.
That interest in international business fueled a merger last week between two unlikely bedfellows: the Whitney Group, an executive search and consulting firm that focuses on the financial industry, and Albert Frank-Guenther Law, the nation's oldest advertising and public relation's agency, which also caters to the same business niche.


Robert Kaufman, 60, TV and Film Writer
Robert Kaufman, a television and screen comedy writer whose credits included the films "Divorce American Style" and "Love at First Bite," died on Thursday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 60 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his wife, Robin Krause.


More Than a Fig Tree
STRANGLER fig trees of Panama are "genetic mosaics" that may consist of up to eight genetically distinct plants, according to research reported in the current issue of the journal Science.
The findings indicate conservationists may have to rethink how many fig trees -- a major food source for tropical birds, monkeys and other animals -- are necessary to preserve biodiversity in a tropical forest.


LAWMAKERS NEAR $151 BILLION PACT ON TRANSPORT BILL
After spending the weekend in legislative gridlock, House and Senate negotiators reached virtual agreement today on a compromise bill establishing highway and mass transportation programs worth $151 billion over six years.
Under the provisions of the bill, the Federal Government would grant the states about $32 billion for mass transportation and $119 billion for highways.
The spending would begin immediately and grow steadily over the years.
Most of the money would come from taxes on motor vehicle fuels.


Shop With Europe Base Is Appealing to Henkel
Henkel KGAA, Dusseldorf, Germany, is looking for a new European-wide agency for the $63 million detergent advertising account pulled last week from Euro RSCG.
The company does not have many alternatives, Werner Baier, a Henkel spokesman, said yesterday, because it wants to assign the account to an agency with offices throughout Europe without business from Henkel rivals like the Procter &amp; Gamble Company.


Islamabad Journal; For Women, Finally, Credit Where Credit's Due
Five times Gulrukh Manzoor went to banks looking for a loan to salvage a sagging children's clothing business.
Five times the answer was no.
The business was too small, the banks said.
It was in the wrong city.
It was not a safe loan prospect.
What the banks did not say, she recalls, was that her request was being rejected because she was a woman.


Charles Wagley, 78, Early Leader In Anthropology of Amazon Basin
Charles Wagley, an anthropologist who pioneered in research of Latin American cultures, died yesterday at his home in Gainesville, Fla., at the age of 78.
Dr. Wagley died of lung cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Pension Shift At Pan Am
A Federal judge yesterday approved the Government takeover of two underfunded pension plans for the Pan Am Corporation employees and retirees.
United States District Judge Michael B. Mukasey of Manhattan ruled on a request by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation to terminate the two plans following a series of missed pension contributions by the airline, which is in bankruptcy reorganization.


INSIDE
New Budget, With Pressure
Governor Cuomo proposed deep spending cuts to close an $875 million budget gap, a plan with broad political implications for New York and his potential Presidential bid.
Page B1.
Gorbachev Set Back on Unity
The Soviet President was rebuffed in his bid to hold the nation together when seven republic leaders withheld support for a treaty.
Page A3.
Japan Said to Shift on Nets
Japan has agreed to end the environmentally damaging practice of driftnet fishing by its fleets, three United States Senators said.
Page A11.
Regulator Urges Bank Aid
The new F.D.I.C. chairman asked Congress to provide $70 billion promptly to keep the nearly empty bank insurance fund afloat.
Page D1.


EXECUTIVES
*
Affiliated Bankshares of Colorodo Inc., Denver, announced that Ron Moore, company chairman, would assume the additional positions of president and chief executive in 1992.
He succeeds Kent Olin, who plans to retire. *
AGS Computers Inc., Mountainside, N.J., a software and information services subsidiary of Nynex, announced that A. Theodore Engkvist, president, would retire Dec. 31.


Pay Attention When I'm Protesting!
When the people of the world get angry, they march right up to David Hendricks's office.
Kurds, Koreans, Haitians, Albanians, Liberians, Burmese, Chechen-Ingush, Greeks and Turks, Croats and Serbs -- two or three days a week they come to shout and to chant.
And chant and chant and chant.
"It's actually an annoying place to work," said Mr.
Hendricks, who has the misfortune to work in a ground-floor office on Dag Hammarskjold Plaza at 47th Street and First Avenue.


Classical Music in Review
Joseph Kalichstein
Pianist 92d Street Y
Joseph Kalichstein played a strenuous program of Schumann and Brahms on Saturday evening, and some of the demands were self-inflicted.
He began with his own condensations of four Schumann pieces (Op. 56, Nos. 4, 5; Op. 58, Nos. 1, 3) for pedal piano, a period instrument with an array of pedals to play added bass notes, as on an organ.


Marriott's Debt Is Downgraded
The senior long-term debt ratings of the Marriott Corporation, the hotel operator based in Bethesda, Md., have been downgraded by Moody's Investors Service to Baa3, from Baa2.
The ratings agency also assigned a prospective Ba1 rating to Marriott's shelf registration covering $230 million in convertible preferred stock.


Market Place; Unilever Shares Termed a Value
AFTER Unilever reported unexpectedly strong quarterly earnings this month, the price of the British-Dutch giant's stock surged.
Although its shares and American depository receipts are trading near their high for the year, many analysts view them as undervalued compared with other consumer products companies.
With the shares trading at 11 or 12 times expected 1992 earnings, several analysts recommend buying them now.
Even more see them as a good long-term investment.


Quotation of the Day
"I don't know what's worse, jail or this." -- MEL MILLER, the New York Assembly Speaker, on Governor Cuomo's budget plan.  [ B1:5. ]


New Books For Users Of DOS
A BOOK on MS-DOS, the most popular operating system for personal computers, would be a welcome gift for a friend or relative, but you do have to know a few things before you buy one.
First, and most important, is whether the recipient's computer runs DOS in the first place.
The personal computers made by the International Business Machines Corporation, and all the machines compatible with them, are DOS machines. (To be quibbling, true-blue I.B.M. computers use PC-DOS, rather than MS-DOS, but they amount to the same thing.) Brand names are legion: Compaq, NEC, Dell, Gateway, Zeos, Leading Edge, and on and on.
You can't tell from the name, unless it is I.B.M., whether the computer can use DOS, but you could always ask.
If the computer is a Macintosh, Amiga, Atari, Commodore 64 or Apple II, it does not ordinarily run DOS.
You also should know whether the recipient of the gift has updated to version 5.0, the latest incarnation of the operating system.


Observer; Suit Plot Thickens
As this column reported last summer, the American press is waging a sly attack against the well-dressed man.
At that time we disclosed the plot to destroy the good character of the suit.
The smear campaign against the suit -- that grand old foundation of the American male's wardrobe -- aims to associate it exclusively with unspeakable people.
Because this column believes in the suit and hates to see a great traditional American garment badly treated, whether by incompetent dry-cleaners or a sneering press, we have stayed with the story.


Banks Give the Maxwells Breathing Room on Debts
Kevin and Ian Maxwell got some breathing room today, as officials from about 25 banks gave them at least 10 days to work out a plan for defusing the debt crisis threatening the global publishing empire their family controls.
Both sides described as constructive the tone of the meeting between the Maxwells and the bankers.
And the bankers agreed to set up a steering committee of at least five banks to consider proposals made today by the brothers for dealing with the crucial issue: inadequately secured loans to the family's private companies.
In a statement issued tonight, the Maxwells said the steering committee would report back within 10 days.


U.S. Sales Of Vehicles Drop 18.6%
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks declined 18.6 percent in mid-November, the auto makers reported today.
Analysts said the figures provided further evidence that the auto industry was in a second recession after slightly recovering from its slump earlier this year.
"It strongly suggests that a double-dip recession is taking hold," said Jack V. Kirnan, an analyst with Kidder, Peabody in New York.
He said the industry was unlikely to muster a recovery until the second quarter of next year at the earliest.
He also asserted that the Big Three American auto makers would probably have to pare down their optimistic production schedules for early 1992.


Simms Is Sticking Strictly to Business
Forget about the "irony" of winning at Tampa Stadium. Phil Simms dismisses all of that.
"No, I can't say those things were going through my mind," the Giants' quarterback said yesterday, referring to his foot injury late last year and the fact that he wasn't able to play when the Giants won the Super Bowl in Tampa, Fla., last January.
"It's strictly business."


Putting the Cart Before the Horse
NO matter which computer you choose, someone will tell you that you picked the wrong one.
You've wasted your money and you'll be unhappy forever.
Tsk, tsk, tsk.
With a little preparation, though, you can laugh in your tormentor's face.
Let's rehearse.
Tormentor: "What? You bought a Bronto X-86 from Paleolithic PC's? Fool! You should have bought a Mackerel II from New Age Systems!" You: "Not so! The Bronto does what I want it to do, at the best price."


What Business Improvement Districts Can Do
To the Editor:
I am pleased that "The Business of Business" (editorial, Nov. 2) recognizes New York City's Business Improvement Districts as examples of involvement by businesses in cleaning up commercial neighborhoods.


Reviews/Television; On Terry Waite and the Arms-for-Hostages Deal
Despite a tendency to make surmise do the work of evidence, "The Secret Story of Terry Waite" sets forth an intriguing explanation of why the Anglican Church envoy, who was freed by his Lebanese captors last week, was taken hostage in the first place.
Tonight's BBC investigation, presented as part of the "Frontline" series at 10 on Channels 13 and 49, argues the case that Lt.
Col.
Oliver L. North put Mr.
Waite at risk by using him as an unwitting cover for Washington's arms-for-hostages dealings with Iran.


Chiron-Cetus Management
The Chiron Corporation said today that Hollings Renton, formerly president and chief operating officer of the Cetus Corporation, would fill that position for Chiron upon completion of the two companies' merger.
Mr.
Renton succeeds Gregory B. Lawless, who Chiron said would leave to pursue other opportunities.


Review/Pop; Lita Ford, Teasing to Tender
While bands like Metallica are trying to make heavy-metal sexism obsolete, throwback boy-toys like Lita Ford are keeping the spirit alive.
Like a cross between David Coverdale and Tawny Kitaen, the husband-and-wife team that steamed up Whitesnake videos a few years back, Ms.
Ford combines big hair, skimpy clothes and macho posturing; she's survived in the male-dominated metal world by simultaneously fulfilling the stereotypes of both sexes.
On Wednesday night at the Marquee, she played hot-lick guitar leads way up on the instrument's neck, sang lines like "I'm so hungry for your sex" (from her 1990 album "Stiletto") and asked the audience, "Do you like my pants?" Underneath her suede chaps, she was wearing only fishnet stockings and a thong bikini bottom.
What's confusing is that Ms.
Ford actually has some talent.
A former member of the 1970's metal girl-group the Runaways, she's a more than adequate guitarist, and when she's not writhing and posing she seems to have a great time being on stage.
Songs like "Shot of Poison," from her new album "Dangerous Curves," don't go further than the standard bad-boy rock hook, but she has one bona fide anthem, "Kiss Me Deadly," a single from 1988.


Kirov Dancers Report Being Locked in Apartment
Two Russian dancers who left the Kirov Ballet last month say the director of the renowned troupe kept them in a locked apartment in Washington before a confrontation in which the police intervened and prevented their transfer to the Soviet Embassy.
"We were scared and being taken against our will," said Aleksandra Koltun, one of the dancers.
"We wanted to stay in America."


Bush Threatens to Veto Crime Bill, Saying It's Too Soft on Defendants
President Bush vowed today to veto an anti-crime package that would extend the death penalty to many drug-related crimes and impose a waiting period on the sale of handguns, arguing that the legislation was not tough enough on criminals.
The veto threat came only hours before the House of Representatives was scheduled to vote on the bill, a compromise between competing House and Senate versions that was approved Sunday evening along partisan lines, the Democrats in favor and the Republicans opposed.


Reviews/Dance; 'La Sylphide' by a Montreal Troupe
"La Sylphide," a pivotal work of 19th-century Romantic ballet, came to the State University College here on Friday night in a production by Les Grands Ballets Canadiens.
It was a good story well told.
To say that is to pay this Montreal company high praise.
The choreography that August Bournonville devised for "La Sylphide" in 1836 abounds in mercurial dartings for elfin spirits, grotesque cavortings for witches and robust folk dances for Scottish peasants.
But "La Sylphide" should be more than a collection of quaint choreographic picture postcards.


Miami Loses Its Ground Soldier
The family and friends that had driven up from Brooklyn were all around Stephen McGuire, just as they had planned.
They were outside Alumni Stadium at Boston College late Saturday night after Miami's costly 10th victory did not go at all as they had hoped.
McGuire was forced to greet the friendly faces with off-balance kisses or awkward handshakes because of the crutches he was compelled to lean on.
A teen-age boy approached, studied the outline of a brace bulging beneath the left leg of McGuire's gray sweatpants and frowned.


Stocks Slip, With Dow Off 0.67, to 2,902.06
Stocks closed narrowly lower yesterday in choppy trading, as many investors moved to the sidelines.
The Dow Jones industrial average was off 0.67 points, to end at 2,902.06.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was fairly heavy, at 175.9 million shares, down from 188.3 million on Friday.
Losing issues outpaced gainers by 1,057 to 629.


Colombian Goes on Trial for False Papers
A 26-year-old Colombian man described by the South American police as an assassin for top cocaine traffickers went on trial yesterday on the relatively minor charges of using false identification and lying to Federal agents.
The defendant, Dandeny Munoz-Mosquera, had broken no laws in the United States when he was arrested in Queens two months ago.
The authorities have been unable to charge him with anything more serious.


To Avoid Jail-Like Atmosphere, Principal Spurned Metal Detectors
Despite widespread concern about security in public schools, the principal of the school where a student was shot to death yesterday had spurned the use of metal detectors to check students for weapons, saying they fostered a Rikers Island-like atmosphere.
The position of Carol Burt-Beck, the principal of Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn, illustrates the ambivalence of New York City school officials toward security measures.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about the New York Public Library's plans to convert part of the B. Altman building into a library of science, industry and business omitted the name of one company that has agreed to guarantee bonds for the project.
The company is Salomon Inc.


Giants Are Writing Off Hostetler For 'Several Weeks,' Not for Year
Jeff Hostetler, who suffered a scary back injury Sunday, will remain hospitalized "for a couple of days" and will be sidelined "several weeks," Coach Ray Handley of the Giants said today.
Hostetler, the Giants' starting quarterback, was hurt when Broderick Thomas of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers crashed into him cleanly after Hostetler had thrown a pass to Dave Meggett.
Hostetler suffered fractures of the transverse processes of the second, third and fourth vertebrae of the lower back.
Handley said a Giant failed to block Thomas, but he would not identify the player.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  U.S. SEEKS TO PROD MIDEAST TALKS
The United States has signaled that it intends to take an active role in pushing Israel and the Arabs toward agreements when peace talks resume next month.
Administration officials say the parties have been given specific suggestions about how to begin solving contentious issues between them.
A1


Cuomo Strategy: Trying to Build Pressure for Multiyear Budget Deal
In presenting a politically unpalatable plan for deep and immediate spending cuts in the state's $30 billion budget, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is actually making a new and tougher bid for the alternative he prefers to those cuts -- an unusual multiyear budget deal.
It is not that the Governor is unwilling to follow up on the $875 million deficit-closing plan he outlined here, which among other things would slash nearly $300 million from local-aid programs.
Such spending is political lifeblood for legislators, especially Republicans whose control of the State Senate, the only real beachhead the party has in state government, rests largely on its continued ability to satisfy suburban voters that it is looking after their interests.


Cardinals Get Galarraga
The St.
Louis Cardinals filled a hole in the middle of their lineup yesterday, acquiring first baseman ANDRES GALARRAGA from the Montreal Expos for right-hander KEN HILL.


U.S. BUILDING CAMP FOR HAITI REFUGEES
The Bush Administration dispatched a military task force to the Caribbean tonight to erect an emergency refugee camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, for thousands of Haitians who have fled the political turmoil in their country and whose exodus by boats to the United States has been blocked by the Coast Guard.
Led by Brig.
Gen.
George A. Walls Jr. of the Marines, the military group, made up of hundreds of troops from all four military services, is to build a tent city at the American base on the eastern tip of Cuba to handle the more than 4,000 Haitians rescued at sea thus far and the hundreds more fleeing each day.


S.&amp;P. Finds Nynex Outlook Improved
The Nynex Corporation's plan to reduce its work force by several thousand employees has prompted the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation to raise the outlook on the credit ratings of the company and some of its units to "stable" from "negative."
The ratings agency said Friday that it had revised the ratings outlook on the securities of Nynex and its units, New York Telephone, New England Telephone and Telegraph, the Nynex Credit Company and the Nynex Capital Funding Company.


Drug Ring Gave Up to $10 Million To Contras, Noriega Jury Is Told
The Medellin cartel made a "contribution" of as much as $10 million to rebels seeking the overthrow of the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua, a founding member of the Colombian cocaine trafficking organization testified here today.
The Colombian, Carlos Lehder Rivas, undergoing a second day of cross-examination in the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the former leader of Panama, also said the cartel had used Costa Rica, where the Nicaraguan rebels maintained supply bases, as a transshipment point for some of the cocaine it smuggled to the United States.
Mr.
Lehder was head of the cartel's transportation operations until he was arrested by the Colombian authorities and handed over to the United States early in 1987.


Pepsi Says It Is Considering A Clear Version of Its Cola
The Pepsi-Cola Company said yesterday that it was thinking about selling a clear, colorless version of Pepsi, its flagship soft drink.
A Pepsi spokesman, Andrew Giangola, said the idea was only "one of several projects we are working on" and added that the company was "not ready to go to market or discuss any details about it."


Police Seek A Motive In Slaying Of Sergeant
State investigators searched for a motive today in the weekend ambush of a police sergeant at the New Jersey Institute of Technology in Newark.
The sergeant, Revell Quince, was fatally shot outside his home on a winding two-lane road in this quiet rural town.
Sergeant Quince, a 43-year-old member of the institute's campus police since 1982, had just returned from work in uniform.
He was crossing his yard and approaching his porch when he was struck by rifle fire at about 11:20 P.M.
Saturday, the authorities said.


Olajuwon Confused
HAKEEM OLAJUWON was released from the hospital yesterday after spending four days undergoing tests for an irregular heartbeat, and he felt strong enough to question why the Houston Rockets put him on the injured list.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL Duke Looks Devilish Duke got 15 first-half points from Bobby Hurley and took advantage of superior size and quickness as it opened its National Collegiate Athletic Association title defense last night on its home court in Durham, N.C., with a 103-75 victory over East Carolina.
Duke, played without center Christian Laettner, who was sidelined with a bruised right foot. (AP) Arkansas 92, Minnesota 83: Center Oliver Miller scored 21 of his 23 points in the second half as Arkansas held off Minnesota in a first-round game of the Maui Invitational in Hawaii. (AP)


2-Week Gun Amnesty Starts in Brooklyn
At 9:30 A.M. yesterday, a heavy-set man walked through the doors of the 75th Precinct station house in East New York, Brooklyn, to the flier reading "Firearms Wanted" and quietly asked a receptionist where to turn in a gun.
Moments later, the man reached in his coat pocket and pulled out a white plastic bag containing a .32-caliber automatic.
In exchange, a sergeant handed him $75.
The sergeant's only question was, "Is it loaded?"


By Design; Just the Right Touch on Top
Even if you are not a hat person, this will be the winter to wear one.
It's a question of style, not warmth.
The one that you want is either an authentic Basque beret or a version of a biker's cap with a pliable crown and a small stiff visor.
Both add just the right snap to many outfits, topping them off with a casual but jaunty touch.
Arnold Hatters Inc., a men's hat shop at 620 Eighth Avenue, between 40th and 41st Streets, has long been a favorite shopping spot for such raffish gentlemen as rap stars, boxers and disk jockeys.
Recently, though, it has also been discovered by female fashion designers and editors. (Don't be fooled by the big sign outside that says Knox Hats. According to store lore, it was put up 60 years ago and no one has had time to change it since.)


Timberwolves' Corbin Traded for Jazz's Bailey
The Utah Jazz traded forward THURL BAILEY and their second-round draft selection in 1992 to Minnesota yesterday in return for forward TYRONE CORBIN.
The 6-foot-11-inch Bailey, for several years one of the National Basketball Association's best reserves, averaged 14.7 points and 5.7 rebounds in eight years with the Jazz.
Corbin, a 6-6 forward, averaged 10.9 points and 5.4 rebounds in six years with four teams. (AP)


Help Russia; Push Russia
For all his skillful management of foreign affairs, President Bush remains oddly limp on a crucial topic: economic aid to beleaguered Russia.
True, Mr.
Bush has proposed emergency food aid and debt deferral, and true, the Senate finally seems headed for enactment of a modest package to help dismantle nuclear and chemical weapons.
But the gravity of Russia's circumstances, and the monumental opportunity for the West, beg for more than these pinched responses.
Americans, unprepared, ask why their scarce dollars should be sent anywhere abroad at a time of sinking fortunes at home.
There are compelling answers, but the case has to be made at the top, by the President.
So far he's been barely audible.


Cuomo Seeks Deeper Cuts In Fiscal Plan
In an announcement with implications for both state and national politics, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo called on the Legislature today to return to Albany immediately to make deep spending cuts aimed at closing a state budget gap he said had now grown to about $875 million.
Mr.
Cuomo declared at an afternoon news conference that time had run out on his negotiations with the Legislature over an unusual multiyear budget plan.
That plan was intended to close in a single step both the $875 million gap in this year's $30 billion budget and next year's projected gap of $4 billion, theoretically making it easier for Mr.
Cuomo to run for President.


We Interrupt Bonilla Talk for Murray Bulletin
With negotiations perhaps entering their final stages, the Mets yesterday spoke again with the agent for Eddie Murray in an effort to work out the specifics of a deal for the free-agent first baseman.
General Manager Al Harazin spoke by telephone with Ron Shapiro, Murray's agent, and there were indications from both sides afterward that Murray's signing with the Mets could happen before Thanksgiving.


Corrections
A brief dance review yesterday about the Jennifer Muller/The Works troupe at the Joyce Theater misidentified the dancer who portrayed the heroine on Thursday in the premiere of "Woman With Visitors at 3 A.M." She was Lana Carroll, not Lana Cantrell.


A Knick Is Aiming To Get More Time
For Kiki Vandeweghe, this season has been hit or sit.
When Vandeweghe makes his first few shots, he can expect to play.
When he is missing, he can expect to sit.


16-Year-Old Is Shot to Death In a High School in Brooklyn
A youth trying to help his brother in a fistfight drew a gun and opened fire in the crowded hallway of a Brooklyn high school yesterday, and the wild shots killed a 16-year-old student bystander and critically wounded a teacher who was approaching to intervene.
After firing three shots with a 9-millimeter automatic, the young gunman escaped as the victims staggered and fell and screams and confusion engulfed the third floor hallway at Thomas Jefferson High School at 400 Pennsylvania Avenue in the East New York section shortly before 10:30 A.M.


Tax-Break Extension Now Seen as Probable
Moving quickly and without dissent, tax-writing committees of the House and Senate voted this afternoon to extend a dozen expiring business and individual tax breaks for six months.
Unless some lawmaker mounts unexpected, last-minute opposition, the measures, which are identical and had been languishing for months, should clear Congress promptly and move to the White House before Thanksgiving, Congressional officials said.
Although President Bush has not formally backed all of the items, he has endorsed many of them, they said, which should assure his signature.


Back in the Bog on Wetlands
President Bush's campaign pledge to resist further erosion of America's wetlands has turned into one of those little nightmares that increasingly disturb his Presidency.
Mr.
Bush's scientists have one definition of what a wetland is, his political advisers another.
Sooner or later he himself will have to choose.
But this much now seems clear: If he wishes to honor his campaign pledge, he'll pay close attention to his scientists.


Sex Discrimination Complaints Against the Police Are Upheld
In a case dating back to when far fewer women could even take entrance tests to become police officers -- and those who passed were given jobs as matrons -- the New York City Human Rights Commission has found that the city's Police Department discriminated against 124 women officers.
The suit was filed in 1976.
The commission announced the resolution yesterday, after an administrative law judge for the Human Rights Commission found in favor of the women in May and the Human Rights Commissioner, Dennis deLeon, affirmed that ruling earlier this month.
Of the 124 women, four have died and about half are no longer with the department.


Washington Memo; For Bush, the Kemp Thing Reappears
Jack Kemp rarely ran the ball when he was a quarterback.
Now he has it and is running for daylight.
The problem is, he's going in the opposite direction from the White House team.
This has made the former Buffalo Bill who runs the Department of Housing and Urban Development a hero among conservative Republicans and a heretic among top White House aides.


Dollar Is Lower Overseas, Then Turns Mixed in U.S.
After settling lower in foreign markets yesterday, the dollar turned mixed in United States trading as dealers concentrated on other currencies.
The dollar fell against the Japanese yen and rose against the German mark, but the trading focus was each of the other two currencies.


Father Fatally Shoots Son While Deer Hunting, Then Kills Himself
A father accidentally shot and killed his son while deer hunting near here this weekend.
Minutes later, he used his son's rifle to kill himself.
Today state conservation officials said both men might still be alive if they had been wearing brightly colored clothing.


Robinson's Complaint
Center DAVID ROBINSON has written an "open letter" to San Antonio Spurs owner RED McCOMBS criticizing him for not using charter planes for travel.
The letter, printed in yesterday's editions in The San Antonio Light and The San Antonio Express-News, intensifies a long-running disagreement with management.


State Suspends Manhattan Doctor Accused of Botching Abortions
Saying he poses an "imminent danger" to the public, state officials yesterday suspended the medical license of the Lower East Side doctor charged with severing the arm of a fetus during an illegal third-trimester abortion.
It is only the fifth time this year that the State Department of Health has used its emergency powers to suspend the license of a doctor before a hearing is held.


Bronco Star Is Out
Denver Broncos wide receiver MARK JACKSON dislocated his right wrist against Seattle on Sunday and may be lost for the rest of the season.
He was hit by safety EUGENE ROBINSON after attempting to catch what would have been a 42-yard touchdown pass from JOHN ELWAY. (AP)


Canadian Jockey: 0 for 4 But Not All for Naught
Like many a young phenom in baseball who arrives with rave notices, Mickey Walls made his debut as a jockey in the Big Apple yesterday.
And like many a young phenom in baseball, he went 0 for 4 in his first day in the big leagues.
But he also showed the stage presence and the smarts that made him a rousing success in Canada this year at the age of 17, an apprentice rider who broke records and was lionized as "the next Steve Cauthen." He also took the big leap into the Big Apple with style and grace, and with one driving finish into third place in the second of his four starts at Aqueduct.


Frederick Barghoorn, 80, Scholar Detained in Soviet Union in 1963
Frederick C. Barghoorn, a longtime Yale professor who became the center of an international incident when Soviet officials jailed him in Moscow on espionage charges and released him only under pressure from President John F. Kennedy, died Wednesday night.
He was 80 years old.
He died at Willows Convalescent Home in Woodbridge, Conn.
The cause of death was respiratory failure, his family said.


Why a Long-Gone Limb Still Aches
SCIENTISTS believe they have discovered the cause of "phantom pain," the mysterious condition that can leave amputees feeling agonizing discomfort in limbs that have been removed for decades.
New research suggests that the problem may occur when one of the body's own chemicals damages certain nerve cells in the spinal cord.
If the finding holds up, scientists say, they may also explain other kinds of so-called abnormal pain that persists months, years and even decades after an injury has healed.
Scientists also hope the work will lead to drugs to ease abnormal pain or prevent it in the first place.


CHRONICLE
For theater people, earning a place on the walls of Sardi's with a caricature is still a signal to the world that you have arrived.
Now there is another, even more rarefied place of honor: a new book called "Off the Wall at Sardi's" by VINCENT SARDI JR.  and THOMAS EDWARD WEST that includes some 275 of the more than 1,000 caricatures that have been added to the walls of Sardi's since 1927.
"That leaves ground, if this goes well, for volume two," Mr. Sardi said the other day.


House Approves Overhaul of Campaign Spending
As lawmakers sought to portray themselves as committed to slowing the chase for money in political campaigns, the House tonight approved a package intended to curb the escalating spending and the influence of special interests in Congressional elections.
The package, which was endorsed by the House Democratic leadership and passed largely with Democratic votes, would set a voluntary limit of $600,000 on each House candidate's spending for primary and general elections.
The bill would also cap candidates' receipts to $200,000 from political action committees, and $200,000 in donations of no more than $200 from individuals.


Johnnie Walker Red Quits Smith/Greenland for Avrett
AFTER 14 years of creating advertisements for Johnnie Walker Red Scotch, some of which drew complaints from women and homosexuals, Smith/Greenland Inc. lost the brand's advertising account yesterday, and its $7 million to $10 million in annual billings, to Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg Inc.
Executives of the Schieffelin &amp; Somerset Company in New York, Johnnie Walker's importer, "were not unhappy" with Smith/ Greenland's work, said Clint Rodenberg, Schieffelin's senior vice president of marketing.
Indeed, he added, the agency is retaining other Scheffelin accounts, including Johnnie Walker Black, Red's higher-priced sibling; Tanqueray gin; Tanqueray Sterling vodka, and Hennessy cognacs.


CHRONICLE
He is known as the father of public relations, but the round of celebrations held last week and this to honor EDWARD L. BERNAYS on his 100th birthday (last Friday) is no publicist's gimmick.
If it were, it would not be so lofty as the symposium to be held today at Emerson College in Boston, with a panel of public relations executives discussing "Public Relations in the 21st Century." Last Thursday, Northeastern University had a whole day of seminars, and the main speaker at a dinner of the Boston Chapter of the Public Relations Society of America was JOHN SILBER, president of Boston University.


Treasuries Slip in Thin Trading
Prices of Treasury securities edged lower in featureless, thin trading yesterday.
Despite very low short-term interest rates, credit market participants said demand at auctions of new three- and six-month bills and two-year notes was good, and rates dropped even further.
The resulting rate on the three-month bill was the lowest in nearly 14 years, and the six-month bill was the lowest in 15 years.


Ireland to Tighten Law on Fugitives
The Government has agreed to close loopholes in the law that have been used by fugitive Irish Republican Army guerrillas to avoid extradition to Britain.
The problem of extradition, a sore point between London and Dublin, flared up here in recent weeks in two situations involving I.R.A. members who were convicted of murder or attempted murder in Northern Ireland but avoided extradition because of Irish law.


White House Christmas Tree Arrives to Begin the Season


Buchanan Seeks 'None of the Above' Vote in New Hampshire
Karen Hutchinson, a New Hampshire state legislator, has a message that she would like to send President Bush.
She could send him a note, or even call his office, but she thinks she has found a more effective way to communicate her discontent.
"I am voting for Pat Buchanan in the primary," she said. "It's a protest vote."


New Waterway Threat
A new species of zebra mussel, seemingly hardier than the variety already threatening North America's waterways, has been discovered in upstate New York, scientists at Cornell University say.


Chess
In early May, Larry Christiansen won the Munich International Tournament by a 1 1/2-point margin.
And in October he won the Vienna International Tournament by the same comfortable lead.
The 35-year-old American grandmaster, originally from Modesto, Calif., is adopting central Europe as his preferred turf.
Indeed, to shorten commuting distances, he and his wife, Natasha, are living in Germany.
In Vienna, Christiansen's score was 7 1/2-1 1/2 in the 10-player, round-robin event.
Second place went to the Soviet grandmaster Vladimir Yepishin, who tallied 6-3.
Third place was shared at 5 1/2-3 1/2


O.E.C.D. Forecasts Slow U.S. Recovery From Recession
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said today that the United States economy would recover far more slowly from its recent recession than it has from most other recessions of the last three decades.
The Paris-based organization predicted that the economy would grow by 1.4 percent in the second half of this year and by 2.5 percent next year, which compares with an average growth of 6 percent in the four quarters immediately after the last seven recessions.


U.S. Invitation to Mideast Talks Offers Compromise Approaches
In inviting Israel, Palestinians and Arab countries to Washington for the next round of peace talks, the United States included a series of concrete suggestions about how the parties might begin solving some of the most contentious issues, the State Department said today.
Bush Administration officials had said previously that they intended to make certain bridging proposals and suggestions to narrow the gaps between Israel and the Arabs -- if and when they should find themselves deadlocked.


Shuttle Secrecy Lifted, A Satellite Is Deployed
The world got its first televised look at the military side of the United States space program today as the six-man crew of the space shuttle Atlantis placed a spy satellite in orbit.
The Atlantis, launched Sunday night, carried into orbit a 5,200-pound satellite intended to detect missile launchings.
About two hours after a small explosive charge pushed the Defense Support Program Satellite out of the Atlantis's cargo bay, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration broadcast a videotape showing the launching.


Few See Japan Make TV History
Japan flipped a switch this morning and started a new era in broadcasting history: Eight hours a day of high-definition television -- brilliant movie-theater images beamed directly from a new satellite over the Japanese islands.
But despite a lot of Government-orchestrated hoopla, almost no one was watching; at $30,000 a set, the advanced televisions are found only in hotel lobbies and big public buildings.
And although they toasted the occasion, the nation's broadcasters and electronics executives spent the day wondering whether, after two decades of work and billions of dollars in investments, they were backing an aging television technology that might burn out before its first commercial break.


RETREAT BY JAPAN ON FISH NETS SEEN
Japan has agreed to end the environmentally damaging practice of drift-net fishing by its fleets, removing an issue that has strained its relations with the United States, three Senators said tonight.
An aide to one of them, Senator Slade Gorton, Republican of Washington State, said that the State Department had notified the senators that the Japanese Cabinet had agreed to the ban and that it would be announced formally by both nations Tuesday.


Computer Virus Threat
Computer viruses are a growing threat despite efforts to stop the electronic invaders, according to results of a survey released yesterday.
The survey found that the likelihood of a virus attack on a company or other computer-using organization is growing as computers increasingly are linked in networks.


Yes, Subway Nirvana Does Exist: Just Go to Newark
People have said for 20 years that wherever urban America is heading, Newark would get there first.
Would that it were true in mass transit.
Through the heart of this city, commonly associated with images of urban despair, runs one of the country's most pleasant and efficient subways -- and one of the least well known.


A Tough Sell for Electric Cars
For 20 years, the people who pioneered electric cars believed that the price of electric vehicles would decline to reasonable levels if a mass market developed eager to snatch them up.
Now, even though 12 states have mandated such a market, the technology to make a practical electric car is lagging.
For example, Mercedes-Benz provided an electric pace car with a sodium-nickel-chloride battery for the New York City Marathon this year.
But the company estimated that because the car's battery was expensive and could only be recharged a few hundred times before needing replacement, its operating cost -- not counting the electricity to charge the battery -- was about a dollar a mile.
In comparison, the average gasoline-powered car costs about 38 cents a mile to run.
Plans by Ford
And although the Ford Motor Company plans to begin selling electric vans to utilities in early 1992, its Ecostar van, which is based on its Escort wagon, can go only about 100 miles in city driving before needing about six hours to recharge its sodium-sulfur battery.


I.O.C. Reviewing Report on Helmick
The International Olympic Committee panel investigating Robert Helmick for possible conflicts of interest is studying a report issued on Sunday that found Helmick had repeatedly violated ethical provisions of the United States Olympic Committee by-laws while serving as the U.S.O.C. president.
Francois Carrard, the I.O.C. director general and one of three members of the panel, said yesterday from his office in Lausanne, Switzerland, that he had received the summary version of the report and that the panel would consider its findings before presenting its own report next week to the I.O.C. executive board.


Economy Needs Return to I.R.A. Deductibility; A Bond Proposal
To the Editor:
Re "Son of Kemp-Roth: Still Wrong" (editorial, Nov. 13):


Rash of Injuries Fires Up Debate
Each National Football League team realizes that player injuries are as much a part of the game as the paramount quest to reach the Super Bowl, but the solution to reducing the numbers is as elusive as capturing the Lombardi Trophy.
The 1991 season has been laced with key injuries from the start: Joe Montana was lost for the year to an elbow ailment before the season began and Randall Cunningham ripped his knee in the Philadelphia Eagles' season-opener and would not return.


Down With the Palace Guard
President Bush is dangerously out of touch with the American public.
Instead of listening to the elected people in his party most in touch with the average voter -- House Republicans -- he remains cloistered with aides who avoid action and favor blaming others for the nation's economic, and their boss's consequent political, woes.
House Republicans are increasingly frustrated with the White House's wait-and-see attitude on the economy.
We hear our constituents' genuine concern about their prosperity and sense resentment that the Administration seems to show little regard for that concern.
Unfortunately, our calls for quick action are rebuked by unelected officials like Richard Darman, the budget director, and John Sununu, the chief of staff, who advocate waiting for a more politically opportune moment to push for an economic growth package.


A Challenge To Telephone Monopoly
In the first such challenge, a small telecommunications company has applied to Illinois state regulators for permission to provide local telephone service to businesses in Chicago.
While significant regulatory hurdles remain, the challenge could open the door to greater competition against the $100 billion local monopoly enjoyed by GTE and the "Baby Bells."
Earlier this month, Terrence L. Barnich, chairman of the Illinois Commerce Commission, the state utility regulator, proposed making Chicago into a "telecommunications free-trade zone," with a full range of competition.
"Other than the regulatory climate, there is no reason why a hundred flowers couldn't bloom here," Mr.
Barnich said in an interview yesterday.
Reselling Services
Responding to that call, Metropolitan Fiber Systems Inc. in Chicago asked the Illinois Commerce Commission on Friday to be allowed to provide many of the same services to business customers as Illinois Bell, the local provider.
It is essentially asking for the right to buy and resell parts of Illinois Bell service to Metropolitan Fiber's business customers.


Reviews/Television; Reinventing the World and Obsessions of Proust
Despite executive shuffles and budget crunches over the last decade or so, the BBC continues to produce, at least occasionally, the kind of splendid little dramas that seem beyond the ability -- or even comprehension -- of most American television.
Tonight's case in point can be found at 9:30 on the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network: "102 Boulevard Haussmann," written by Alan Bennett and starring Alan Bates as Marcel Proust.
The year is 1917, and a war is raging across Europe.
Proust, already being widely recognized as a great writer, spends most of his time working at home on the Boulevard Haussmann, his room lined with cork to spare his delicate sensibility any invasion of street noise.
He is tended to most protectively by his housekeeper, Celeste Albaret (Janet McTeeter).
On one of his rare outings, he is so impressed by a new string quartet, and especially by its handsome young violist, Amable Massis (Paul Rhys), that he invites the group to play for him alone at home.


Review/Dance; Nurturing Onstage the Moves Born on the Ghettos' Streets
Some of the most joyously exciting dance in town was performed on Saturday night at Performance Space 122 (150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street), when the Rhythm Technicians, a hip-hop dance and rap company, presented "So! What Happens Now?," a dance-theater piece about the struggles and triumphs of street dancers from New York ghettos.
One point made by the piece is that street dance is an art as demanding and inventive as mainstream dance forms like ballet and jazz.
The company gives the audience, seated around the performers as close as any street-corner crowd, a chance to view that artistry close-up.
There are some stirring pyrotechnical feats, among them prolonged, upended head-and-shoulder spins and catapults through space that spring from the ground, at breakneck speed, from just about every body part.


Time Is Running Out For Eastern Hemlock
MORE and more, it looks as if the Eastern hemlock, with its delicate evergreen foliage, its graceful lines, pyramidal crown and branches that droop nearly to the ground, may go the way of the chestnut and the elm.
Disease imported from abroad all but wiped out the latter, two of North America's most impressive and cherished trees, earlier in this century.
The hemlock has long been under attack by an imported insect that sucks out its juices, and the insect's steady northward advance has lately been provoking concern in Connecticut, New Jersey and southern New York.


U.S. Has a Responsibility for Refugees
To the Editor:
I am appalled that you say in "New Solutions for New Refugees" (editorial Nov. 10) we should continue to draw sharp distinctions between real refugees and "economic migrants," because "even wealthy, developed countries can't absorb all who suffer economic deprivation."


Hepatitis B Drug Gets Backing
A medical advisory panel today recommended that the Food and Drug Administration approve the first drug treatment for chronic hepatitis B, a blood-borne disease that can be spread through unclean drug needles.
The Schering Corporation manufactures the drug, Interferon-Alfa 2A, under the trade name Intron.
It is already approved to treat hepatitis C, the AIDS-related cancer called Kaposi's sarcoma, genital warts and hairy cell leukemia.


Arabs Split on Strategy For Next Round of Talks
The Arab camp taking part in the peace talks with Israel is preocupied with differing strategies in its approach to the next round of Middle East peace talks planned for Dec. 4 in Washington.
While these differences remain largely focused on procedural matters, Arab diplomats say they reflect deeper discord on fundamental issues between Syria and Lebanon, on one hand, and the Jordanian and Palestinian delegations on the other.


Business and Health; Push in Congress On Drug Prices
CONGRESSIONAL critics of pharmaceutical companies are again pressing them to slow the rapid rise in drug prices, which is running at 10.2 percent, or three times the general inflation rate.
The industry is divided on the issue.
A few drug companies like Merck &amp; Company and Pfizer Inc., which are rich in strong-selling products, favor moderating the increases to fend off criticism.
But most do not seem to have changed their pricing policies, and no other drug maker has endorsed Merck's proposal to brake prices, with annual rises no greater than the Consumer Price Index.


Refilling Ozone Hole
A fleet of planes spraying 50,000 tons of propane or ethane high over the South Pole may be able to heal the hole in the earth's protective ozone layer, scientists say.
They admit the idea is impractical, but believe it could start serious discussion.
"This is a concept and not a proposal," said Ralph Cicerone, a professor of geosciences at the University of California at Irvine, a co-author of a report in the current issue of the journal Science.
"We are serious about thinking about these things, but we aren't serious about going out and doing them yet."


Resort: The Season That Knows No Bounds
The next fashion season is thriving at stores in New York and elsewhere in the country.
The season, resort, theoretically consists of clothes to be worn in warm-weather playgrounds while winter is raging in the North.
But as the crisp, fresh designs have been trickling into the stores in the last two weeks, they have been upstaging the more somber winter clothes, many of which have already made the markdown racks.
Customers have been drawn to pretty party dresses, suits in snappy patterns, as well as denim separates and styles that only look as if they are made of denim, including white jeans.


Dumper, Unfazed by Fines, Receives an Odd Indictment: Stealing Land
For years officials and patients at the Pilgrim State Hospital here watched in disbelief as a garbage hauler systematically bulldozed a corner of the hospital grounds just beyond the barred windows of building 15 and dumped tons of garbage and construction debris there.
State environmental officials charged the garbage hauler, V. Garofalo Carting Inc., with dumping violations, and the company paid $4,000 in fines.
But according to the state, it kept on dumping until hillocks of shattered beams and bricks rose 25 feet into the air.
The company even gouged out a pit, about 40 feet deep and a hundred feet across, at the edge of a stand of pines, say state officials, and carried off 68,000 cubic yards of sand and gravel.


Dickerson Returns
An unrepentant ERIC DICKERSON rejoined the Indianapolis Colts yesterday but left no doubt he would rather be somewhere else.
Dickerson was fined and suspended for refusing to practice earlier this month.
"I'm here to do my job, and that's it," he said.
He had been suspended for three weeks.
He said he had asked to be cut or traded after he was suspended, and he admitted "there's a lot of hard feelings." (AP)


As a Double Opening Nears, A Studio Head Has the Jitters
As the holiday season approaches, are Mike Medavoy and the Sony Corporation about to enter Never-Neverland?
Mr.
Medavoy is the chairman of Tri-Star Pictures, the studio that is producing "Hook," one of the year's most expensive and widely anticipated films, and "Bugsy," a risky and costly love story about a gangster and his moll.


Republics Rebuff Gorbachev on a New Union Accord
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's attempt to enlist the Soviet republics in a new treaty of national political unity ran into a roadblock today as republic leaders scuttled his planned initialing ceremony in a fresh display of disarray.
With 7 of the current 12 republics attending, Mr.
Gorbachev's hopes for reviving some form of centrally focused Union government received an embarrassing setback.


Militant Muslims Sentenced To Death in Jordan


Precious Metals Post Losses After a Week of Big Gains
Precious metal futures prices fell yesterday as news of weak auto sales prompted traders to take profits from last week's strong gains.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for delivery in December fell $1.30, to $368.30 an ounce, and December silver fell 6 cents, to $4.072 an ounce.
Platinum for January delivery dropped $2.30, to $371.50 an ounce, on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


In This War, Scarred Veterans Warn the Recruits
THIS column won't make the front page this morning.
Like the endless strife in Lebanon, this nation's war on drugs continues cursedly conclusion-free.
Faced with the gargantuan scale of drug abuse and the discomfort of viewing something so gritty so close to home, the country's MTV-length attention span has focused on other hot topics of passing import.
Any day we'll begin getting the usual year-end 10 best and 10 worst lists.
It's a pretty safe bet that Barry Halpin will not be Man of the Year.
Just for the record, however, Mr.
Halpin instigated another small-time skirmish for the souls of some students here the other morning.
No one will ever know if it mattered.


Johnson Goes Home
MAGIC JOHNSON returned to his hometown of Lansing, Mich., yesterday with a message about AIDS.
It was Johnson's first visit there since his disclosure earlier this month that he was infected with the virus that causes the disease.
In Lansing to celebrate Thanksgiving with his family, Johnson said he would be urging unmarried people to abstain from sex rather than practice safe sex.
"What I'm trying to do is save lives," he told WDIV-TV in Detroit.


Bank Backed In Offer for Integrated
A bankruptcy judge approved a modified agreement last night between the Bankers Trust New York Corporation and Integrated Resources Inc., giving the banking company the inside track to acquire Integrated, a bankrupt syndicator of real estate partnerships.
The only competitive bid for Integrated now on the table, from the Pritzker family of Chicago, is likely to be withdrawn, a lawyer for the Pritzkers said after the ruling was issued at 10:15 P.M.


Senator Riegle's Duty
Senator Alan Cranston was dealt a public rebuke by the Senate Ethics Committee last week for pressuring bank regulators on behalf of Charles Keating, a $1 million contributor to the California Democrat's campaign and favorite political causes.
But it was Senator Donald Riegle, recipient of $80,000 from Mr.
Keating, who set in motion the infamous meetings in 1987 at which four and then five Senators pressed regulators to keep Mr.
Keating's failing saving and loan operations out of bankruptcy.
That abusive behavior won Mr.
Riegle charter membership in the Keating Five, but only a weak reprimand from the supine Ethics Committee.
The committee's spineless response to the Michigan Democrat's embarrassingly evasive testimony damaged its reputation, as well as that of the Senate.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY DINKINS IN DISFAVOR
Mayor Dinkins's political support has collapsed not quite halfway through his term, with fewer than a third of all New Yorkers approving of the way he is handling his job, according to a New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.
Battered by the city's fiscal crisis, rising social problems and the dashing of many of the high expectations that greeted his narrow victory, Mr.
Dinkins has an approval rating of 29 percent, with 58 percent disapproving -- almost the reverse of his ratings in mid-1990.
Page A1.
FATAL GUNPLAY AT A BROOKLYN SCHOOL
A student was killed and a teacher seriously wounded when an argument between two other youths turned to gunfire in the hallway of a Brooklyn high school.
The shootings come as the school system has taken a number of steps to bolster security, steps the teachers union argues do not go far enough.
Pages A1 and B2.
GUNS-FOR-CASH AMNESTY BEGINS
At 9:30 A.M., a modest-looking man walked into the 75th Precinct station house in Brooklyn and quietly asked a receptionist where to turn in a gun.
Moments later, standing in a linoleum-floored office, he reached into his coat pocket and pulled out a white plastic bag containing a .32-caliber automatic handgun.
In exchange, a police sergeant handed him $75 cash.
Thus began the first day of Brooklyn's new two-week gun amnesty plan.
Page B2.
HAVE BRACELET, CAN'T TRAVEL
With electronic-monitoring bracelets strapped to their legs, about 500 New York City inmates are expected to be released from jail next year in a new effort to reduce overcrowding.
Page B3.
DEFENDANT IDENTIFIED AS KAHANE KILLER
A college student from Long Island became the first witness at the Meir Kahane murder trial to identify the defendant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, as the killer of Rabbi Kahane.
Docket, page B3.
Sex-bias case upheld against police.
Page B3.
REGION NEW STRATEGY ON DUMPING
When New York State officials charged a garbage hauler with dumping trash on the grounds of Pilgrim State Hospital on Long Island, the company paid fines and, according to the state, just kept dumping.
Now, the state has come up with a novel way of going after the company and its top officials: They have been arrested on theft charges: to wit, stealing state land.
Page B5.
DEATH OF 2 DEER HUNTERS
A man on his annual fall hunting trip in central New York State accidentally shot his son to death after mistaking him for a deer, the authorities said.
After discovering what he had done, he turned the gun on himself.
Page B5.
AND THEY DON'T MEAN THE D TRAIN
"Completely charming" was the verdict of one commuter, Bob Hartman, a graphic designer.
"Quaint," "clean" and "safe," said another user, Robert Salazar, a student at the Newark branch of Rutgers University.
What are they talking about?
Page B5.
CAMPUS POLICE OFFICER SLAIN AT HOME
A police sergeant at the New Jersey Institute of Technology in Newark was fatally shot just outside his home on a winding two-lane country road in the western part of the state.
Page B5.
Our Towns B4 Fashion B7


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about the Overpriced Stock Service, a financial newsletter, referred incorrectly in some editions to a headline in the August issue.
It read: "Short Everything! It's 1990 All Over Again"; the reference was not to 1987.


Big Issue Returns; Handley Walks Out
Don't ask Ray Handley who the Giants' quarterback will be when Jeff Hostetler recovers from the back injury he suffered Sunday.
A reporter did that today, asking persistently if Phil Simms would stay at quarterback or Hostetler would get the job back, and the Giants' coach walked out of his news conference.
In the ground-level press room in Giants Stadium, Handley met with 40 or so news people, including a season-high nine television crews.
He started with a health update on the players injured Sunday in the Giants' 21-14 victory over the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
Sales of U.S.-built cars and light trucks fell 18.6 percent in mid-November.
Analysts said the figures provided further evidence that the auto industry was in a second recession after its slump earlier this year.  [ Page D1. ]
William Taylor, the new F.D.I.C. head, urged Congress to lay aside its differences and promptly provide $70 billion in taxpayer loans to keep the bank insurance fund afloat.  [ D1. ]


Reviews/Dance; City Ballet in Weekend of Balanchine
The New York City Ballet's dancers have been unusually revved up for the first week of a new season, and the weekend performances were no exception.
Much of this spiritedness and polished execution have come from the male contingent, notably from Damian Woetzel, frequently featured in his current re-energized form, and from young dancers like Ethan Stiefel, who made a debut in "Tchaikovsky Pas de Deux" on Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater.


City Wants Previews Labeled, but Producers Balk
The city's Department of Cultural Affairs announced yesterday that it would meet with representatives of Broadway and Off Broadway producers next Tuesday to resolve a dispute about whether shows that have not yet been reviewed by critics should be clearly labeled as previews in advertisements.
Mark Green, the Consumer Affairs Commissioner, issued a warning letter to two producers' groups last Wednesday, saying, "Consumers are entitled to know exactly what they are buying when they purchase theater tickets."


Republicans, Soft on Crime?
"If our forces could win the ground war in 100 hours, then surely the Congress can pass this legislation in 100 days." That's how President Bush challenged Congress to pass a crime bill in March, on the heels of the Persian Gulf victory.
It took lawmakers more than 200 days to comply, but the result is a constructive compromise on a highly divisive issue.
Yet law-and-order Republicans in the Senate threaten to filibuster the bill, and Mr.
Bush promises a veto.
Their behavior makes little sense.


Toymakers on Display at Craft Museum


Sports of The Times; The Savage Pleasures Of Football
Brutal and terrible injuries are a price we pay for sports entertainment, particularly in football.
Sometimes it takes a tragedy like that of Mike Utley to remind us of this, and the injury to Jeff Hostetler on Sunday underscores it again.
On Sunday in Tampa, Fla., Hostetler, the Giants' quarterback, was smashed by Broderick Thomas, a whopping Buccaneer linebacker, while passing.
Hostetler, one of four Giants eventually knocked out of the game because of injury, fell and lay motionless.
Many feared he had the kind of injury that Utley had a week earlier.


Title for One, Cheers for Another
One lashes out deceptively from any side of the baseline, the other overtly attacks the net.
One is half the other's age.
And the contrasts don't stop there.
Monica Seles won the tournament and enough year-end laurels to solidify her top ranking well into 1992, but it was a former No. 1, Martina Navratilova, who got the sympathy vote and standing ovation when the $3 million Virginia Slims Championships closed book on another tennis season Sunday afternoon.


Say Something Good About South Bronx
To the Editor:
As someone who grew up in the Mott Haven section of the Bronx and whose parents still live there, I could not help being offended at the title of your series on that South Bronx neighborhood, "Life at the Bottom" (Nov. 5-8).
Contrary to the images in the news media and in popular literature like Tom Wolfe's "Bonfire of the Vanities," there is much hope and promise in Mott Haven.


Review/Pop; Drawing the Listener Into Dreamscapes
Laurie Freelove's voice cracks and rasps, whispers and slides and breaks.
In her songs, it is a voice of otherworldly reveries where terror or despair are as likely as bliss.
At the Bitter End on Wednesday night, Ms.
Freelove and her three backup musicians turned songs into dream scapes.
Her melodies and words clawed against sustained arrangements that drew listeners into the songs, carrying the turbulent introspection of her album, "Smells Like Truth" (Chrysalis), to the stage.
Among current performers, Ms.
Freelove probably fits somewhere between Sinead O'Connor and Suzanne Vega, but she imitates neither of them.
Ms.
Freelove's band and her own guitar playing do not propel her songs.
Instead, they envelop her voice with a drizzle of strummed acoustic guitar or a long-breathed low note on bass clarinet or a distant shriek of feedback.
Floating above the instruments, her short modal melodies can become urgent cries as a song progresses.


Doctors Find Comfort Is a Potent Medicine
"COMFORT always, cure rarely," was a motto of medicine in times long gone, when bedside manner was far more potent than any medicines.
Now, in a movement that counters the rush to high-technology, high-turnover medicine, some physicians are urging that the lost art of comforting be revived.
They are spurred by a steady march of scientific findings demonstrating how heavily patients' emotional states can affect the course of their diseases.


On My Mind; A Special Corruption
Sometimes, when I read the stories from Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union about how the corruptions of capitalism have set in after the fall of Communism, my mind is seized with memories and with wonderment.
The stories are all true, I know, and should be told.
And there will be many more of them that will have to be reported.


Macy Bonds Off Sharply
The junk bonds of R. H. Macy &amp; Company fell sharply yesterday after a creditor, Prudential Securities Inc., deferred by a month a $48.7 million interest payment that was due.
The deferral raised dealers' worries about Macy's health.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.94
4.75
7.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.44
4.43
7.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.51
4.51
6.96
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.03
6.99
8.14
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.98
7.97
8.42
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.95
8.95
9.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.90
6.90
7.49
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Q&amp;A
Stomach Capacity
Q.
Does the stomach shrink when you eat less?


Economy Needs Return to I.R.A. Deductibility; Cut Capital Gains Tax
To the Editor:
"Son of Kemp-Roth: Still Wrong" (editorial, Nov. 13) is your usual editorial against cutting the capital gains tax.
You state that reform directed toward past investments "couldn't possibly spur future investment." Dead wrong.
Capital for new investments comes from selling old investments, and right now $1 trillion of old investments is locked up by investors who won't sell under this tax rate (in New York City, it's 40 percent).
A lower rate would encourage capital fluidity, and a rearrangement of assets between conservative and speculative investors would yield more funds for new ventures.


International Paper To Restate Results
The International Paper Company, the nation's largest paper producer, said yesterday that it was cutting 1,000 positions from its worldwide work force and that it would adopt an accounting change that would force it to restate its results for the first three quarters of 1991.
The Purchase, N.Y., company, which has been hurt by sluggish demand for some products, said it was adopting the accounting rule, known as Financial Accounting Standard No. 106, before 1993, when the rule will become mandatory for all companies.
The new standard requires that the costs of providing life and medical insurance coverage for a retired employee be accrued over the employee's active career.


Senate Votes Aid to Soviets to Scrap Atomic Arms
The Senate approved a stripped-down plan today to transfer up to $500 million from the Pentagon budget to help dismantle Soviet nuclear weapons.
The Senate also approved the treaty that cuts NATO and former Warsaw Pact non-nuclear forces in Europe.


BRIEFS
RATINGS *
Synetic Inc., Montvale, N.J., which is 67 percent owned by Medco Containment Services, has received a B rating from Standard &amp; Poor's on its $50 million of convertible subordinated debentures, due 2001.
The company is a provider of pharmacy services to nursing homes and other institutions.


Donald Burros; Executive, 64
Donald Burros, a business executive who was also a sculptor, died yesterday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 64 years old.
He died of pancreatic cancer, said his wife, Marian.


Classical Music in Review
Concert of Remembrance
Cathedral of St. John the Divine
There are concerts with themes so powerful that the music they include takes on a utilitarian rather than an artistic caste.
The Second Interfaith Concert of Remembrance on Saturday night at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine remembered the Holocaust.
The Brooklyn Philharmonic, the Canticum Novum Singers and the Northport High School Choir, all under Lukas Foss, framed this evening with the opening and ending choruses of Bach's St.
Matthew Passion.


Bridge
An expert who had already won a major title here at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals was on track to win a second here today.
Hugh Ross of Oakland, Calif., who owns three world team titles and won the Life Master Open Pairs on Saturday, was a member of a squad that was leading going into the final two sessions of the Open Board-a-Match Teams Championship.
Along with John Sutherlin of Dallas, Bart Bramley and Barry Goren, both of Chicago, Bob Crossley of Greenbrae, Calif., and Jaggy Shivdasani of India, he had a qualifying score of 34 boards.
Other leaders were:


Tenneco Sets $632 Million Sale to Enron
Tenneco Inc. said today that it had agreed to sell its natural-gas liquids operations and some related assets to the Enron Corporation for $632 million.
Natural-gas liquids, which include ethane, butanes and propane, are derived from the processing of natural gas.
They have been the only buoyant sector of an otherwise depressed natural-gas industry during the last two years, as both demand and prices have risen.


U.S. Base in Cuba To Be Haitian Camp
Washington sent a military task force to build an emergency refugee camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, for thousands of Haitians whose exodus to the United States has been blocked by the Coast Guard.
The sudden move reflects growing concern over the unfolding refugee drama prompted in part by an American-supported trade embargo against Haiti, part of efforts to reverse a Sept. 30 military coup.


Behind Jobless Figures, A Rise in Poor Children
A disproportionate number of Americans who are losing jobs during the recession are under 25 years old, a study by a children's advocacy group says, adding that the trend threatens to push more children into poverty.
All in all, more than 1 million of the 1.2 million jobs that workers lost since the recession began in July 1990 were lost by workers 16 to 24 years old, according to the study, which was released today by the Children's Defense Fund and the Center for Labor Market Studies at Northeastern University in Boston.


A Quick Trip to Columbus Provides Bush With a Break From Frustration
President Bush left behind the frustrations of the big economic picture today for the small-scale politics that he loves: shaking the hands of local dignitaries, watching pre-school children play "Fish Derby" on a computer and exclaiming as high school students drew fake blood from artificial arms with real needles.
Accompanied by Education Secretary Lamar Alexander, Mr.
Bush swooped down on Columbus in his Boeing 747 for less than four hours.
He sped through a visit to the Fort Hayes Metropolitan Education Center, a speech in a Veterans Memorial Auditorium filled with sleepy high school students and interviews with local television reporters.


BRIEFS
*
Check Express Inc., Tampa, Fla., an operator of check cashing centers, has terminated merger negotiations with Ace Cash Express Inc. *
Du Pont and Philips Industries N.V., the Dutch electrical company, said that as part of the sale of their joint venture, Philips and Du Pont Optical, they had entered into an agreement with Mitsubishi Kasei Corp., a Japanese chemical company, for the sale of certain assets relating to the joint venture's polymer rewritable media business.
Terms were not disclosed.


Plane Blast Still Open Case, U.S. Says
Stung by criticism that the Bush Administration virtually ruled out the complicity of Syria and Iran in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 in 1988 by indicting two Libyans for the crime, Federal law enforcement officials say investigators are continuing to explore whether either country is to blame.
Still, Justice Department officials insist they have uncovered no hard evidence to charge Syrians or Iranians in the plot, a conclusion that has provoked a skeptical outcry from terrorism experts, some family members of the victims and officials in Israel who remain unconvinced that Libya bears the sole responsibility.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets at 10 A.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Careers; Recruiters Still Busy In Downturn
ALTHOUGH the recesssion has reduced corporate earnings and led to staff cutbacks, the management-recruiting industry has not suffered as badly, thanks in part to special money-saving services ideal for the current economic climate.
The recent quarterly report of the Association of Executive Search Consultants, showed that the number of searches for managers by companies was 6 percent higher in the the third quarter of this year from the third quarter last year.
It also showed that third-quarter searches were down only 3 percent from the second quarter.


Without Wife at Side, He Loses Zest for Job
It started as a summertime romance between two college kids in the 1950's.
He was working on the Oakland waterfront tossing boxes in a warehouse; she was keypunching computer cards in the office.
He thought she was "cute."
They married in 1958 and ultimately rose to the top of the University of California, he as president of the nine-campus system, she as the official associate of the president, his constant companion in all matters private and official.


Miller, on Witness Stand, Denies Cheating Investors
Mel Miller, the politically powerful Speaker of the New York State Assembly, opened his defense yesterday by going on the witness stand to deny the fraud charges against him in a Federal courtroom in Brooklyn.
His lawyer, Gerald B. Lefcourt, began the questions by asking if Mr.
Miller had defrauded the three people described by the prosecution as the principal fraud victims in the case.


Charming Shoppes reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Final Push To Finish Bank Bill
In the hours before Congress was to begin its Thanksgiving recess, lawmakers worked today to resolve differences on a slimmed-down banking bill that would provide new money for the bank insurance fund, as the Administration had asked.
But the bill included none of the broad changes in the half-century-old laws governing the banking industry that the White House proposed in February.
By late in the afternoon, House and Senate negotiators had agreed to drop provisions in the Senate bill that would have eased barriers to interstate banking.
The interstate banking measure had been the last significant White House recommendation left.
Measure Bogs Down
But the bill bogged down in the evening over a variety of smaller provisions that would give regulators greater authority to take over weak institutions and limit the insurance coverage on bank deposits sold by Wall Street investment houses.


New Rules On Margins
The Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission today approved new rules to allow some market professionals to hold one margin account for combined positions in futures and options.
The changes, called cross-margining, are intended to release capital that market professionals have on deposit for margin accounts, and to help improve traders' liquidity in times of market stress.


Court Approves Cuts in Benefits In Costly Illness
A Federal appeals court has ruled that employers who serve as their own health insurers, without using a private insurance company, may change their policies and sharply reduce coverage for workers who develop costly illnesses like AIDS.
In the case before the court, an employee with AIDS saw his maximum benefits drop to $5,000 from $1 million.


Credit Card Cap Dropped
A House-Senate conference committee on banking legislation decided today not to take any action on credit card interest rates.
Two weeks ago, the Senate approved a measure sponsored by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, that would have put a 14 percent cap on charge card rates.
Those rates generally range now from 18 percent to 20 percent.


Review/Film; Coppola's 'Apocalypse' Then: The Making of a Screen Epic
There have been few sharper portraits of the film maker as alchemist than "Hearts of Darkness: A Film Maker's Apocalypse," in which Francis Ford Coppola is seen struggling with hellish logistical problems, wild-card actors, freak accidents and other unseen demons, then ultimately pulling a miracle out of his hat.
Previously seen on Showtime, "Hearts of Darkness" opens today at the Film Forum.
It's well worth close scrutiny on a large screen.
The filming of Mr.
Coppola's "Apocalypse Now" in the Philippines, mostly in 1977 and '78, presented rare opportunities for a journalistic fly on the wall, opportunities rendered that much more interesting when the fly turned out to be Eleanor Coppola, the director's wife.
Mrs.
Coppola, who earlier wrote about her experiences in an account called "Notes," shot some documentary material while the film crew was on location, and had close access to the events that tormented her husband.
She was also well acquainted with the particular brand of high-strung creative ferment that is Mr.
Coppola's stock in trade, and that in the case of "Apocalypse Now" tested the limits of his capacity for courting disaster.


Albertson's Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 31


Japan Agrees to End the Use of Huge Fishing Nets
Bowing to American pressure on a sensitive environmental issue, Japan agreed today to comply with a United Nations moratorium on the use of huge fishing nets in the northern Pacific Ocean that scientists say are responsible for widespread destruction of marine life.
The Japanese decision, announced after a Cabinet meeting, brought an end to an unusually contentious issue between Washington and Tokyo and defused a controversy that had threatened to do further damage to Japan's reputation on environmental matters.


Getting It Right at the N.E.H.
The advisory council of the National Endowment for the Humanities would still be virtually unknown if President Bush hadn't nominated an undistinguished candidate for membership earlier this year.
Carol Iannone's thin scholarly record caused an outcry in academic circles, and the Senate committee rejected her nomination.
Mr.
Bush seems to have learned from that debacle.
His newest nominee, Kenny J. Williams, a conservative professor of English at Duke University, should be an asset to the council.
The council advises the N.E.H. on which scholarship, research and public programs deserve Federal money.


Simms Is the Giants' Old Pro, But He Has Things to Learn
It has been almost a full year since No. 11 ran the Giants' show.
And even Phil Simms, 36 years old with thousands of passes past, can use some instruction -- even after his theatrical return last Sunday to lead the Giants to a closing-seconds victory over the Buccaneers at Tampa, Fla.


Anton Furst, 47, the Set Designer For 'Batman' and 'Awakenings'
Anton Furst, the Oscar-winning production designer who created the Batmobile and the haunting sets for the 1989 film "Batman," leaped to his death on Sunday, the Los Angeles County coroner's office said Monday.
He was 47 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Furst died of multiple injuries after jumping from about the eighth floor of a car-park structure at 4 P.M. on Sunday, said Scott Carrier, a spokesman for the coroner's office.
Detective Sgt.
E.
D.
Toles said that there was a witness and that the police have ruled out foul play.


Metropolitan Diary
THANKSGIVING Everyone wants to go home for Thanksgiving, wherever home is.
Not just you and me but the fancy folks and the downtown down-and-outers, whoever they might have been.
Way back then, we were laughing wide-eyed children at tables heavy with turkey and dressing and pies, whenever that once was.
And now savoring distant tastes of long gone times, we re-collect sweet birds of youth, whatever that must have been.
ROGER GRANET
. . .
Sign seen by Michael E. Zuller at the Basket Shop, a Barclay Street confectionery: DO YOU HAVE FRIENDS OR RELATIVES AWAY AT SCHOOL OR IN PRISON?
WE SHIP GOODY BASKETS ANYWHERE!
. . .
EPIC WURST
With my remote set on rapid autofire, I was blasting through the spectrum of cable stations in search of a "Hogan's Heroes" rerun when my finger slipped and like a bad turn of "The Wheel of Fortune," the tuner landed on the dreaded PBS.
Before the knee-jerk groan could reach my lips, a curious-looking fellow sitting rather uneasily in an easy chair muttered "Milton." He went on and on about a brilliant poet, deprived of sight, master of epic verse, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
Who is this Milton?
I have an Uncle Milton but, according to Aunt Harriet, he has never been known for lyric talents.
Milty's expertise is in and his artistic medium is wurst, not verse.
He once owned the Paradise appetizing store in the Bronx.
He has logged more hours with pickled herring, muenster cheese and lox spreads than with Aunt Harriet.
Blind?
He can glance at a piece of gefilte fish and determine its weight, cost and the percentage of whitefish in the mix.
One sad day, fire ravaged the block and the store.
Uncle Milton's Paradise was lost.
STEVE SCHECHTER
. . .
On a Broadway bus in late afternoon, Isaac Kaufman hears a seated woman gasp, then shudder and flick something off her leg.
It is a cockroach.
The passengers look uncertainly at one another.
A middle-aged man across the aisle steps up to the insect, waves at it, says "Adios, amigo," and steps on it.
There is a round of applause, an "ole" or two and then everyone goes back to whatever they had been doing.
.. .
To be filed under H, as in "Huh?"
William K. Kopp.
D.D.S., of Rego Park, Queens, is on a flight from San Francisco to J.F.K.
Searching for reading material, he reaches into the seat pocket in front of him and pulls out a card headed "Safety." This is what it says:
"If you are sitting in an exit row and you cannot read this card or cannot see well enough to follow these instructions, please tell a crew member." In seven languages yet.
. . .
Dear Diary:
Well, it's pickle-bottling time in my neighborhood.
I have made the rounds of the 50 three-foot-square parks in the five-block vicinity of my apartment on East 52d Street and have gathered from the pavement such condiments as parsley, parsnip, dill, fennel and caraway.
What passers-by believe to be just weeds turn out to be exotic aromatics as fabulous as the tumeric of Arabia.
Where did I get the cucumbers?
From my window boxes!
To those who wish to engage in a more specialized pickling operation, there is some coriander and anise in the Beekman Place area.
One thing, however.
It is getting harder and harder to buy the mason jars.
JACK GASNICK
. . .
Dear Diary:
This is what happened the other day.
Richard locked himself out of his West Fourth Street apartment.
The super wasn't around.
Two hours later, Richard was still waiting in the lobby.
Then Mary Anne, an upstairs neighbor, came home.
She didn't have the keys to Richard's apartment, but she had keys to Carol's apartment next door to her.
And Carol, she knew, had keys to Lydia's apartment on the floor below.
And Lydia, Richard knew, had keys to his apartment.
So Mary Anne used her keys to get into Carol's apartment where she found a set of keys labeled "Lydia." Then Mary Anne and Richard went to Lydia's apartment where Richard was certain he would find the keys to his apartment.
And so he did.
A few minutes later he was unlocking his own door.
There's a moral here someplace, maybe about good neighbors, maybe about New York apartment dwellers.
On the other hand it could be a question.
Like, didn't Lucy and Ethel have it easy?
JANE HEIL


High School Mourns the Day After a Killing
As if awaiting the sequel to a riveting movie, or because even an incident of horror could not pry them from their daily routine, most of the students and teachers at Thomas Jefferson High School returned to classes yesterday, the day after a student was killed and a teacher was wounded by gunshots in a hallway.
The death scene on the third floor had been gruesome enough, but then students learned a few hours later that the police had arrested one of their own, a 14-year-old boy, in connection with the shootings.
Held Without Bail
The student, Jason Bentley, was arraigned in Brooklyn Criminal Court yesterday on charges of second-degree murder and second-degree criminal possession of a weapon.
He was held without bail.


Southern Co. reports earnings for 12mos Oct 31


Electro-Catheter Corp. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


On Fire Island, Storms and Governments Provoke Fear
The beach is coming back strong, but the sand dunes are gone, wiped out by a Halloween storm that also destroyed 45 Fire Island homes.
"We seem to be getting shortchanged by nature," said Bartley Horton, a general contractor who has lived on Fire Island for 53 years.


Atmos Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fleetwood Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 27


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 22
Nov. 15
Nov. 23
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
6.9
6.6
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.0
2.8
Gasoline stocks
202.7
197.4
218.3
Distillate stocks
138.6
136.1
134.8
Crude imports, daily
5.6
5.6
5.3
Product imports, daily
1.9
2.2
1.7
Crude stocks
346.9
352.5
337.1
Crude production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
85.5
82.3
83.0
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Goody's Family Clothing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stifel Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


Colgate Moves In East Europe
The Colgate-Palmolive Company, the consumer products giant, yesterday announced several initiatives to increase its presence in eastern Europe.
The New York-based company said it had created ventures to produce and market consumer products in Poland and Romania.
It also formed a subsidiary to market Colgate products in Hungary.


Open Positions on Short Sales Increase by 3% on Nasdaq
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the number of actively traded shares sold short, and not yet covered, in the month ended on Nov. 15 rose by nearly 9.9 million, or 3 percent, to a record 334.7 million.
The previous record was set in the monthlong period ended Oct. 15, when open positions on short sales of active issues totaled 324.8 million shares.


Groundwater Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


City Hospitals Having Trouble Luring Residents, Study Shows
New York City hospitals are having a much harder time attracting doctors to their residency programs than in the past, apparently because of problems like cuts in government aid and increases in the number of patients with problems related to drug abuse, a new study says.
The study, published yesterday in the Journal of the American Medical Association, found a drop of just under a third in recruitment of doctors at city-owned hospitals in New York over seven years.


Another U.N. Report Says Iraq May Conceal Uranium
United Nations inspectors have unearthed new evidence suggesting that Iraq may be concealing a quantity of highly enriched uranium suitable for use as a nuclear explosive and probably acquired from an unknown foreign supplier.
The evidence was discovered last month by experts from the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency, during their seventh inspection tour investigating Saddam Hussein's secret nuclear programs.
It takes the form of traces of uranium enriched up to 93 percent -- "weapons-grade" levels -- which were found at four places inside the Thwaitha nuclear installation, 40 miles southwest of Baghdad.


Oneida Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


BUSH'S RESPONSES COME FROM SCRIPT
A White House microphone, accidentally left on after President Bush completed a closed-circuit broadcast to a California audience, today confirmed what some reporters had long suspected: some of Mr.
Bush's seemingly spontaneous exchanges with the public are actually scripted beforehand.
The President complained about problems with the scripted exchanges after a question-and-answer session with a teachers group, the Association of Christian Schools International, which is holding its convention in Anaheim, Calif.
Mr.
Bush spoke from the White House, a technique he frequently uses in "appearances" before small conventions, and his remarks were carried on speakers in the White House press room for reporters.


Memo Cites Disney Records' Woes
The Walt Disney Company's pop music record label, which has failed to release a significant hit in its almost two years of operation, is losing millions of dollars a year and has been plagued by management mistakes, according to an internal memo written by the label's president.
In the memo, Peter Paterno, an entertainment industry lawyer who was hired by Disney two years ago to set up and run Hollywood Records, acknowledged that the label was perceived by many to be "the Titanic captained by the Three Stooges." But he defended the label's strategy and asked Disney's management not to dismiss him or close down the label.


Riding Herd on Iron Horsed, With Fiber Optics
The Union Pacific Railroad, operator of a communications network that is considered one of the world's most advanced command-and-control systems for freight trains, prides itself on the speedier deliveries the network makes possible.
But safety is a benefit, too, as John Cazahous demonstrated after noticing a red blip on his screen one day in the railroad's Harriman Dispatching Center here.


A Leading Deal Maker Quits Goldman, Sachs
After 20 years on Wall Street, where he participated in some of the biggest deals in history, Geoffrey T. Boisi has decided to move on.
Mr.
Boisi, a member of the management committee of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company and the former head of investment banking there, has been preparing himself for a departure for more than a year.
But, he says, when he disclosed his decision yesterday, his colleagues were surprised.


Independence Holding Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


University To Eliminate Liberal Arts
As leaders of the University of Bridgeport struggled today to save the school, many students and professors left campus for the Thanksgiving holiday in tears, uncertain about how long they would be studying and working there.
On the same day that the school's interim president announced plans to eliminate the liberal-arts college next year, a university lawyer argued in court for permission to tap restricted endowment funds so the university can make this week's payroll.


To Be on Time, Try Some Old-Fashioned Procrastination
IT was surely the revenge of the P.C.'s.
Not the Politically Correct, because I had a good claim to that high ground.
No, it was the infamous Procrastinators' Cabal that got me.
This insidious organization, as secretive as the Masons, is the one that opens a new window in the post office at the moment you reach your window after a half-hour wait.
My sister, I believe, holds some high office: her son was able to persuade a police officer in Vermont that the deadline for college applications was but a half-hour off and he had to drive at 90 m.p.h. to get his application in, or, like you know, officer, really crush the family.


Ccair Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


50-Off Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


Victoria Creations Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Benihana National reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 13


Bucharest Journal; Forget Bad Memories, a New Germany Beckons
Out on the edge of Bucharest, Dumitru Tranca tells of his children who are leaving for Germany.
He describes it as a paradise, with jobs and housing for all, not like the muddy cinderblock village, with yelping dogs guarding against intruders, where the gypsy patriarch and his families live.
Mr.
Tranca, a 58-year-old with a weathered face and rows of gold teeth, wears a tall Persian lamb cap marking him as a gypsy king, or leader.
But his flock has almost disappeared.


Koch Returns to City Hall to Hear Some Nice Things Said About Him


Howard Wins Camp
DESMOND HOWARD, the Michigan receiver-returner who accounted for 1,749 yards and 23 touchdowns in leading the Wolverines to a 10-1 record and the Big Ten championship, was awarded the Walter Camp Trophy yesterday as the season's outstanding college football player.


NBC and CBS Are Neck and Neck in Ratings
Declaring that it has "stopped the bleeding," NBC yesterday predicted that it would win the November sweep, one of the three most important ratings months in the television season.
CBS's research department said the outcome might still be a tie.
But it would take some extraordinary results in the final days to hold off an NBC victory.


MacLeod Loses His Notre Dame Debut
John Taylor scored 18 points tonight, leading Butler to a 67-60 victory over Notre Dame that spoiled John MacLeod's debut as the 15th basketball coach of the Irish.
J.
P.
Brens hit two free throws and Darin Archbold added one in the final minute to dash Notre Dame's hopes for a comeback.


Tech Data Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Exploration Co. of Louisiana reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scali, McCabe, Sloves Sells Stake in Publitel
Scali, McCabe, Sloves, New York, announced yesterday the sale of its interest in its Montreal affiliate, Publitel/SMS, to the agency's present management.
At the same time, Publitel announced a merger with another Quebec agency, PNMD.
Publitel had billings of about $16 million, from clients like Labatt Brewery, Best Foods and the Quebec government, said Marvin Sloves, Scali's chairman and chief executive.
He added that the sale had been in the works for several years, because Scali has been increasing its relationships with other agencies in Quebec.
Terms of the sale were not disclosed.


Man, Suspected as an Assassin, Is Guilty of Lying
A 26-year-old Colombian described by prosecutors as the top assassin of the Medellin drug cartel was convicted yesterday of using false identification and lying to Federal agents who tracked him from Miami and seized him at a Queens phone booth in September.
The man, Dandeny Munoz-Mosquera, faces up to six years in prison on the two charges when he is sentenced on Jan. 13 by Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
The judge said in court yesterday that if the Government, at a pre-sentencing hearing, substantiated its allegations about Mr.
Munoz-Mosquera's involvement in the killings of 40 or more police officers and in other killings, the sentence was likely to be the maximum.
Judge Weinstein also suggested that in the meantime Mr.
Munoz-Mosquera be held in a "high-security prison."


Ex-Agent Cut a Dashing Figure in the Spy World
One of the last of the legendary covert warriors at the Central Intelligence Agency, Duane R. Clarridge was a flamboyant spy who seemed to step boldly into the Iran-contra affair from the pages of an Ian Fleming novel.
Aggressive, imaginative and always willing to stick his neck out for the C.I.A., Mr.
Clarridge was a star who sparkled under William J. Casey, Director of Central Intelligence in the Reagan years.
Some former colleagues say Mr.
Clarridge virtually created the contras' war in Nicaragua for Mr.
Casey in the early 1980's.


Allou Health &amp; Beauty Care reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Essef Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Don't Make the David Dukes News Media Stars
To the Editor:
In "Pests of the Lower South" (Op-Ed, Nov. 15), C. Vann Woodward writes that "Senator Joseph McCarthy did not represent a Southern state, and the city of Skokie, where neo-Nazis paraded, is not in Louisiana." Professor Woodward's point is that demagogy of the David Duke kind is not confined to the South.


PHH Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


American Vanguard reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


C.D.'s and Bank Funds Dip
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were moderately down for the week ended yesterday.
According to The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest-rate publication based in North Palm Beach, Fla., the outlook for yields is gloomy, with the slide definitely going into 1992.
"Weak indicators and a public lack of confidence are hurting the ability to recover from the economic slump and in turn hurting bank savings yields," Robert K. Heady, its publisher, said.
"The drop this week is surprisingly stronger than last week, even three weeks after a prime-rate cut."


Dow Recovers From Drop to Finish 14.08 Higher
Largely on the strength of a promised restructuring of the International Business Machines Corporation, the Dow Jones industrial average recovered yesterday from a 52-point tumble to finish the day 14.08 points higher, at 2,916.14.
I.B.M., one of the 30 stocks in the Dow Jones industrial average, said yesterday that it would take a fourth-quarter charge of $3 billion charge and trim its ranks by an additional 20,000 people.
The company said the moves would ultimately save it $1 billion next year and $2 billion annually thereafter.
I.B.M., whose work force will shrink to about 330,000 after the cuts, had already eliminated 20,000 jobs this year.


Designs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


U.S. Judge Bars Energy Secretary From Opening Nuclear Waste Site
A Federal District Court Judge today issued an injunction that indefinitely bars Energy Secretary James D. Watkins from opening the nation's first permanent repository for nuclear wastes.
The action by Judge John Garrett Penn comes six weeks after New Mexico was joined by Texas and four environmental groups in a lawsuit filed here that said Mr.
Watkins violated Federal law by seeking to open the repository in New Mexico without Congressional approval.


Appian Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Riser Foods Inc. reports earnings for 16wks to Oct 19


AID DONORS INSIST ON KENYA REFORMS
The United States and other aid-donor nations told Kenya today to introduce political and economic reforms and improvements in human rights or face major cuts in aid in six months.
The warning to the Government of President Daniel arap Moi, which has been widely accused of corruption and political repression, amounted to a rare, publicly acknowledged intervention by aid donors into the domestic political affairs of a developing nation.
Governments and international lending institutions that give foreign aid usually link aid strictly to economic reforms, although political motivations are often seen behind aid programs.


The Pop Life
The Singles Charts
Billboard, the music industry's leading trade publication, has begun using an elaborate computerized system to compile its weekly chart of the country's top 100 singles.
The new system, in part similar to the one Billboard uses to chart the top albums, should go a long way toward eliminating manipulation of the charts by record labels and independent promotion companies that pressure some radio stations and record stores to report bogus or distorted data.


Consumer Confidence Is the Lowest Since 1980
American consumers' confidence in the economy has fallen beneath the lowest level recorded during the 1982 recession, the Conference Board said yesterday in a report that indicates growing unease over job security and general disbelief in the Bush Administration's contention that a recovery has taken hold.
The index of consumer confidence compiled by the board, a widely followed business research group, declined to 50.6 from 60.1 in October.
The figure is more than three points below the worst rating of the 1982 recession, when the nation's output of all goods and service, as measured by the gross national product, dropped almost 6 percent in a single quarter and unemployment climbed over the 10 percent mark.


INSIDE
Iran-Contra Indictment
A former C.I.A. official, Duane R. Clarridge, was indicted on perjury charges stemming from a 1985 missile shipment to Iran.
Page A12.
A More Worried Consumer
Consumer confidence in the economy has fallen below the lowest level of the 1982 recession.
Page D1.
Sniff, Sniff, $ niff
As scientists unravel how humans respond to aromas, marketers are using smells to sell.
Page C1.


Neiman Marcus Group reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 2


President of Kenya Orders Arrest of 2 Close Associates
Under international pressure to reform his Government, President Daniel arap Moi today ordered the arrest of two close political colleagues who last week were publicly implicated in the 1990 slaying of Kenya's Foreign Minister, an opponent of Government corruption.
But at the same time the President abruptly shut down the public inquiry at which the charges against the two former high-ranking officials were being aired.
Instead, the investigation of the killing was turned over to the Kenyan police, a move that left many Kenyans skeptical that justice would be done, since the police have been accused of hampering the judicial inquiry and of being linked with corruption.


BRIEFS
*
Corning Inc., Corning, N.Y., said its Corning Lab Services unit had completed the acquisition of Clinical Pathology Facility Inc.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Eastex Energy Inc., Houston, acquired Service Pipeline Co., also known as Servco, and its subsidiaries.
Eastex will pay about 450,000 common shares and will assume about $2.9 million in Servco debt.


Cakes Take New York: C3.


No Regrets For Handley On Monday Rollout
While conceding he "might have handled it differently," Giant Coach Ray Handley said yesterday he had "no regrets" about stalking out of Monday's news conference because he objected to questions about his quarterbacks.
In an interview last night over radio station WFAN, Handley said that he was trying to avoid creating a quarterback "situation" by declining to answer questions.


Peck Ex-Head Held Bankrupt
Asil Nadir, former chairman of the financially troubled Polly Peck International P.L.C., has been declared bankrupt after legal action by a group of creditor banks, a lawyer for one of the banks said today.
A British court on Monday acted on a request by the Norwegian bank, the Den Norske Bank, and nine other international banks, said a lawyer for the law firm, Stephenson Harwood.


Review/Opera; One Art Imitating Another Art With 'Figaro'
Until Monday night, I never imagined Elisabeth Schwarzkopf to be about two feet tall with a dozen strings coming out of her joints.
But I didn't expect that of Anna Moffo either.
And Eberhard Wachter, I am told, is certainly more substantial than the three-inch-waisted figure I saw in Alice Tully Hall.
But there were their voices, and with just a little suspension of disbelief, the sounds could be imagined emerging from the finely sculptured puppets of the Salzburg Marionette Theater.
The figures almost seemed authentic representations of Countess Almaviva, Susanna and the Count himself.
This marionette performance of Mozart's "Marriage of Figaro" was, in fact, a fascinating experience and is worth sampling this week (even with children) as the Austrian troupe repeats it, along with productions of "Don Giovanni," "Cosi Fan Tutte" and "The Magic Flute," through Sunday night.
The only major problem is that the hall itself is inappropriate for the 15-foot-high stage; even the advertisements recommend opera glasses.


Grant Tensor Geophysical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


P.A.M. Transportation Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


House of Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Look Out Beaujolais! Vino Novello Is Here
HOPING to cash in on the lucrative American taste for Beaujolais nouveau, Italy wants America to discover vino novello.
So, with rivalry in mind, Italy beat France to the corkscrew last week by showing its new wine in New York on Tuesday, two days before the 1991 Beaujolais nouveau landed.


Glenayre Elec reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Carl. I. Friedlander; Aircraft Maker, 83
Carl I. Friedlander, a former president of the Aeronca Aircraft Company, died on Thursday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from pneumonia, his family said.


Phone Bill Increase to Aid 911 Overhaul
The New York City Council approved legislation yesterday that will add 35 cents to the monthly telephone bills of city residents to help pay for modernizing the city's 911 emergency response system.
The surcharge is expected to begin by March 1.
But the legislation, which was requested by Mayor David N. Dinkins, includes a so-called sunset provision that limits the surcharge to three years, unless the Council agrees to extend it.


Saudis Lay Plans to Surpass Soviets in Production of Oil
Saudi Arabia gave the first formal indication today that it may well surpass the Soviet Union as the world's largest oil producer within the next two years.
While stressing that they would act cautiously and slowly, Saudi officials confirmed to other members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, who began a meeting here today, that they would increase their production capacity significantly above its current level of between 8.5 million and 9 million barrels a day.


Florafax International reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Food Notes
Bay Scallops' Good Name
The New York area bay scallop season has started, but supplies are limited and still threatened by pollution.
Most scallops are being sold on Long Island for $10 to $16 a pound.


Liberty Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Son, Stepdaughter, 3 Others Held in Sergeant's Killing
Five people, including a son and stepdaughter, were charged today with murder and conspiracy in the ambush slaying of a campus police sergeant outside his home on a country road in rural Allamuchy Township Saturday night.
The Warren County prosecutor, Richard C. Hare, said the five had plotted to kill the sergeant, Revell Quince, a 43-year-old shift supervisor on the police force at the New Jersey Institute of Technology in Newark, because in the 1980's he had been accused of sexually and physically abusing his stepdaughter, Cynthia Gregory, a 22-year-old supermarket cashier.


Making Law Backward
Laws, so the textbooks say, are expressions of majority will, enacted by Congress with the approval of the President.
Or, in some cases, over his veto.
Throw those textbooks out.
The U.S. has just managed to enshrine the family planning clinic "gag rule" in national law even though Congress never dreamed of censoring doctors.
The gag rule is only the latest and most successful example of backward lawmaking -- a series of usurpations, end runs and floutings of legislative authority engineered by the Reagan and Bush Administrations.


Next, Close the Political Sewer
"There is no more important issue before us," Richard Gephardt, the House majority leader, told his colleagues this week in support of legislation to clean up Congressional campaign financing.
"We have to restore the faith of the American people." By resoundingly passing the reform bill, the House took a big step toward restoring that faith.
This progress honors the tenacity of Representative Sam Gejdenson, the Connecticut Democrat who drafted the bill, and a new resolve among his colleagues to address rising anger at Congress.
Both houses have now passed serious measures that strike at the corrosive influence of special interest money in Federal elections.
Even so, the whole effort will blur into mere smoke if the measure that finally emerges from a House-Senate conference fails to stop sewer money contributions that pervert present law.


Mets Ready to Add Murray's Big Bat
The Mets are on the verge of signing free-agent first baseman Eddie Murray and could have the details wrapped up and the deal completed as early as today.
General Manager Al Harazin conducted two negotiating sessions by telephone yesterday with Murray's agent and emerged from them hopeful that one more conference today would cinch the deal for the 35-year-old first baseman.


Anton Furst, 47, the Set Designer For 'Batman' and 'Awakenings'
Anton Furst, the Oscar-winning production designer who created the Batmobile and the haunting sets for the 1989 film "Batman," leaped to his death on Sunday, the Los Angeles County coroner's office said Monday.
He was 47 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Furst died of multiple injuries after jumping from about the eighth floor of a car-park structure at 4 P.M. on Sunday, said Scott Carrier, a spokesman for the coroner's office.
Detective Sgt.
E.
D.
Toles said that there was a witness and that the police have ruled out foul play.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-11  WESTERN DONORS WARN KENYA
Western donor nations told Kenya to introduce political and economic reforms and improvements in human rights or face major cuts in aid in six months.
Page A1


Bob Johnson, Top Hockey Coach In Pros and College, Is Dead at 60
Bob Johnson, the hockey coach who achieved success at every level of the game, including capturing the Stanley Cup last year with the Pittsburgh Penguins, died of brain cancer yesterday.
He was 60 years old.
Mr.
Johnson died at his home in Colorado Springs, where he had been confined since an operation last August to remove a brain tumor.
Doctors had decided to treat a second tumor with radiation treatments.
Harry Sanders, a spokesman for the Penguins, said Mr.
Johnson had been in a coma for about a week.


Gali Freedman, Designer, Weds
Grace Helen Freedman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Freedman of West Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to Oz Ben-Amram, a son of Eliahu Ben-Amram of Herzliya, Israel, and Clelia Ben-Amram Segre of Jerusalem.
Rabbi Paul Laderman officiated at the Hyatt Regency on Mount Scopus in Jerusalem.
The bride, 29 years old, is known as Gali.
She is a graphic designer and illustrator in Tel Aviv.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received a bachelor's degree in art from the Bezalel Academy of Art in Jerusalem.
Her father, who is retired, was an advertising production schedule keeper for The New York Times.
Her mother, also retired, was an assistant school principal in Newark and a reading specialist in West Orange.


Remedy for Yanks Isn't Steinbrenner
What is ailing the Yankees?
What should be done to fix what is so obviously broken?


Ex-C.I.A. Official Charged on Iran Arms
A Federal grand jury today indicted Duane R. Clarridge, a former senior official at the Central Intelligence Agency, charging him with seven counts of perjury and making false statements stemming from a secret missile shipment to Iran in November 1985 that was one of the first steps in the Iran-contra affair.
Mr.
Clarridge directed the agency's covert operations in Europe at the time of the events outlined in the indictment.
He had been a swashbuckling clandestine agent who became a favorite of William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence under President Ronald Reagan.


Compromise Is Reached on $151 Billion Bill Revising U.S. Transit Financing
House and Senate negotiators today unanimously endorsed a compromise on a transportation bill and said it was likely to have the support of big majorities in both chambers.
The Bush Administration also endorsed the bill, which is to provide $151 billion over six years: $119 billion for highway programs and $32 billion for mass transportation.


Stewart &amp; Stevenson Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Checkers Drive-In Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Freshmen Return for Garden Party
Gary DeCesare is a high school basketball coach, not a crazed fan.
He is more likely to keep score and analyze defenses while watching a game than he is to cheer wildly or snap photographs of players.
So why is he bringing a camera to Madison Square Garden tonight?
What is compelling him to corral two players between the semifinals of the Preseason National Invitation Tournament, force them to pose and then click away until the roll of film has expired?


Theater in Review
The Shadow of a Gunman  Symphony Space 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street Manhattan Through Dec. 8 By Sean O'Casey; directed by Shivaun O'Casey; set design by Brien Vahey; set decoration, Josie MacAvin; costumes, Jan Bee Brown; lighting design, Rory Dempster; sound, Paul Bull; production stage manager, Bryan Young; music, Tommy Sands; produced by Sally de Sousa.
Presented by the O'Casey Theater Company of Newry County Down, Northern Ireland.
WITH: Niall Buggy, Risteard Cooper, Michelle Fairley, Ian Fitzgibbon, Pauline Flanagan, Stephen Gabis, Richard Holmes, Doreen Keogh, Sean McCarthy, Shauna Rooney and George Vogel.
Although it is nearly 70 years old, "The Shadow of a Gunman" retains its harsh immediacy within and also beyond its depressed Dublin environment.
It is a tightly focused, unsentimental play about heroism both false and real and about how people respond to the challenge of an emergency.
Shivaun O'Casey's production, brought to Symphony Space by the new O'Casey Theater Company, is more successful at capturing the raffish comedy than it is at suggesting the darker recesses of the drama.


Leader for Policy Group
Olin Robison, a former president of Middlebury College and an authority on American-Soviet affairs, has been named president of the Salzburg Seminar, an organization that brings together policy makers, educators and politicians from around the world for the discussion of international issues.
And the seminar's administrative offices will be moved to Middlebury, Vt., after 45 years in Cambridge, Mass.
Long recognized for leadership in studying international issues, the Salzburg Seminar offers one- to three-week sessions six to eight times a year on a single topic of concern, including education, economics, the environment, culture and social issues.
The seminars meet in an 18th-century palace in Salzburg, Austria, the Schloss Leopoldskron.


4 Key Issues in Dispute on Package to Fight Crime
The anticrime legislative package fought over in Congress touched on most of the issues that have been at the heart of the debate for more than 20 years over how to control crime: Is gun control effective?
How useful is the death penalty?
And have courts and the police been constrained by excessive concern with the rights of the accused?
House leaders abandoned the bill tonight in the face of a veto threat by President Bush, who argued that it was not tough enough.
The Democrats had retorted that the bill was considerably more stringent than current law.


60-Minute Gourmet
THE average home cook still seems to be intimidated by souffles, especially savory ones.
Dessert souffles have become so popular in restaurants that cooks seem more inclined to try their hands at those.
Essentially, souffles of any kind are fairly simple.
If well made -- and that requires getting the proportions correct -- a souffle should stay puffed for 5 to 10 minutes.
It should be crisp and golden on the outside, moist but not overly runny inside.
I am particularly fond of cheese souffles, which can be made with virtually any type of cheese or combinations of several types.


3 Clients Shift to Grey From Levine, Huntley
Grey Advertising Inc., New York, announced yesterday that three of the four remaining clients of Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver, the subsidiary that Grey is shutting after large losses, have transferred their accounts to Grey.
The billings involved are estimated at $30 million.
Moving to Grey are Bausch &amp; Lomb's Ray-Ban, Ethan Allen Inc. and the Panasonic Company.
Their decisions, which had been anticipated, mean that an as-yet unspecified number of Levine, Huntley employees can join Grey, said Robert Berenson, Grey's executive vice president of administration and account management.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a Bush Administration proposal to phase out Federal support for affirmative action programs misstated the number of businesses and employees monitored by the Office of Federal Contract Compliance.
The office monitors more than 95,000 businesses employing more than 27 million workers.


Knicks' Defense Doesn't Rest
Gerald Wilkins made acrobatic shots.
John Starks made long-range shots.
And the Knicks' fourth-quarter defense made it difficult for Miami to make any shots.
Propelled by its defense and its backcourt, New York cruised to a 98-81 victory over the Heat at Madison Square Garden last night.
It was the Knicks' fourth consecutive victory, matching their longest winning streak of the season, and it put them into a tie with Boston for the Atlantic Division lead, both at 8-5.


Armada Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Thursday about new compost products and programs referred incorrectly to the use of electric garbage disposers in Brooklyn.
The New York City Buildings Department forbids them in residential kitchens.


METRO DIGEST
SOME HELP FOR MASS TRANSIT
With its heavy reliance on mass transit, the New York metropolitan region should be a major beneficiary of the $151 billion transportation bill nearing approval in Congress, according to legislators from the region.
B5.
NEW YORK CITY  FISCAL TURMOIL AT COLUMBIA
Still smarting from a series of budget cuts last spring, the chairmen of 26 academic departments at Columbia University have threatened to resign their chairmanships rather than enforce any more cuts.
A1.
CONDOM GIVEAWAY BEGINS IN SCHOOLS
Seeking to stem the spread of AIDS, New York City became the first urban school system in the nation to make condoms widely available to high school students.
At John Dewey High School in Brooklyn, one of two schools to inaugurate the program, there were no throngs of angry parents and no other visible protests, just the giggles of teen-agers excited by something novel and faintly forbidden.
A1.  35 CENTS = IMPROVED 911
The City Council approved legislation that will add 35 cents to residents' monthly telephone bills to help pay for modernizing the city's 911 emergency response system.
B3.
MILLER DENIES FRAUD CHARGES
His manner composed and his tone conversational, Assembly Speaker Mel Miller went on the witness stand to deny Federal charges that he had defrauded his law clients in investments in cooperative apartments.
B3.
LOSING THE RECRUITING WARS
New York City hospitals are having an increasingly hard time attracting doctors to their residency programs, largely because of the city's social and economic ills, a new study says.
B3.
Woman dies after wrong-way driver collides with ambulance. B3.
Suspected drug assassin is convicted of lying to Federal agents.
B3.
REGION  TRASH WARS, TRADE WARS?
From across the Canadian border, waste paper, rotten food and the flotsam of countless Ontario businesses are arriving in western New York.
In the wake has come anger and a growing effort to impose tariffs on the trash, despite warnings about provoking a trade war.
A1.
GETTING TO KNOW MR.
CUOMO
As Governor Cuomo attracts national attention with his musings on the Presidency, political observers around the country are learning a truism that has long been familiar in the state capital -- that the Governor not only has a way with words; he often has a way around them.
B5. 5 HELD IN SERGEANT'S SLAYING
Five people, including a son and stepdaughter, were charged in the ambush slaying of a police sergeant outside his home on a country road in western New Jersey.
B5.
FIRE ISLANDERS' LAMENT
Along Fire Island's barrier beach, where 45 homes were destroyed in a Halloween storm, people have good reason to believe that they are shortchanged by nature.
Many of them feel that government has not been much kinder.
B5.
About New York B4
Education B6


U.S. Seeks Sanctions On China
The Administration today announced the failure of trade negotiations with China aimed at stopping the piracy of American patents, copyrights and trademarks, and began the legal process for restricting some Chinese imports in retaliation.
The decision by the trade representative, Carla A. Hills, is the first time that the United States has sought trade sanctions because another country did not protect American inventions.
It represents a further deterioration in American-Chinese relations.


Handwritten MSS. Follow the Dinosaur
To the Editor:
It may have been coincidental, but the day you published "The House of Morgan, Doubled" (editorial, Nov. 8) was the day I visited New York City's wonderful Pierpont Morgan Library, with its newly completed courtyard to connect it with J. P. Morgan's mansion, and once again enjoyed examining its priceless treasures.


Contempt Charge Deferred
A Federal judge deferred action yesterday on a move to charge a well-known lawyer, Bruce Cutler, with criminal contempt for making public statements about the John Gotti case.
The judge, I. Leo Glasser, said in Federal District Court in Brooklyn that he would delay his decision until at least next week on whether to sign an order charging Mr.
Cutler with violating court rules about discussing cases in public.
A lawyer representing Mr.
Cutler, Frederick P. Hafetz, asked the judge to put off any action until Mr.
Cutler completed a trial in Chicago early next year.
In Chicago, Mr.
Cutler said he had acted properly in defense of Mr.
Gotti.


American Travellers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Red Eagle Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kelley Oil &amp; Gas Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Biodyne reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Theater in Review
The Death and Life of Sherlock Holmes  The Open Eye: New Stagings 270 West 89th Street, Manhattan Through Dec. 15 By Suzan L. Zeder; based on the stories of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle; directed by Russell Treyz; costumes, Marianne Powell-Parker; scenery, Adrienne J. Brockway; lights, Spencer Moss; stage manager, James Marr.
Presented by Amie Brockway, artistic director.
WITH: Elton Beckett, Kermit Brown, George Cavey, Mitchell Greenberg, Amanda Gronich, Jim Helsinger, Tara Mallen and Arleigh Richards.
Moriarity was deluded.
There was no way, even with the help of the hellish Reichenbach Falls, he could take Sherlock Holmes to his death.
Everyone knows how Holmes's passionate public let Sir Arthur Conan Doyle know that neither he nor Moriarity could pull such a stunt.
Holmes lives, no matter what his creator or his enemy might think.
After all, who were Moriarity and Doyle, anyway?
Answering that question is what Suzan L. Zeder challenges the audience to do in "The Death and Life of Sherlock Holmes," being presented at the Open Eye: New Stagings on the Upper West Side.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Gunnarsson Is Upset  Scott Davis of the United States yesterday upset eighth-seeded Jan Gunnarsson, 6-4, 6-4, making the Swede the first seeded player knocked out of the South African Open in Johannesburg.
Gunnarsson, who is ranked 92d in the world, was slowed by a heavy brace on his right knee.
The top-seeded doubles team, South Africans Wayne Ferreira and Pietie Norval, was also upset, losing by 7-5, 7-6 to their compatriots Neville Godwin and Gareth Williams. (AP) VOLLEYBALL  United States Triumphs  Brent Hilliard scored 14 spike points yesterday to lead the United States to an 11-15, 15-5, 15-6, 15-7 victory over Mexico in Group A competition of the men's World Cup in Hiroshima, Japan.
It was the Americans' fourth victory without a loss.
Mexico is 0-4.
In other Group A matches, the Soviet Union beat Chile, 15-3, 15-5, 15-4, and Japan defeated Tunisia, 15-2, 15-4, 15-9.
The Soviet Union and Japan are 3-1, Tunisia 2-2 and Chile 0-4.
The three best teams in each group advance to the final round starting Friday in Tokyo. (AP) N.H.L.
Rookies Pace Sharks  Rookies Jayson More, Jeff Odgers and Mike Sullivan scored secondperiod goals last night and the San Jose Sharks snapped a six-game winless streak by beating the Vancouver Canucks, 4-1, at Daly City, Calif.
The three straight goals enabled the Sharks to beat the Canucks for the first time in four meetings despite being outshot, 43-34.
The Canucks lost for the third time in four games.
San Jose had gone 0-5-1 in its previous six games. (AP)


Connecticut Taxpayers Gathered in Civil Rally
To the Editor:
In "The Whining State of Connecticut" (Op-Ed, Nov. 9), David Holahan writes about the taxpayer rally in Hartford on Oct. 5.
The rally he describes is not the one I attended.


Central Reserve Life Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fire at Garner's Home
Fire swept through the home of one of those rookie managers, PHIL GARNER, early yesterday in Kingwood, Tex.
Fortunately for the new Milwaukee Brewers manager and his family, two deputy constables had stopped a motorist for a traffic violation near the house about the same time.
When the deputies noticed the blaze, they tried to alert the family inside, but Garner, his wife and their three children were sleeping so soundly the deputies had to break down the door and make their way through heavy smoke to wake them.


Tony Randall Casts Himself As a Theater's Guiding Spirit
How does Tony Randall, the founder of the new National Actors Theater, envision his role as impresario?
"That's easy; look right here," he said on a recent evening, holding up the shiny silkish jacket he wears everywhere these days, the one emblazoned with the logo of his classical repertory company.
"See?" he said, pointing to the word "Boss" in bold white stitching on the front of the jacket.
"Though now perhaps it should say 'Boss and Understudy.' " He laughed, clearly delighted with himself but greatly relieved as he sat in his dressing room in the Belasco Theater.
He had just filled in for Fritz Weaver in "The Crucible," the company's first play, which began performances last week and officially opens on Dec. 10.


Taming the Frontier of the Senses: Using Aroma to Manipulate Moods
SUZANNE JAGER-APPELLE, an advertising executive in New York, ran into Sak's Fifth Avenue last week to buy lipstick.
A half-hour later, she was still lingering over silk scarfs, wondering which her mother might like for Christmas.
Later, she realized that on the scarf counter was a bowl of the potpourri that perfumed the house where she grew up.
"It turned me into a dreamy little girl," Ms.
Jager-Appelle said.
The response to aroma is primal, idiosyncratic and not well understood.
Helen Keller once called smell "the fallen angel of the senses." It is the sense most closely tied with the area of the brain associated with memory and emotion.
Smells have no names, but are described in relationship to something else.
Wine smells "like violets," a leather couch "like new shoes," a pine forest "like Christmas."


First American Health Concepts reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


John O. Whedon, 86, Radio and TV Writer
John Ogden Whedon, a writer for radio, television, theater and films, died on Friday at a nursing home in Medford, Ore.
He was 86 years old.
He died of pneumonia, said his daughter, Jill Whedon of Manhattan.


Yes, Free Spirits Can Become Elder Statesmen
Who would ever have expected to see him here, sipping a Perrier in a health club by the Seine and talking about court-surface strategy?
Who would ever have picked the role of teacher, coach and molder of men for Yannick Noah, tennis's freest of spirits, all flowing dreadlocks and acrobatics with a racquet in his hand and an off-court persona alternating between flash dancer and tortured artist?
Not Yannick Noah, that's for sure.
"I don't like to watch matches," said Noah, the 31-year-old captain of France's Davis Cup team, which will face the United States in the final in Lyons, France, Friday through Sunday.
"The best spot to be in this game is on the court."


The End of a Military Era


Mesa Airlines Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


AZERBAIJAN ACTS ON WAR READINESS
Six days ago, a helicopter crashed over the treacherous terrain of Nagorno-Karabakh, a region that has been at the heart of a long-running feud between Armenians and Azerbaijanis.
All 22 people aboard were killed, including several top Azerbaijani officials.
In Baku, the capital of the Azerbaijan republic, the crash was depicted as an act of terrorism by Armenian militants, and its victims buried as "martyrs" to the nationalist cause.
Officials in Armenia, alarmed by the fever and pitch of the Azerbaijanis' accusations, are pressing the theory that the crash was an accident, caused by heavy fog.


The Dream of Land Dies Hard in Mexico
For 74 years, the Mexican Constitution has promised land to any citizen who would work it.
But there were a few catches: the land could not be rented, mortgaged or sold.
So when a Government functionary began telling local farmers here the other day how President Carlos Salinas de Gortari was going to change all that, the men might have been expected to applaud.
They did not.


Do Arrests Increase the Rates Of Repeated Domestic Violence?
WHEN the police arrest men who are assaulting their wives or lovers, it can sometimes lead to more attacks once the men are released, according to a major new study of domestic violence.
The new findings suggest that factors in the men's lives, like whether they have jobs, affect the likelihood that they will strike again.
As a result, the findings call into question the current wisdom among criminologists, that arresting their attackers is the best way to protect battered women from further violence.
The findings also challenge the effectiveness of recent laws in 15 states and the District of Columbia that require arrests in all cases of domestic battery.


Cathedral Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; 5 Jewish Families in Fascist Italy, on Both Sides
Benevolence and Betrayal Five Italian Jewish Families Under Fascism By Alexander Stille Illustrated. 365 pages.
Summit Books. $25.
Italian Fascism, censorship, the German occupation of wartime Italy, anti-Semitism, deportations to the Third Reich's concentration camps, the Holocaust: all of these served as background for a number of remarkable Italian authors who survived experiences in the underground, in the camps or in exile to produce a lasting literature.


Swiss Lift Ban on Digest
The Reader's Digest Association Inc. said yesterday that an injunction barring distribution of its October issue in Switzerland was lifted by a court in Lausanne.
The injunction had been obtained Sept. 18 by the Church of Scientology in an attempt to prevent distribution of an article entitled "Scientology: A Dangerous Cult Goes Mainstream." The article was excerpted from a longer one that originally appeared in Time magazine.


Corrections
A book review yesterday about "Wilderness Tips" by Margaret Atwood omitted the reviewer's byline in some copies.
The review was by Michiko Kakutani.


INTELLIGENCE CHIEF IS NAMED BY LIBYA
Threatened by Western reprisals for the bombing of a Pan Am airliner three years ago, Libya has announced the appointment of a new chief of intelligence.
The appointment is seen as a move to purge the country's security agencies accused of involvement in terrorism.
Libya's state-run press agency, Jana, said in a report monitored in Beirut on Monday night that the secretariat of the national legislature had named Col.
Youssef Abdel Kader al-Dobri to head the External Security Agency, which is in charge of foreign intelligence operations.


Ivaco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fraud Case Sentencings
The owners of a defunct investment firm have been sentenced to prison for operating a fraud scheme that resulted in $532 million of phony tax deductions for their clients, prosecutors said yesterday.
Bernhard Manko of the Arbitrage Management Company was sentenced Monday by Federal District Judge Mary Johnson Lowe to five years in prison and a $350,000 fine.
The second defendant, Jon Edelman, received a six-year sentence and a $450,000 fine.


Don't Make the David Dukes News Media Stars; No Hidden Vote
To the Editor:
Voters in the Nov. 16 Louisiana election for governor, including those who were leaning toward David Duke, were candid in pre-election opinion polls.
Speculation about a large "hidden vote" for Mr.
Duke was never warranted.


EXECUTIVES
*
BDO Binder, New York, an accounting firm, named Keith McNair and Cecil Fleming co-executive partners in charge of its new firm, BDO Dunwoody Ward Mallette, Toronto. *
Greater New York Savings Bank, New York, named Gerard C. Keegan, president and chief operating officer, to the additional positions of chairman and chief executive.
He succeeds Charles J. Ohlig, who has resigned.


Dataimage Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ray Johns, 91, Official In Two Service Groups
Ray E. Johns, a retired Y.M.C.A. executive who had been prominent in the United Service Organizations in World War II, died Thursday at the Pheasant Wood Nursing Home in Peterborough, N.H.
He was 91 years old and a longtime resident of Hancock, N.H.
He had been suffering from Alzheimer's disease but the immediate cause of his death was unclear, said his wife, the former Rebecca Kittredge, to whom he was married in 1970.


2 Banks See Big Savings In Merger
In a progress report as they move toward a merger at the end of the year, Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover said yesterday that they had started trimming staff and were confident that savings from the merger would be greater than the $650 million they had forecast.
Joseph G. Sponholz, Chemical Bank's chief financial officer, who is coordinating many parts of the merger, said the $650 million in annual savings after three years "is both a floor and in the bag." The greatest part of the savings, or about $350 million, would come from a sharp cut in employment at the two banks, both of which have steadily reduced their work force the last few years.  6,200 Fewer Jobs
The banks, which will operate under the Chemical name, expect to eliminate 6,200 jobs, or about 14 percent of the 44,400 workers they had at midyear.
About 1,100 jobs have already been eliminated, mostly by not replacing workers who quit or retired.
But more painful cuts are coming, and 2,000 more workers are expected to lose their jobs in the first half of next year.
Last week, the Chemical Banking Corporation said that 200 workers in corporate finance, or about 20 percent of the department, were given notice last week and would be out of the bank by next week.
Mr.
Sponholz said that most employment cuts would involve clerical workers, but added that managers would be cut in the same proportion as lower-paid workers.
He said the company had no plan to balance cuts or plum assignments evenly between the banks.
Besides laying plans for job cuts, officials at the banks have chosen 25 of the 32 computer systems to be used by the new Chemical.
The 70 branches to be closed have been identified, and the banks have decided to run their credit-card business from the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company's processing center in Hicksville, L.I., closing Chemical's operation in Delaware and part of the bank's processing center in Jericho, L.I.
Before the merger announcement in July, Chemical and Manufacturers had been keeping a tight rein on payrolls and expenses.
Since the end of 1989, the companies had reduced staffs by about 4,765.
New Stock Issue
Yesterday's meeting with securities analysts comes just as the banks are eager to convince investors that they will be more profitable and stronger after the merger.
The companies are planning meetings between investors and top managers to help attract buyers for the $1.25 billion in common stock they plan to sell in January.
The stock offering, which was registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday, would be the largest by a banking company.
Money from the sale would pay for the $550 million in expenses for severance payments to employees and for losses on abandoned branch offices and other real estate, as well as for strengthening the financial condition of the new Chemical Bank.
When Chemical and Manufacturers Hanover announced their merger plan, they estimated that the companies' combined expenses of $4.6 billion could be reduced by $650 million over three years.
The savings would come from eliminating about 6,200 jobs from combined payrolls of 47,500, and by eliminating duplicated operations, ranging from Chemical's old headquarters on Park Avenue to 70 branches in the New York area.
Fed Approval Seen Soon
Peter J. Tobin, Manufacturers Hanover's chief financial officer, said that the Federal Reserve was expected to approve the merger within "the next day or two" and added that the "Justice Department has indicated to the Fed it will not challenge any aspect" of the merger.
Despite the confident statements by Chemical and Manufacturers executives that they will meet their targets for expense cuts, Chemical's stock price has lost the momentum it gained after the merger was announced.
"The cost savings will be real, but the market is worried right now about the weak economy and its effect on banks," said Brent Erensel, an analyst at Mabon, Nugent &amp; Company.
He said Chemical's stock, which traded as high as $30.125 a share in mid-August, was also depressed by the prospect of more than 50 million new shares to be offered in January.
Chemical's stock closed yesterday at $22.25, down 12.5 cents, while Manufacturers' also fell, by the same amount, to $25.


Market Place; A Lull for Mutual Funds Is Brief
The sharp fall in stock prices in mid-November caused only a mild tremor among mutual fund investors, fund managers said yesterday.
Although some funds saw a brief outflow of money after the Dow Jones industrial average plunged 120 points on Friday, Nov. 15, the cash resumed pouring in soon after.
"When we had the down blip, sales slowed," said Robert Leo, director of mutual funds for Shearson Lehman Brothers, referring to the drop in stocks.
"But redemptions were a non-event. People almost take these 100-point days in stride now."


Theater in Review
Seven Pillars of Wicca-Dick: A Triumph  Duality Playhouse 119 West 23d Street, Manhattan Through Dec. 8 Written and performed by Mark Ameen; directed by Rich Rubin; lighting, Susan Hamburger; set design, Angelo Underhill.
Presented by P.I.A.
Productions.
In "Monologue of a Dying Beast," the long, impassioned poem with which he concludes his one-man performance piece, "Seven Pillars of Wicca-Dick: A Triumph," the actor and poet Mark Ameen addresses the AIDS epidemic, homophobia and his childhood sexual attraction to his father, among other volatile subjects.


Physician-Owned Labs Benefit Patients
To the Editor:
The recent Medicare rules and proposed laws requiring physicians to divest themselves of interests in laboratories and X-ray or magnetic resonance imaging centers will not only unconstitutionally deprive physicians of income, of their investments and probably of their pensions, but they will also guarantee that these facilities are owned by people who are interested only in making a profit.


Software By Hewlett
The Hewlett-Packard Company said today that it was adapting the proprietary operating system software of its HP 3000 business computer to be more compatible with "open systems" based on the industry standard operating system, Unix.
As part of the plan, Hewlett has changed the name of the software from MPE/XL to MPEiX to reflect its compatibility with Posix, a standard for operating system interfaces.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about William G. Mulligan, a lawyer who aided the investigation that forced Mayor James J. Walker of New York out of office in 1932, misidentified two of Mr.
Mulligan's surviving stepchildren.
They are Christopher O'Connor and Valerie Clark.
The obituary also misstated Mr.
O'Connor's residence.
It is Catonsville, Md.


Phillips-Van Heusen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3


Four A's Tries Promotions Using Top Corporate Chiefs
TO convince marketers to keep up their advertising spending despite the gloomy economic outlook, the American Association of Advertising Agencies is signing celebrity endorsers -- not sports stars or singers, but top corporate executives.
In an effort scheduled to begin running next week, the executives, including John Sculley, chairman and chief executive of Apple Computer Inc., and Michael R. Quinlan, chairman and chief executive of the McDonald's Corporation, will appear in print advertisements from the association, the trade organization for the nation's ad industry.
The ads are meant to stimulate ad spending amid continuing doubts among industry executives that marketers' budgets will soon recover to the robust levels of the 1980's.


Utley Is Moved
MIKE UTLEY, the offensive lineman paralyzed from the chest down, has been moved from Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit to the Rehabilitation Institute of Michigan, the Lions said yesterday.
Utley suffered a spinal-cord injury while blocking during the Lions' 21-10 victory over the Los Angeles Rams on Nov. 17 and underwent surgery the next day. . . .
STEVE BONO will make a fourth start Sunday in place of STEVE YOUNG, whose injured left knee needs one or two more weeks to heal, according to the San Francisco 49ers' coach, GEORGE SEIFERT.
Young suffered a partial ligament tear in the knee Nov. 3 at Atlanta.
It was hoped he would be back in time for Sunday's game against New Orleans, but it now appears he may miss the next game Dec. 8 at Seattle as well. (AP)





The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE ON THE EXERCISE OF THE INALIENABLE RIGHTS OF THE PALESTINIAN PEOPLE -- 10:30 a.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


United Merchants &amp; Manufacturers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Book Notes
When It Hurts to Write
First the reviewers said that Alexandra Ripley couldn't write.
Now her doctors are saying it.
After penning the manuscript for the 823-page "Scarlett" in longhand, then signing more than 10,000 copies of the much-panned best-selling sequel to "Gone With the Wind," Ms.
Ripley has a serious case of tendinitis and carpal tunnel syndrome.


Rams Will Wait
A decision on whether he will remain the Los Angeles Rams' coach will be made after the season, JOHN ROBINSON said yesterday.
"The Rams as an organization, myself included, will sit down and try to plot out our future," said Robinson, whose team has lost six straight to fall to 3-9.


Ex-Reagan Aides Ask If North Equipped Waite
In the week since the British hostage Terry Waite was released from nearly five years of captivity in Lebanon, new information has appeared suggesting that the Anglican Church's envoy was unwittingly enlisted by Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North in his effort to free American hostages in Lebanon.
A question being debated among former Reagan Administration officials is whether Colonel North, who as a White House national security aide was the central figure of the Iran-contra affair, provided Mr.
Waite with a tiny, complex transponder.


Veteran Strategist and Outsiders' Champion Shows Up in Brown Campaign
They are the political odd couple of the year: Edmund G. Brown Jr., the ascetic former Governor of California who recently completed a seven-year sabbatical from politics, and Patrick H. Caddell, the political strategist who has made a career of trying to ride alienated outsiders to victory over the establishment and who also appears to be trying to make a political comeback after several years of self-imposed exile.
Mr.
Brown, Jerry to friends, kicked off his third bid for the Presidency on Oct. 21 with an iconoclastic declaration that America was in decline, a blast at the two main political parties and greedy, corrupt politics and a pledge not to accept campaign contributions larger than $100.
With him that day at Independence Hall in Philadelphia was the imposing bearded figure of Mr.
Caddell, a man widely credited with devising a similar outsider strategy that Jimmy Carter used to gain the White House 15 years ago.


Value City Department Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Bombardier Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Varity Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Advice for Handley From P.R. Sidelines
Coach Ray Handley of the Giants can avoid a continuing confrontation with the news media by admitting today that he overreacted in stalking out of Monday's news conference, a media consultant, Andrea Kirby, said yesterday.
"Anything that's negative snowballs," explained Kirby, a former ABC Sports reporter and studio host.
Her clients include seven major league baseball teams and two National Basketball Association clubs.


Intelogic Trace Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Personal Health
IMAGINE these possibilities:
A woman with an underactive thyroid gland decided to use up an old supply of the thyroid medication that had been keeping her disorder under control for years.
At her next medical visit, she was found to be thyroid deficient and her doctor increased her dosage, unwittingly producing an overdose.
Neither she nor her physician realized her apparent deficiency arose because the old medication she had been taking had lost its potency.
A teen-ager being treated for acne with small daily doses of tetracycline developed signs of kidney damage.
He underwent an extensive workup for kidney disease without doctors' realizing that the problem had been caused by a supply of tetracycline that had been kept in the car and had changed its chemical nature to form substances toxic to the kidneys.


Nabors Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Atlas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; Hanover Band's Mozart
The Hanover Band, now 11 years old, made its name in the early 1980's with one of the first traversals of the Beethoven symphony cycle on period instruments.
It has since moved both forward in the 19th century and backward in the 18th, and on Sunday afternoon at Alice Tully Hall, the English ensemble presented some of the products of its divergent researches.
Before the intermission, the subject was Mozart.
The players, conducted by Roy Goodman, began with an account of the "Clemenza di Tito" overture that illuminated the band's considerable strengths.
Those were light, transparent string textures, a pure wind sound and well-tuned brass playing, all finely balanced.


CHRONICLE
There are few projects so secretive as a WOODY ALLEN movie in the midst of production, but a smattering of information has seeped out about the film, still unnamed, that he is shooting at Barnard College, among other locations.
EMILY LLOYD, who had the role of a student, a central character in the movie, has been dismissed "by mutual agreement," according to Leslee Dart, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Allen.
She will be replaced by JULIETTE LEWIS, who has garnered considerable attention for her portrayal of the teen-age daughter in the film "Cape Fear."


Bridge
The world's most versatile player completed a rare double here Monday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals.
Zia Mahmood, the Pakistani star who is based in Manhattan but circles the world's tournaments playing with a galaxy of partners, followed his success Saturday in the Life Master Open Pairs by winning the Open Board-a-Match Teams.
He has a chance for a sweep by winning the Blue Ribbon Pairs, which began today, and the Reisinger Teams, which winds up the tournament.
Zia's teammates were Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan, David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., and Jeffrey Wolfson of Boca Raton, Fla.
Their final score of 33 boards gave them a victory by the minimum margin.


Custer Falls Again as Site Is Renamed
After months of debate, Congress has approved a bill that renames the Custer Battlefield National Monument in southeastern Montana as the Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument and authorizes construction of a memorial to the Indians who fought and died at the 1876 battle, commonly known as "Custer's Last Stand."
The bill was approved by a voice vote in the House late Monday night and was approved Friday by the Senate.
A White House spokesman could not say whether President Bush would sign it, but last month the Administration expressed its approval.


Space Shuttle's Mission Is Extended to 10 Days


Hach Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
In a sweeping overhaul, I.B.M. said it would become a federation of smaller, nimbler companies able to respond more quickly to the demands of the marketplace.  [ Page A1. ]


Review/Film; Growing Up Surrounded By Death
Here are two notable facts about Macaulay Culkin, currently America's youngest movie star.
One: his voice is changing, since he's now 11 years old.
And two: he plays nothing more than a supporting role in "My Girl," even though the surprise success of "Home Alone" (which was released before this film began shooting) owed so much to his natural comic talent and his flair for the double-take shriek.
Expecting this funny, unaffected young actor to spend most of his time on the sidelines, as the makers of "My Girl" do, is a little like trying to defy gravity -- and just about as smart.
Mr.
Culkin is not even the "my" in "My Girl," since the film is chiefly about the girl herself.
She is Vada Sultenfuss (Anna Chlumsky), and the film's case of the cutes extends well beyond that name.
Vada's father, Harry (Dan Aykroyd), is a playful mortician who kids around in the embalming room and is accused of "cremating" the food at the backyard barbecue.
Harry's new assistant is Shelly DeVoto (Jamie Lee Curtis), a zany cosmetologist who assures her employer: "I promise I'll take good care of these people. They deserve it. They're dead. All they've got left is their looks." Too much of the film's wit is in this same funny-as-a-corpse vein.


Where Trail of Tears Ends for the Hard to Place
"INSTEAD of telling each other we love each other, we punch each other in the head," said a 15-year-old named Matthew M., who lives at the Salvation Army's group home for hard-to-place boys in East Harlem.
Put there are those who have failed foster care, less intensive homes and all those other "solutions" -- solutions that have also failed them.
It is a place of shrieks, curses and fists through walls.
It is also where a dozen troubled youngsters have found genuine care and, sometimes, love.


FNB Rochester Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gish Biomedical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


John G. Winchester; Banker, 89
John G. Winchester, a retired New York banker and investment adviser, died on Wednesday in Clark House, a nursing home in Westwood, Mass.
He was 89 years old and was a longtime resident of Juno Beach, Fla.
He died of complications from pneumonia, said his lawyer, Christopher C. Angell in Manhattan.


District of Columbia Journal; In a Sea of Killings, One Turns Heads
The killings have been going on here for so long and with such frequency that they are now taken as one of the givens of life in the nation's capital, along with politics, the humidity and the Redskins.
There are streets and apartment buildings in poor sections of the inner city where there have been two, three, even half a dozen murders, most involving angry young men caught up in running drugs and guns.


Indian Army Deployed in Punjab
The Indian Army has been called out in Punjab State to assist security operations against Sikhs fighting for an independent state.
The move is part of a new Government campaign to help prepare the way for state elections, officials here say.
Yet the killings have persisted, and in one incident a pro-Government Sikh and two others shot and killed 18 people near the city of Amritsar, news reports said.
The attackers were arrested by the police, who said those killed included eight women and children.


Comtrex Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


I.B.M. WILL CHANGE IN EFFORT TO KEEP MARKET DOMINANCE
In a sweeping overhaul of the way it does business, I.B.M., long one of the world's most admired and successful companies, said yesterday that it would become a federation of smaller, nimbler companies able to respond more quickly to the demands of the marketplace.
John F. Akers, the company's chairman, said in a telephone interview yesterday that I.B.M., the world's largest computer maker, was examining a number of ways to do this, including selling major portions of its operations to partners or even the public.
The company's hope is to bring new life to stagnating product lines.


Drivefone Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aerosonic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Ross Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Aegon Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
New York yesterday became the first city in the nation to begin making condoms available to all its public high school students.
At John Dewey High School in Brooklyn, one of two schools to inaugurate the program, teen-agers who had just been given condoms held them up for television and newspaper cameras as the students posed with their boyfriends and girlfriends outside the school's gates.


Public &amp; Private; Games Politicians Play
The poor are different from you and me: they have less money and fewer options.
While New York City has plenty of reputable places in which a woman can get an abortion, poor women sometimes wind up in the sort of dirty and slipshod joints we imagined had disappeared.
One doctor, accused of performing an illegal third-trimester abortion that resulted in the birth of a baby with its arm amputated at the shoulder, had his license suspended Monday.
His patients had seen his ad in a Spanish-language newspaper, passed his storefront offices, learned of his cheap rates.
A spokesman for the State Health Department noted that the best way to find an abortion clinic is to go to medical societies, hospitals or established organizations like Planned Parenthood.


San Diego Gas President Rose Through Ranks
In the 1950's, Jack E. Thomas, "discovered" San Diego, a small city at the time, where he was serving in the Navy.
As a civilian in 1957, he went to work for the San Diego Gas and Electric Company, as a junior engineer.
Now, 34 years later, he has been named president, effective Jan. 1, and faces the challenge of finding power to meet future needs of the nation's sixth-largest city, which continues to grow rapidly.


Kewaunee Scientific reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


LACKING SUPPORT, DEMOCRATS GIVE UP ON CRIME MEASURE
House leaders abandoned an anti-crime bill Tuesday night in the face of President Bush's veto threat.
And even though negotiators reached an agreement on a transportation bill and neared one on keeping the bank insurance fund afloat, House Democrats discussed extending the session into next month.
Speaker Thomas S. Foley said the House Committee on Ways and Means would hold hearings on tax proposals next week.
He said it had not been decided whether the entire House would come back to work in December.


Artra Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Enzo Biochem reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Dollar Ends Sharply Higher After Drop Early in the Day
The dollar took a wild ride yesterday, first tumbling on gloomy news about the economy, then surging on word that Germany's top economics aide had said the dollar's value was too low.
Gold prices ended lower.
The Republic National Bank quoted bullion at $365.25 an ounce as of 4 P.M., down $2.05 from Monday.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery was down $1.90 at $366.20.


Congress Street Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Named Gene Lamont manager.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Claimed Dwayne Henry, pitcher, off waivers from the Houston Astros.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Named Terry Collins coach.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  SEATTLE SUPERSONICS -- Placed Bart Kofoed, guard, on the injured list.
Activated Shawn Kemp, forward, from the injured list.
Continental Basketball Association  BAKERSFIELD JAMMERS -- Signed Leonard Allen, center.
Waived Antwahn Nance, forward.
Traded Arlyn Bowers, guard, to Grand Rapids for a future draft pick.
OMAHA RACERS -- Placed Roland Gray, forward, on injured reserve.
Signed Dudley Bradley, guard.
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Traded Orlando Graham, center, to Columbus for Demitrius Calip, guard and a 1992 seventh-round draft pick.
Activated Ed Horton, forward.
Football  National Football League  PHOENIX CARDINALS -- Waived Mike Brennan, guard.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Placed Chris Calloway, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
Re-signed Rob McGovern, linebacker.
World League of American Football  WLAF -- Awarded a franchise to Columbus, Ohio starting the 1992 season.
Professional Spring Football League  PSFL -- Awarded a franchise to Washington, D.C.
TAMPA BAY OUTLAWS -- Named Terry Bledsoe general manager.


Russ Togs, Banks Agree to Sale Plan
Russ Togs Inc., the bankrupt New York apparel company that makes clothing lines like Diane Von Furstenberg and the Villager, said yesterday that it had put itself up for sale.
Russ Togs and its banks agreed that a sale was the best way to pay the company's $65.9 million of liabilities.


Transit Bill Seen as Boon to Metro Area
With its heavy reliance on mass transit, the New York metropolitan region should be a major beneficiary of the six-year, $151 billion transportation bill nearing approval in Congress.
Although it is certain to cause temporary inconvenience, legislators from the region were ecstatic about the bill.
They said it has many plums for the region and will jump start highway and mass transit construction throughout the area.


The Cakes That Take New York Erupt With Molten Chocolate
NEW YORKERS are calling it the best dessert.
Ever.
Tiramisu has had it.
Creme brulee, watch out.
The confection in question is a small warm chocolate cake that, when cut, oozes with intensely rich molten chocolate.
This year, some version of it is being served in more than a dozen restaurants.
New ones are added to the list almost daily.


Berlitz International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gift to Met Museum
The Metropolitan Museum of Art has received a grant of $3 million from the philanthropist Janice H. Levin for the renovation of its 19th-century-paintings galleries and construction of a gallery bearing Mrs.
Levin's name.
She has also promised to give the museum three Impressionist paintings: "A la Bourse" by Edgar Degas, "Environs de Pontoise" by Camille Pisarro and "Un Coin de la Prairie en Normandie" by Alfred Sisley.


Litton Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Intera Info.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Battle of the 'Rabbit Ears' Heirs on Long Island
To Marvin P. Middlemark, life was a rollicking adventure.
He had a flair for finding exotic uses for the wealth that rained down on him for inventing the "rabbit ears" television antenna.
He was unabashedly at ease keeping a pet chimpanzee, which sometimes answered the front door of his home and got soused at parties.
And thus perhaps it is all too fitting that ever since Mr.
Middlemark's death more than two years ago, the strife that has surrounded the pursuit of his inheritance has seemed like a twisted adventure out of Dickens.


Woman Dies After Wrong-Way Driver Hits Ambulance
An injured woman being taken to Bellevue Hospital Center died early yesterday after a car going the wrong way on a one-way street slammed head-on into the ambulance carrying her through an intersection in mid-Manhattan, officials said.
The police charged the man behind the wheel of the car, Joseph Sohler, 25 years old, with driving while impaired and driving with a suspended license.


Quotation of the Day
"We might be seeing the beginning of the dismantling of the I.B.M. Corporation." -- RICK MARTIN, a computer industry analyst at Prudential Securities.  [ A1:1. ]


Corrections
Because of a production error, the Science Watch column of Science Times yesterday included an incorrect credit.
The Associated Press was the source of the report on the ozone hole, not the one on zebra mussels.


Savin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Why Aren't We Thankful?
With the cold war over and with fears of another Pearl Harbor at rest, it's hard to remember a Thanksgiving Day when there were more reasons for the U.S. to give thanks than in this second year of the last decade of the century.
But somehow there is little rejoicing.
We seem to be at peace with everybody but ourselves.
How could this be?
For 50 years since the invention of atomic weapons, we have lived in fear of a third world war.
In the first two world wars, 70 million people were killed.


Strawbridge &amp; Clothier reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 2


Mountains of Canadian Trash Are Hauled to Dumps in U.S.
Canadian bacon, beer and whisky are staples among Americans with a taste for luxury.
But here in western New York, the latest Canadian export has brought mostly grief.
From across the Canadian border, waste paper, rotten food and the flotsam of countless Ontario businesses are arriving in what amounts to a rolling pipeline of mud-splashed tractor-trailers.
In their wake has come anger about the unpublicized change in Federal rules that made it possible, and a growing effort in Congress to impose tariffs on the trash, despite warnings about provoking a trade war.


Klaus Kinski, 65, Actor Known For His Portraits of the Obsessed
Klaus Kinski, an actor acclaimed for playing obsessive, demented characters in the films of the German director Werner Herzog, was found dead on Saturday at his home in Lagunitas, Calif.
He was 65 years old.
Preliminary autopsy results suggested that Mr.
Kinski "apparently died of natural causes due to a heart problem," a spokeswoman for the Marin County coroner's office said.


ABC Deal for Cable Special
In another example of unusual programming cooperation between a broadcast network and a cable network, ABC will broadcast a special program that was produced by a new cable channel seeking to increase its national profile.
ABC will get the one-hour program free of cost.
Paying a license fee for a program is the standard way a network acquires a program.


Prices Rise on Strong U.S. Sale
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved higher yesterday, pushed up by a successful auction of new five-year notes and two surveys showing that consumer confidence had fallen to its lowest level in close to a decade.
Dealers, who had expected demand for the new notes to be good, said the strong bidding at the 1 P.M. auction for $9 billion worth of securities muted the market's reaction to the surveys by the Conference Board and the University of Michigan.


Barr Sworn In as New Attorney General


Riverside Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wine Talk
IT used to be so easy.
The expensive stuff was in the regular bottles and the cheap stuff was in the jugs.
Today, Hearty Burgundy, once the proud if modestflag-bearer of the Gallo line, is sitting there on the shelf in the same-size bottle as Chateau Lafite-Rothschild and you can't even unscrew the cap.


North Korea to Allow Nuclear Inspections if U.S. Does
In one of the first signs that it may be softening its hard-line position, North Korea has announced that it is ready to permit international inspection of its secret nuclear installations if the United States also allows inspections to guarantee it is removing all nuclear weapons from South Korea.
The four-point proposal was vague on some key points, leaving it uncertain how much the North Korean position had really changed.
But it included what was, by North Korean standards, conciliatory language and thus represented a potentially modest easing in the verbal jousting of recent months over the inspection issue.


2 Ex-Bills Become Special To Jets
Louie Aguiar and Chris Burkett have both worn Buffalo uniforms at one time, but they will be happy to be on the other side of the line of scrimmage line when the Jets face the Bills at Rich Stadium in Orchard Park, N.Y., on Sunday.
"All the guys here are great and the front office is great and I couldn't be happier," said Aguiar, the Jets' punter, who was cut by Buffalo after free-agent tryouts in 1989 and 1990.
He beat out Joe Prokop for the starting job with the Jets in training camp this year.


PEC Israel Economic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BHA Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Questech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Body Armor &amp; Equipment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Keithley Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Don't Make the David Dukes News Media Stars; Rights for All
To the Editor:
In "Little Comfort in Mr. Duke's Loss" (editorial, Nov. 18), you again miss the significance of David Duke.
Mr.
Duke lost because of his background as Nazi and Ku Klux Klan geek.
If a known child molester with an innovative day-care program had got 40 percent of the way toward certification, we would heave a sigh of relief at his defeat.
Would we also reject the innovations he proposed?


Cimco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Broker to Let Soviet Citizens Trade U.S. Shares
A brokerage firm here announced today that it had made an arrangement that would allow people in the Soviet Union to buy and sell the stocks of American companies for the first time.
The firm, Montgomery Securities, does not expect Soviet citizens to stampede to snap up shares of A.T.&amp;T. or I.B.M.
Still, by allowing Soviet investors to participate in one of the central institutions of American capitalism, experts said the agreement represented a significant step toward the development of capital markets in the Soviet Union.


Integrated Bid Backed
A bankruptcy judge approved a modified agreement Monday night between the Bankers Trust New York Corporation and Integrated Resources Inc., giving the banking company the inside track to acquiring Integrated, a bankrupt syndicator of real estate partnerships.
The only competitive bid for Integrated now on the table, from the Pritzker family of Chicago, is likely to be withdrawn, a lawyer for the Pritzkers said after the ruling.


Lincoln Center Debut For Mannes Orchestra
The Mannes College of Music is to open its 75th-anniversary celebration with the Lincoln Center debut of the Mannes Orchestra on Dec. 5 at 8 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
The concert is in part a tribute to Mozart, falling on the 200th anniversary of the composer's death.


Hycor Biomedical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Home Intensive Care reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Free Agents In a Free Enterprise
IN two days, attorneys for the National Football League and the N.F.L.
Players Association will meet in Minneapolis for a pretrial hearing before United States District Judge David Doty.
Friday's hearing is the final step before the highly anticipated case of Freeman McNeil vs. the N.F.L., scheduled to be heard in mid-February.
At stake is a possible resolution of free agency in the National Football League.


DEAD SEA SCROLLS FREE OF LAST CURB
The last restrictions on scholars' access to the Dead Sea Scrolls have been removed, the head of the official team overseeing their publication has announced.
The scholar, Emanuel Tov, said at a news conference here on Monday night that the Israel Antiquities Authority, which controls the scrolls, had dropped a rule that those wishing to use the scrolls or photographic facsimiles agree not to publish in full the texts that they cited.


Bilingual Teaching: A New Focus on Both Tongues
As Maria del Socorro Leandro makes her morning rounds at Burleson Elementary School, where she is the principal, she sees classroom lessons begin in English, then switch to Spanish and back to English.
First graders discuss in English the characters in Dr.
Seuss's book, "Green Eggs and Ham." A third-grade class studies Texas history in Spanish.
And in another classroom, a group of parents receives instruction in Spanish on how to encourage their children to speak English at home.


USX to Raise Steel Prices April 1
The USX Corporation, which operates the nation's largest steel company, said yesterday that it would adopt a new pricing structure on April 1, increasing prices as much as 9 percent.
The price increase, if it holds, will affect a wide range of steel buyers and is primarily seen by industry analysts as an attempt to win higher prices from the auto companies, which purchase steel at discounts under long-term contracts.
The auto makers' contract with USX expires when the new pricing becomes effective.


Is a Turkey Forgotten A Turkey Forgone?
THANKSGIVING doesn't exactly come as a surprise.
It is always near the end of November, and always on a Thursday.
But for some reason, a lot of people don't know until the very last minute -- like tonight -- what they will be doing or whom they will be doing it with.
Maybe there are so many Thanksgiving procrastinators because it's so easy to put off planning for the holiday.
It's not like Christmas.
You don't have to run around and buy gifts for people you rarely see or barely know.
With Thanksgiving, you can decide at the last minute to celebrate, and you don't even have to cook.
This is definitely why restaurants were invented.


Intercargo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Naming of Premier in Zaire Revives Opposition Protests
President Mobutu Sese Seko's appointment of a Prime Minister on Monday night rekindled protests today in Zaire's riot-torn capital.
The main opposition coalition, the Sacred Union, threatened to break off relations with Mr.
Mobutu after the autocratic leader appointed Nguza Karl-i-Bond, once a leading figure in the opposition, as Prime Minister.


Robinson Hands It to Gold Glovers
If Brooks Robinson was telling it right yesterday, a Gold Glove Award and, say, a .320 batting average, will get you a pretty hefty major league contract these days, but at contract time don't expect to get very far on your fielding skills alone.
"No general manager ever asked me how many games I'd saved with my glove," he said.
"But a lot of times I was asked how many home runs I'd hit or how many runs I'd driven in."


Fonic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Penn Coach Resigns
When you're the head coach at a college that has won more more football games (677) than all but a handful of other schools in the country, a 4-6 record isn't especially appealing, a followup 3-7 record is hardly going in the right direction and a third-year 2-8 record is, well, do you really want to try for 1-9 next year?
Not GARY STEELE.
After compiling a 9-21 record in three seasons at Penn, Steele announced his resignation yesterday.
The 40-year-old coach spent six years as a Penn assistant, including three as defensive coordinator, before replacing ED ZUBROW in 1989.


CHRONICLE
Whatever happened to radio comedy?
According to STAN FREBERG, it disappeared 34 years ago, when his show, which replaced Jack Benny's for a year, went off the air.
"There has been no network comedy radio show in an hourlong form since 1957," he said yesterday from his office in Beverly Hills, Calif.
"That makes me the last network radio comic in America, hard though that may be to believe."


American Israeli Paper Mills reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chairman of Time Warner Treated for Prostate Cancer
Steven J. Ross, the chairman and co-chief executive of Time Warner Inc., is being treated for prostate cancer but plans to continue with his normal work schedule, the media company said yesterday in a statement.
A spokeswoman, Jeanette Lerman, said that the tests revealing the cancer came back yesterday from the laboratory and that Mr.
Ross, who is 64 years old, was at home on vacation.
She added that he would undertake whatever therapy was required, in a hospital if necessary, but that he intended to "go on working at the typical Steve Ross pace."


Foreign Affairs; To Cuomo or Not to Cuomo
There are three schools of thought on whether Gov.
Mario Cuomo should run for President:
*
Yes, not because he'd be a good President but because he'd raise the right issues and mop up George Bush in debates.


Yankees Hold Up Buechele at Third
The Yankees took another step backward yesterday in their mystifying effort to go forward.
After showing the first sign of stirring from their off-season hibernation by indicating pursuit of Steve Buechele, the Yankees inexplicably canceled the third baseman's visit to the New York-New Jersey area this weekend and said they would not make him an offer at this time.


Too Slow on Abortion Butchery
The New York State Health Department has suspended the medical license of Dr.
Abu Hayat, who already faces criminal charges for performing an illegal third-trimester abortion.
It accuses him of "gross negligence" and "moral unfitness" to practice.
Yet there have been complaints about Dr.
Hayat since at least 1988.
The case raises doubts about the Health Department's ability to respond promptly to charges of medical abuse and life-threatening misconduct.
Dr.
Hayat operates in the shadowy world of abortion mills, which serve low-income women, illegal immigrants and minors.
In September 1990 he allegedly performed an abortion on a woman who died soon after at Kings County Hospital.


Holiday on Thursday
The Thanksgiving holiday will be observed on Thursday, November 25th.
Here are the holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  PARADE: Begins at 9 a.m. at 77th Street and Central Park West; then heads to Columbus Circle and down Broadway to 34th street.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION: No pickups and street cleanings.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Saturday schedule with some additional service in Manhattan.
The Long Island Rail Road will be on a weekend schedule and Metro-North will be on a holiday schedule, with some extra service.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on holiday schedule with some extra service.


U.S. Shoe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


In Rare Cases of Indigestion, Baking Soda May Be a Peril
Baking soda, like aspirin, bandages and rubbing alcohol, has been a staple in medicine cabinets for more than a century.
Over that time, billions of doses of sodium bicarbonate have followed holiday feasts, spicy foods or samplings of unusual recipes into the digestive systems of the nation.
Few people report adverse effects from the common household chemical.
But ingesting it has been associated with scattered cases of stomachs bursting, presumably because of carbon dioxide gas the compound releases into the digestive organ when it is unusually full.


Syntex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


On the Team
All BARBARA TOMS wanted to do was join the school wrestling team, and since the 15-year-old student has been a member of the girls' swimming team and was physically fit, it might have seemed a pro-forma matter at Bethlehem High School outside Albany.
Not so.
Apparently because Toms is a girl and all the 40 or so other wrestlers on the team are boys, school officials did not accept her application as a matter of course but kicked it up to the district level, where, according to The Albany Times Union, a special three-member panel was convened to consider the matter last week.


Poor Visibility Haunts Subway Conductors
To the Editor:
"Transit investigators have found that the conductor of an L train whose doors closed on a stroller, leading to a fall that badly injured a baby boy, could not see the door from his post in the middle of the train" (news item, Nov. 12).
There is nothing new in that -- and no sign New York City is doing anything about it.


Don't Make the David Dukes News Media Stars; Son of Reagan-Bush
To the Editor:
Thank you for "The Many David Dukes" (editorial, Nov. 14).
The Reagan-Bush juggernaut has succeeded by a shameless strategy of negative labeling in arousing group hatred, promoting class division and indulging in character assassination.
In addition to "welfare queen," the "L word" meant to divide and destroy.
Getting government off the backs of these people meant simply to give full license to greed.
We're all paying the price for this kind of untrammeled behavior, and David Duke simply made the motives explicit by his racist ideology.
DAVID M. BOSSMAN South Orange, N.J., Nov. 14, 1991
The writer is professor of Jewish-Christian studies, Seton Hall U.


White Sox Choose Lamont as Manager
GENE LAMONT became the newest kid on the major league managing block when he was hired yesterday to lead the Chicago White Sox.
Lamont, Pittsburgh's third-base coach under JIM LEYLAND for the last six years, succeeds JEFF TORBORG, who quit to manage the Mets.
"We wanted freshness, a new guy and not someone recycled," said RON SCHUELER, the White Sox general manager.
"Personality-wise, he's a lot like Torborg. Jeff had a lot of strengths because the fans, the players and the media all liked him. Gene's a little more aggressive coming over from the National League."


Wheat Prices Take Plunge; Oil Falls on OPEC News
Wheat futures prices fell sharply yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade as uncertainty over Soviet grain purchases and a stronger dollar prompted profit taking after several days of strong gains.
On other commodity markets, oil futures fell and livestock and meat futures were mixed.


Gensia Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pep Boys--Manny, Moe &amp; Jack reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 2


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.62
4.89
7.37
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.40
4.44
7.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.46
4.51
6.98
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.99
7.03
8.15
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.93
7.98
8.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.94
8.95
9.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.90
6.90
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Voters in Northern Italy Give Fringe Group a Slim Victory
In a local election cast as a presage for the nation, voters in the northern city of Brescia presented a rebuff today to the party that has mostly run the country since World War II, voting in favor of a fringe group that wants more autonomy for Italy's wealthy industrial north.
Two days of municipal balloting in Brescia, a northern industrial city about 50 miles east of Milan, yielded a fractional but politically significant victory for the Lombardy League over the Christian Democrats.


Upjohn in Move To Back Halcion
The Upjohn Company said yesterday that it would defend American physicians and pay their expenses in lawsuits charging damages caused by Halcion, if a doctor prescribing the drug has followed the directions in the package.
The announcement was the latest in a series of moves by Upjohn, based in Kalamazoo, Mich., to deal with negative reports about Halcion, the world's most widely used prescription drug for sleeping problems.


As a Deficit Looms, 26 Threaten to Quit Key Columbia Posts
A group of 26 influential faculty members at Columbia University, jittery about the recession and still smarting from a series of budget cuts imposed last spring, have threatened to resign their positions as heads of academic departments rather than accept further budget cuts that might be made this year or next.
In a dramatically worded document sent to university administrators earlier this month, the heads of the 26 departments in Arts and Sciences, the primary component of undergraduate education, wrote: "We do not accept nor will we cooperate with any efforts to reduce the Arts and Sciences budget beyond what was agreed upon last spring."


Coho Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Atek Metals Center Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Economic Scene; Clean Air, At What Price?
IF Americans can land a man on the moon and even brew a decent cup of decaf, why can't they make city air clean enough to breathe?
No good reason, most analysts would argue.
But the current, high-stakes battle over reformulating gasoline shows it's not only a question of how clean you make it, it's how you make it clean.
While gasoline is a major source of hydrocarbons in urban air, the fuel's contribution to smog is plummeting because new cars are far cleaner than their predecessors.
Thus James W. Kinnear, chief executive of Texaco, argues that Federal orders to squeeze the last few percent of hydrocarbons out of auto tailpipes in nine heavily polluted cities will make only a marginal difference to human health -- and will certainly not prove cost-effective.


Israel's Coffee Spoons
Talking about openings for peace in the Middle East, Israelis like to recall Abba Eban's tart remark about the Palestinians: They never miss an opportunity to miss an opportunity.
At this pregnant moment, it's Israel that risks falling into the opportunity gap.
For 43 years, Israel has wanted nothing more than face-to-face negotiations with its several Arab neighbors -- neighbors that except for Egypt would not deign even to acknowledge Israel's existence.
Courtesy of the Bush Administration, Israel now has that opportunity.
Last month's Madrid conference opened the way for negotiations, in circumstances agreeable to Israel.


Books of The Times; A Journalist Looks Back on His Life and World
Deadline A Memoir By James Reston Illustrated. 525 pages. Random House. $25.
In his 50 years as a reporter and columnist at The New York Times, James Reston broke more big scoops, interviewed more big shots and won more kudos from his fellows than just about anybody else in the business.
He was the quintessential Washington insider.
Officials used him to test out new ideas on the public or to drop leaks for which they did not want to be held accountable.
Because of his high position at The Times -- Washington bureau chief from 1953 to 1964, and columnist from 1954 on -- and his personal integrity, he was trusted both by those who provided the news and by those who read it.


For Immigrants, English Helps Them Feel at Home
The subject was Thanksgiving.
In the classroom in Brooklyn where they are learning English together, the 21 students from Guinea, Haiti, Czechoslovakia, the Dominican Republic and 10 other countries were groping for its meaning.
They got the part about eating a lot (their multi-ethnic feast started at 10:30 yesterday morning).
But they were bewildered by a holiday that celebrates Pilgrims, turkey, pumpkin pie, football and Macy's all in one day.
And Francois Versailles, from Haiti, who rushes from class with his dictionary in his briefcase to his job as a machinist with the Transit Authority, seemed at first to confuse Thanksgiving with another holiday.


Penn State vs. Pitt: Game of Emotion
Compare statistics, compare schedules, compare results against common opponents, compare rankings.
Penn State has an advantage over Pittsburgh in every possible analytical measuring stick.
Except for one: emotion, which often plays a bigger role in deciding the outcome of the nation's 14th oldest football rivalry than any other.


Editorial Notebook; Reinstitutionalize the Homeless?
Uproar over Mayor David Dinkins's site proposals for new homeless shelters generates an obvious question: If the homeless mentally ill are an unmanageable presence in New York City, why not send them back to upstate mental hospital complexes, where buildings stand empty?
The question raises serious legal and ethical questions.
Homelessness and mental illness aren't crimes.
Government bears a heavy burden to justify involuntary transportation and confinement upstate.
But there's another compelling reason for doubt: Refilling hospitals would cost New York taxpayers a fortune.


Explaining Thankfulness To the Young
THERE are "haves" and "have-nots" in the world, and while most adults understand why some people have food, clothing and shelter and others do not, children cannot always comprehend the discrepancy.
As the nation prepares to celebrate Thanksgiving, a time of family feasts and sharing, children become more aware of life's inequities.
And many parents find themselves struggling to answer their children's questions about issues like homelessness and hunger in an honest way, without frightening them or confusing them, without discouraging their charitable instincts or endangering them.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
A SHOWER that drips or sprays unevenly is more than just a nuisance; it can cause major damage inside a wall.
There are, however, ways to cure most shower woes.
Here's how to figure out what is behind the drip.
If water drips from the bathtub spout while the shower is operating, the problem lies with the mechanism that directs the water to the tub or the shower head, the diverter.
The easiest diverter to handle is the one mounted inside a bathtub spout, with a knob on top of the spout.
The entire spout should be replaced.


Philip Morris Revamping Its Food Unit
The Philip Morris Companies announced a broad restructuring of its food operations yesterday that will result in a $275 million after-tax charge against its fourth-quarter net earnings.
It also said it would take a $1 billion charge to cover new accounting rules for retiree benefits.
The company said its Kraft General Foods subsidiary would discontinue some business lines and consolidate its manufacturing and distribution plants.
Analysts said the moves came in the face of a weakening domestic food market.


Injured Hostetler Returns Home
After spending three nights in a Tampa, Fla., hospital for a back injury, Jeff Hostetler, the Giants' quarterback, was flown in a private, medically equipped plane yesterday to Teterboro (N.J.) Airport and then taken by limousine to his home.
The usual cost of such a two-and-a-half-hour flight is $8,000 to $10,000, according to an airplane-charter company official, and Hostetler reportedly made the flight while lying down.
He is still suffering the effects of last Sunday's tackle in Tampa that broke three transverse processes, winglike attachments to the vertebrae.
Earlier in the day, he was booked on two Continental Airlines commercial flights but was a "no-show" on each.
Throughout the day, the Giants refused to disclose Hostetler's travel plans.


Turning a Passion Into an Obsession
"NOW I can do during the day what I used to stay up all night for," said Renee Palmer, who decided a few months ago to make what she called "her passion" into "an obsession."


U.N. Is Offering To Send a Force To Yugoslavia
The United Nations Security Council stepped up its efforts to end the fighting in Yugoslavia today by pledging to send a peacekeeping force of up to 10,000 soldiers to reinforce the current fragile cease-fire if the warring Serbs and Croats show they really want peace.
In doing so, the Council had to overcome the reservations of many of its third-world members who were worried about creating a precedent by intervening in what is essentially a civil war.
Many of those countries, diplomats say, feared that the resolution today might encourage similar outside interferance in internal conflicts in the third world.


Hatch Gives Details About B.C.C.I. Ties
Senator Orrin G. Hatch today confirmed a report that his defense of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International in a Senate speech last year, as well as of the Justice Department's handling of a money-laundering case against the bank, had been based on information provided by Robert Altman, a friend who was serving as a lawyer for B.C.C.I.
Mr.
Altman was also president of First American Bankshares Inc., a Washington bank that Federal prosecutors contend was secretly controlled by B.C.C.I., which was closed last July by regulators in seven countries because of reported widespread money laundering and fraud.


False Rumor of Soviet Coup A Factor in Dollar's Rise
The dollar's value rose against most key currencies today, strengthened at first by a false rumor of a second Soviet coup and later by better-than-expected news about the American economy.
Foreign exchange dealers said trading volume was thin because many participants quit early for the Thanksgiving holiday.
But they said the market was predisposed toward the dollar.


Charge of Secret Deal Upsets Anti-Apartheid Bloc
A tactical alliance between South Africa's two leading anti-apartheid movements was thrown into turmoil today when one abruptly accused the other of secretly arranging to share power with the white minority Government during the nation's transition to majority rule.
The African National Congress was accused by a smaller rival, the Pan-Africanist Congress, of agreeing with the authorities on an interim government that could be set up by February.


New Publisher At Rodale Press
Rodale Press Inc. has named Jeff Morgan publisher of Men's Health, the five-year-old health and fitness magazine for men.
Mr.
Morgan comes to Rodale from Playboy magazine, where he served as national sales director.
Before that he was advertising director for Family Media's Health magazine.
Mr.
Morgan replaces Michael Rooney, who last month was named publisher of Discover magazine.


Following the Yellow Brick Road, and Finding a Spiritual Path
Of the millions of Americans who danced down the Yellow Brick Road last night with Dorothy, the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodsman, the Cowardly Lion and Toto, enjoying the annual Thanksgiving broadcast of "The Wizard of Oz," few probably realized that they were actually encountering "a cosmogonic myth that is also eschatological" -- a secular version of a religious account of creation, fall from grace and return to paradise.
They would have known that, of course, if they had been in Room 203E of the Kansas City Convention Center on Monday morning when Paul Nathanson delivered his analysis of "The Wizard of Oz as a Secular Myth of America."


Student Picked for Board
An 18-year-old Stuyvesant High School senior has been nominated as the city's first student member of the central Board of Education.
The student, Won So, the president of the Stuyvesant Student Union, was nominated for the new post by Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's 40-member Student Advisory Council.
A resolution appointing him is to be submitted to the board on Dec. 18 and he is expected to join the board in February.
Mr.
So, a native of Korea who came to the United States in 1982, is in the top 2 percent of his class at Stuyvesant.
He is to serve on the board until he graduates in June.
A 10th-grader at Edward R. Murrow High School, Andrea Schlesinger, was chosen as Mr.
So's alternate.


McRae's 'Technical' Violations
A spokesman for Syracuse University said yesterday that Conrad McRae, the basketball team's 6-foot-10-inch center, had been declared ineligible to play basketball by the National Collegiate Athletic Association on Tuesday because of minor rules violations that occurred during the course of his recruitment.
"There were four violations of what I'd call a technical nature," said Robert Hill, the university's spokesman.
He refused to elaborate.


Court Relaxes Curb On Biographers' Use Of Unpublished Data
The right of a biographer to use a few segments from the unpublished letters of the author Richard Wright was upheld last week by a Federal appeals court in Manhattan.
Free speech advocates said the ruling was a small legal victory in a larger publishing war that they were nonetheless losing.
At issue are the legal rights of authors to prevent their unpublished or copyrighted writings from being used without their permission by historians, biographers and other writers.
It is a thorny dispute that previously involved the court when biographers tried to use the unpublished letters of J. D. Salinger and the diaries and journals of L. Ron Hubbard, the late founder of the Church of Scientology.


CHRONICLE
All around New York, amateur and professional cooks are deserting their own kitchens to prepare Thanksgiving dinners for the homeless and destitute.
One of them, ROBERT OLIVER, the executive chef of Taste Caterers, normally cooks for parties given by such clients as Bloomingdale's, Cartier and Gourmet magazine.
But today the diners who will feast on his Thanksgiving fare will be some of the more than 1,500 homeless people in and around Grand Central Terminal and Pennsylvania Station, the Port Authority bus terminal, Central Park and City Hall Park.


Centocor's F.D.A. Progress
Centocor Inc. said Tuesday that an advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration had recommended that the company's Myoscint imaging product be approved for the detection of dead heart tissue.
The F.D.A. will now consider the committee's advice.
Myoscint is a fragment of a monoclonal antibody.
Monoclonal antibodies are models of a naturally occurring immune system protein that can be produced in mice.


Paul A. Kaplan, 36, a Theatrical Producer
Paul Alan Kaplan, a theatrical producer and board member of the Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center, died on Monday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 36 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, said Ralph Giarrusso, his companion.


Dow Falls 16.10 on Blue-Chip Losses
Stocks closed mixed yesterday, with blue chips bearing the brunt of the weakness.
Sharp declines in I.B.M. and Philip Morris pushed the Dow Jones industrial average down 16.10 points, to 2,900.04.
For the most part, blue-chip issues traded in a tight range just below Tuesday's closing level, but the declines in I.B.M. and Philip Morris rattled the rest of the market.
I.B.M. fell 3 5/8, to 94 1/4, and Philip Morris dropped 1 5/8, to 68 1/8.


D'Amato Wins in Effort For Charities
As lawmakers struggled against exhaustion just before dawn this morning to piece together a bank bailout bill, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato asked colleagues for a small favor.
The New York Republican said he needed $6 million to help charitable groups that lost hundreds of thousands of dollars when two small New York City banks collapsed.
It wasn't much, he said.
And the recipients were worthy.
A nursing home.
The United Negro College Fund.


Miller, Maintaining Innocence, Ends Testimony
Mel Miller finished testifying in his fraud trial in Brooklyn yesterday, insisting under cross-examination that he did not deceive or defraud anyone in a series of real-estate investments.
The charges, which accuse Mr.
Miller of defrauding his clients of some profits from the investments, involve his private role as a lawyer, not his political role as the Speaker of the New York State Assembly.


Moscow Journal; Eager Economist Finds Capitalism a Tough Sell
Larisa Piyasheva's free-market economics are so blunt and zealous that it was considered a reformist coup two weeks ago when she was hired by the city to plot Moscow's transition to showcase capitalism.
But this week Miss Piyasheva was debating whether to quit the sack of fighting cats that public service is becoming in these nebulous first months of post-Communist freedom.


Altobelli to Rochester
The man who led the Baltimore Orioles to a World Series championship in 1983 has been named general manager of the team's top minor league affiliate, the Rochester Red Wings.


Beating, Not Crash, Called Death Cause
An injured woman on her way to the hospital in an ambulance that was hit head-on by another vehicle in Manhattan on Tuesday died as a result of injuries sustained in a beating and not from the accident, an autopsy revealed yesterday.
The woman, Nafisya Abdullah, 24 years old, of 50 Amsterdam Avenue on the Upper West Side, died of blunt force trauma to her face, head and brain after being struck by a blunt object, and not as a result of the accident, said a spokeswoman for the Medical Examiner's Office, Ellen Borakove.


In Japan, a Debate Becomes a Melee Over Peacekeeping Force


Whatever Foie Gras Is for Humans, It's Murder for the Geese; The Greeks Used Figs
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 17 front-page story on the potential cardiovascular benefits of foie gras took a load off my heart, since I had just consumed a tin of foie gras sent to me from France and packed by the "Dukes of Gascony" at Gimont, some 12 miles east of Auch.


Where Shall We Find the Leaders We Need?
To the Editor:
It is chilling to hear Dick Thornburgh, former Attorney General, conclude on the occasion of his defeat in the Pennsylvania senatorial race that the economy and the cost of health care "obviously commanded much greater attention in the campaign than we anticipated" (news article, Nov. 6).


David Shemin, 80, Expert on Structure of Blood Molecules
Dr.
David Shemin, a noted biochemist who was a retired Northwestern University professor, died Tuesday at his home in Woods Hole, Mass.
He was 80 years old.
He died of colon cancer, said a friend and co-worker, Dr. Irving London.


Premiere of Documentary
A documentary film exploring the 45-year collaboration between the composer John Cage and the choreographer Merce Cunningham is to receive its New York premiere on Wednesday at the Anthology Film Archives, 32 Second Avenue, at Second Street, Manhattan.
The 95-minute film, "Cage/Cunningham," was directed by Elliot Caplan.
It is to run through Dec. 29.
Tickets are $6; $5 for students and the elderly; $4 for Anthology Film Archives members.
Information: (212) 505-5181.


Risk Lures Teen-Agers To 'Surf' on the Subways
WEARING a purple baseball cap and a cocky smile, Elliott Ortiz stood between two cars on the No. 6 train as it rumbled over tracks 30 feet above the Parkchester section of the Bronx.
He paused for a second, waiting for the wiggling 400-ton train to pick up speed.
Then he hoisted himself to the roof and disappeared.
In less than a minute -- enough time, he said, for a windblown handstand -- he dropped down again, this time, one car closer to the train's front.
Three passengers jolted to their feet in surprise, but he looked as nonchalant as if he had done nothing more unusual than offer up his seat.


A Woman on the Ice
Three goals and three stitches and it was all over.
But MANON RHEAUME became the first woman to play in a regularly scheduled major junior hockey game on Tuesday night.


Clerk at F.C.C. Is Fatally Shot Outside Office
An employee of the Federal Communications Commission's field office in lower Manhattan was shot to death yesterday afternoon by a "disturbed" woman who had previously lodged unusual complaints with the agency, the police and commission officials said.
The shooting took place at 4:45 P.M. in front of the office at 201 Varick Street, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
The victim, Catherine Forster, 51 years old, of 70-14 67th Place, Glendale, Queens, was shot twice in the chest.


Democrats Set Hearings On Taxes and Economy
Preparing the ground for a showdown with President Bush next year, Congressional Democrats announced today a series of public hearings next month on tax policy and the state of the economy.
Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, said the first witnesses he would call, in hearings that he scheduled for next week, would be the President's top economic policy advisers.
Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas said he would try to get those Administration officials to appear before his Finance Committee as well.


Congress Votes $100 Billion Bank and S.&amp; L. Aid
In a final burst of legislation before adjourning until January, Congress today approved two broad bailout measures that total more than $100 billion, one for the nation's banking industry and one to continue the Government's rescue of hundreds of savings and loans.
Along with the adoption of a $151 billion, six-year transportation program, the actions on financial bailouts were the most significant accomplishments of the final day of a Congressional session that began on the sober note of war with Iraq and concluded with a quarrelsome sitting that lasted 33 hours and 2 minutes.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ROBERT EMERY and his 9-year-old daughter regularly argue over what TV programs she may watch, how many holes she may have in her ears and how late she may stay up at night.
"She wants to be a teen-ager, but she's not ready for those things," said Dr.
Emery, an associate professor of psychology at the University of Virginia at Charlottesville.
His daughter is, if anything, a bit precocious.
There is a predictable increase in the battles between parents and their children when those children reach puberty.
A similar increase in fighting takes place during the "terrible twos." In each case, the child is struggling with issues of independence and control.
Of course, arguments with adolescents are different than those with toddlers or even school-age children, for the teen-agers can use them to test their newly improved but imperfect skills at reasoning.


Home Video
800 Number for 'Nature'
During broadcasts of "Land of the Eagle," the "Nature" series special on PBS this week (all eight parts are on Channel 13 today from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.), viewers have been invited to dial an 800 number and order the video.
A line on the television screen with the number reads, "Offer made by Thirteen/WNET" and it is explained that some of the proceeds will help support similar specials in the future.
No other details of the offer are given.


Economic Watch; Soviet Debt Deal May Add To Problems of the Republics
Can anyone spare a dime?
The leaders of the Soviet republics, who were hoping for a coin or three in return for assuming the Soviet Union's debts, were left empty-handed last week.
While the West agreed to a delay in repayment of the principal through 1992, the deal offered no money to slow the republics' perilous financial decline.
Indeed, the negotiation with the United States and its major economic allies in Moscow may have added to the republics' economic woes by highlighting both the division of interests between the Russian Federation and the Ukraine and Washington's indecision on aid.


Bills, on Best Behavior, Save Rancor for Sunday
ORCHARD PARK, N.Y., Nov. 27 --
Comments disparaging the Jets? Don't look for any from the Bills locker room here.
Linebacker Darryl Talley likened the Jets to the Bills three years ago, calling them a "hungry team with an aggressive defense, that refuses to quit." Quarterback Jim Kelly agreed with Talley's comment, while receiver James Lofton said the Jets have some of the best talent in the league, on both sides of the line of scrimmage.


In a Nutshell, Pitino Is in Nets' Future
If Joe Taub, the untitled power broker on the Nets' board of directors, had his way, Willis Reed would return to the bench as interim coach of the Nets until the end of the season.
The organization would not have to reach into its pocket for another coaching salary and could wait until next spring to determine the availability of Joe Taub's close friend, Rick Pitino, who says he will wager $20,000 that he will not leave the University of Kentucky.
Taub would gladly pick up the $20,000.
If the Nets' ownership-by-committee becomes insistent on dismissing Bill Fitch, Reed prefers it recruit a coach from the broadcasting ranks (Mike Fratello, Doug Collins) or from the leisure circuit (Doug Moe).
As usual, the Nets' ownership, the Secaucus Seven, has agreed on nothing.


Review/Music; German Cabaret Songs From Between the Wars
The beleaguered German spirit between World War I and the rise of Hitler mixed poison and saccharine into a musical formula made famous in the cabarets of Berlin.
The simplest forms of popular music were induced to express sophisticated forms of social wit and political bitterness.
Prodding the process were the original voices of Bertolt Brecht and Kurt Weill.
Under the auspices of the Jewish Museum, a four-member troupe of dancers and singers accompanied by the pianist Jonathan Goldberg offered a brief and uninterrupted look at this music on Sunday afternoon.
The Nazi anthems "When the SS and the SA" and the "Horst Wessel Lied" received nasty treatments.
There were also little musical shrugs about unhappy political realities, and even a love song or two.


Bridge
The chance of a remarkable sweep stayed alive here today at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals.
Zia Mahmood, the Pakistani star who lives in Manhattan, was fourth in the Blue Ribbon Pair Championship going into the semifinal stage, with Michael Rosenberg, also of Manhattan, as his partner.
Zia has already won the Life Master Open Pairs and the Open Board-a-Match Teams, and could win the Blue Ribbon and the Reisinger Teams, which would be a unique accomplishment.
The Blue Ribbon leaders were:
First, Howard Weinstein and Peter Nagy, both of Chicago, 1234.24 match points.


Port Authority Terminal to End Drug Stakeouts
To combat what they describe as a sharp rise in robbery complaints, officials at the Port Authority Bus Terminal have told detectives there to discontinue undercover surveillance of drug dealing and to concentrate on thefts.
Officials insisted yesterday that drug arrests would continue at the terminal but that stakeouts and decoys to snare drug traffickers had been eliminated.


Apple Protests Loss of Air Force Contract
Apple Computer Inc. has formally protested the award of a billion-dollar Government contract to two small, privately held companies.
Apple's lawyers said officials of the Air Force Standard Systems Center had told them that 20 of the 22 companies submitting bids were disqualified on technical grounds.
The contract, known as Desktop IV, was awarded last week to the Compuadd Corporation, based here, and Sysorex Information Systems Inc. of Falls Church, Va.
It calls for the delivery of as many as 300,000 desktop computers in the next three years, along with related software, peripheral equipment and support services.


Dodgers Get Davis of Reds For Belcher
The Los Angeles Dodgers, risking an uncharacteristic pitching shortage, reunited Eric Davis with Darryl Strawberry yesterday in a four-player trade with the Cincinnati Reds that is certain to have ramifications for the National League West next season.
Acting only hours after they lost first baseman Eddie Murray as a free agent to the Mets, the Dodgers replenished their run-production supply by acquiring Davis from the Reds, with pitcher Kip Gross, for a pair of pitchers, Tim Belcher and John Wetteland.


Sailing Through a Skyful of Thanksgiving Reveries; Goyim and Indians
I WAS born and raised in New Jersey, where many communities and schools have been given American Indian names: Piscataway Township and Conackamack Junior High and Lake Hopatcong are only a few of my childhood landmarks.
Even then, I was aware that while various tribes rightfully demanded the return of lands in Wyoming or the Dakotas, there never seemed to be any bids for portions of the Garden State.
Although my family has sinced moved away, New Jersey remains my spiritual home for the holidays; only in Jersey, at the local mini-mall, did I once glimpse a festive ice cream cake uncannily sculptured and colored to resemble a cooked and garnished turkey.


OPEC Leader Looks Ahead, And Sees Possible Turmoil
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, ending a two-day meeting here, decided today to keep its oil production at the current level.
But its Secretary General issued a strong warning that next year would be filled with unpredictable developments for the world's oil markets.
The Secretary General, Subroto, said that among other uncertainties OPEC did not know when Iraq, once a leading oil producer, would be able to export again.


Hard Times Hit the Suburbs, Touching Affluent Addresses
This is a town of old money and new, bound together by country clubs, riding stables and costly water views in one of the wealthiest counties in the nation.
But here in Greenwich, and in dozens of other towns across the metropolitan region, there are people who are having a hard time putting food on their tables.
They conceal it as best they can, as life in the suburbs often dictates.
But left jobless by the recession, caught in the vise of their mortgages and with no more unemployment benefits available, thousands of men and women in the region who never sought assistance of any kind before are beginning to accept free turkeys, jars of peanut butter and boxes of spaghetti in an effort to make ends meet.


S. C. Schiff Wed To Ms. Smigel
Jacqueline Debora Smigel, the daughter of Marcel and Ines Smigel of Great Neck, L.I., and Steven Craig Schiff, a son of Rabbi Solomon and Shirley Schiff of Miami Beach, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Dovid Feinstein officiated at the Great Neck Synagogue.
Mrs.
Schiff, 26 years old, is an alumna of Yeshiva University, where she is a graduate student in clinical psychology.
Her father is the president of the Marco International Corporation, a metals trading company in New York.
Her mother is an artist.


Webster Is Suspended
Saying that coaches were expected to set an example for their players, the National Hockey League announced yesterday that TOM WEBSTER, coach of the Los Angeles Kings, would be suspended for the next 12 games for throwing a stick at Referee KERRY FRASER.
In addition, the Kings were fined $10,000 for the incident during the Nov. 16 game against the Detroit Red Wings.


Business and the Law; Who Gets Utility Tax-Loss Benefit?
Utility companies and state regulators are squaring off in Washington for a complex battle over who should benefit from tax losses incurred by utility subsidiaries -- shareholders or ratepayers.
The issue, which is being fought in Congress and with the Internal Revenue Service, is of growing financial importance because many holding companies that own electric, gas and telephone utilities have subsidiaries in unregulated businesses that generate substantial tax losses.


U.S., TURNING FROM MOSCOW, WOULD GRANT RECOGNITION TO AN INDEPENDENT UKRAINE
President Bush has authorized a major shift in American policy away from the central Soviet Government and toward the republics, deciding to recognize an independent Ukraine "expeditiously" if the second-largest Soviet republic breaks with Moscow in a referendum on Sunday, officials said today.
Independence fever in the Ukraine is running high, and Administration officials say they expect the Ukrainians will vote to separate from the Soviet Union.
In that case, Washington will start trying to strengthen its ties with the Ukraine immediately, but will delay formal diplomatic recognition for some time, perhaps weeks, the officials said.
U.S.
Would Set Demands
Instead, in hopes of setting a pattern for demands from other republics for similar treatment, United States recognition of the Ukraine will be timed according to the speed with which the Ukrainians move to ease American concerns on human rights, ethnic tensions, disarmament and control over nuclear weapons, officials said.


Cuomo's Fiscal Proposal Raises Policy Issues
While its main purpose is to balance the state budget, the fiscal plan released this week by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo also plots new policy directions for the state in politically sensitive areas like Medicaid, insurance and corrections.
Included in the plan, for instance, are proposals to eliminate dental and podiatry coverage from the state's Medicaid program, to increase the rates that commercial insurers pay hospitals and even to end the tradition of giving inmates $40 in "good luck money" upon their release from prison.


'Dangerous' Sales Good, Not Great
In its first day of sale on Tuesday, Michael Jackson's "Dangerous" album sold respectably but broke no sales records, stores around the country reported.
Representatives from many stores said they expected "Dangerous" (Epic) to be the best-selling album of the week.
But while "Dangerous" appeared to a fanfare of promotion, including a special on Fox Television and a highly anticipated video clip, "Dangerous" has not generated the huge immediate sales of the September releases by Guns 'n' Roses or, in many stores, the release of U2's "Achtung Baby" last week.


Court Denies Dismissal in Tyson Case
A judge today denied motions by defense attorneys seeking dismissal of rape and related charges against Mike Tyson.
During a 50-minute hearing, Judge Patricia J. Gifford of Marion Superior Court denied five defense motions, four dealing with the status of charges against Tyson and a fifth seeking assignment of a new judge for the case.


Gold Rallies Amid Worries On U.S. Inflation and Soviets
Gold futures prices rallied yesterday, ending a two-day decline, amid worries about unrest in the Soviet Union and the possibility of higher inflation at home.
Gold for delivery in December rose $1.60, to $367.90, on New York's Commodity Exchange.
December silver slipped 1.5 cents, to $4.06 a troy ounce.


Professor Is Criticized for Anti-Semitic Past
Events of a half century ago have become a center of controversy at the University of Chicago, where a visiting professor has been accused of writing anti-Semitic views as a young woman in Nazi Germany.
In the August 1991 issue of the monthly magazine Commentary, an article by Leo Bogart entitled "The Pollster and the Nazis," accuses the professor, Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann, of including anti-Semitic remarks in her dissertation.
The article also said she included anti-Semetic remarks in in an article about Jewish control of the media in Das Reich, a Nazi newspaper.


Hearst Names A Chief Editor
Ron Javers, former editor of Philadelphia magazine, was named editor in chief of Town &amp; Country, Hearst Magazines announced Monday.
He will replace Frank Zachary, who has edited the 145-year-old magazine since 1972 and will become editor emeritus and a consultant to Hearst.
Mr.
Javers, 45, was dismissed as editor of Philadelphia last summer after a dispute with the publisher, David H. Lipson Jr., over the mentioning of advertisers in an annual feature called "Best of Philly." At the time, Mr.
Lipson said that Mr.
Javers had taken the names of some of the magazine's advertisers off the list "because he knew I would have liked to have them on."


The Public Charms of the Belle Epoque
Paris was not always the City of Light.
It started to be so around 1860 when Baron Haussmann, the city planner for Napoleon III, designed the major boulevards and parks of the city and lighted the streets with gas lamps.
In the 1880's, the rebuilt city and its glittering thoroughfares entered the era known as the Belle Epoque, which lasted until World War I. The Paris of that era is the subject of a show of 70 photographs at the gallery of the New York School of Interior Design (155 East 56th Street) through Feb. 27.


Taking an Intimate Look Into Castles and Chateaus
COCO CHANEL'S boudoir, rooms from a Swedish castle and the Chateau de Groussay in France are some of the subjects depicted in "The Art of the Interior," a collection of paintings and watercolors on view through Dec. 14 at Slatkin &amp; Company, a decorative accessories shop at 131 East 70th Street.


Congress, in Rush to Adjourn, Bans Automated Sales Calls
Before adjourning until January, Congress yesterday approved a bill that would ban the use of automated dialing devices that deliver pre-recorded messages.
The measure would also allow consumers to try to block calls from salespeople by placing their names on a list.


Mets Weigh Bonilla Offer
Al Harazin, the general manager of the Mets, spoke yesterday with the agent for Bobby Bonilla and said he was asked whether the club was prepared to improve its offer for the free-agent outfielder/infielder.
"I told them I'd consider improving the offer," Harazin said.
"But there is a point beyond which a team cannot go. I have to resolve in my mind what that point is for us."


Philip Morris Revamping Its Food Unit
The Philip Morris Companies announced a broad restructuring of its food operations yesterday that will result in a $275 million after-tax charge against its fourth-quarter net earnings.
It also said it would take a $1 billion charge to cover new accounting rules for retiree benefits.
The company said its Kraft General Foods subsidiary would discontinue some business lines and consolidate its manufacturing and distribution plants.
Analysts said the moves came in the face of a weakening domestic food market.


Mariners Valued At $100 Million
The Seattle Mariners have been appraised at $100 million, which is likely to improve the chances that the owner, Jeff Smulyan, will keep his team in the city, King County Executive Tim Hill said.


An End to the Slaughter at Sea
"A sweet victory for the global environment" was how one elated marine biologist described Japan's announcement on Tuesday that it would shut down its drift-net fishing industry by the end of next year.
It surely is.
It's also a tribute to a few resolute American legislators and thousands of dedicated conservationists who have fought for years against this cruel and wasteful practice.
Japan is one of three Asian nations -- with South Korea and Taiwan -- that conduct drift-net fishing in the Pacific.
Drift nets are mammoth curtains of lightweight filament, 30 miles long and 30 feet deep.
The Asian fleets use them to harvest squid, but the nets also trap millions of other fish and marine mammals, which are dumped over the side dead or dying.


Ga. Tech and Texas Go 'Absolutely Wild'
Madison Square Garden resembled an indoor playground last night.
Walk past any outdoor court in the city and the game is blinding.
Run and gun.
End to end.
Nonstop.
There is no time to call plays.
It was the same inside the Garden during the opening semifinal of the Big Apple National Invitation Tournament.
There was no need for a 45-second clock as Georgia Tech and Texas ran and ran and ran, and the Yellow Jackets crossed the finish line in front with a 120-107 victory.


Talking Turkey About the Bird
Today of all days finds America's turkey growers puzzled and distressed.
While ever more Americans are roasting turkeys at home, the big bird still hasn't found a large market among those seeking fast food or convenient everyday meals.
Turkey meat, after all, is healthful and cheap -- better for you than beef or pork.
Why shouldn't people make it part of their daily diet instead of reserving it for special occasions?
The growers may be forgiven for not facing up to the answer: Turkey, however storied its tradition, has no taste.


To Sit On? Yes, and to Worship At
FREDERIC FEKKAI, the Manhattan hair stylist of the moment, knew exactly what he wanted when it came time to choose a sofa for the apartment he shares with his wife, Catherine.
"After standing up all day," he said, "it's important to be able to sit down."
Mr.
Fekkai sits down in style.
The sofa -- a red damask beauty that is nearly nine feet long -- is the cornerstone of the design of the Fekkais' living room on the top floor of an Upper East Side mansion.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-13 U.S. MOVES TO RECOGNIZE UKRAINE
President Bush has decided to recognize an independent Ukraine "expeditiously" if the second-largest Soviet republic breaks with Moscow in a referendum on Sunday.
The decision represents a major shift in American policy away from the central Soviet Government.
Page A1  KHMER ROUGE CHIEF ASSAULTED
Screaming "murderer" and vowing to "kill the monster," a mob of revenge-seeking Cambodians beat and bloodied Khieu Samphan, a senior Khmer Rouge leader, and forced him to flee to Thailand only hours after he returned to the Cambodian capital under the auspices of a United Nations peace treaty.
A1 U.N.
BACKS YUGOSLAV PEACE FORCE
The Security Council pledged to send a peacekeeping force of up to 10,000 soldiers to reinforce the fragile cease-fire in Yugoslavia if the warring Serbs and Croats show they really want peace.
The council had to overcome the reservations of many countries worried about creating a precedent by intervening in what is essentially a civil war.
A1 ISRAEL REBUFFS U.S.
ON TALKS
In a blunt challenge to the United States, Israel rejected an American call for a new round of peace negotiations in Washington next week.
It proposed instead that the talks be delayed for five days and then moved quickly to a new site in or near the Middle East.
A1 U.S. officials admit Middle East peace efforts are in trouble.
A10 U.S.
AND IRAN REACH SETTLEMENT
The United States has agreed to pay Iran $278 million to compensate it for undelivered American-made military equipment bought by Teheran before Iran's 1979 revolution.
American officials denied that the deal reached in The Hague was linked to the fate of three remaining American hostages.
A3 DEMAND FOR LIBYANS' EXTRADITION
The United States and Britain increased pressure on Libya, demanding that it surrender the two intelligence agents who have been charged with the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103.
No deadline was set for compliance and there was no mention of possible retaliatory steps.
A3  Moscow Journal: Cold-turkey capitalist vs. timid reformers.
A4 Bishops meeting in Rome on rebuilding church in Eastern Europe.
A13 Haitians are in limbo at a new American tent camp in Cuba.
A6 The A.N.C. is accused of a secret transition deal with Pretoria.
A12 NATIONAL A16-21, B14-18, D20-22 BILLIONS MORE IN BAILOUTS
Hurrying to wrap up legislation before adjourning until January, Congress approved two bailout measures totaling more than $100 billion: one for the nation's banking industry, the other to continue the Government's rescue of hundreds of savings and loan associations.
A1 FORETASTE OF A COMING BATTLE
Preparing the ground for a showdown with President Bush next year, Congressional Democrats announced a series of public hearings in December on tax policy and the state of the economy.
D20 News analysis: How the tax-cut issue emerged.
D20 The crime bill was passed by the House but died in the Senate.
D22 Congress approved new rules on Medicaid financing.
D20 Reporter's Notebook: At Capitol, the hours were few, but very long.
D21 HE WAS SURE YOU'D ASK
White House Memo: As an episode this week made clear, the President has many of his exchanges with ordinary citizens scripted by aides, so that questions are known in advance and the answers are readily at hand.
A16 A SOLDIER'S STORY
In Vietnam one day 23 years ago, a surgeon tried to save the life of a young soldier with both legs nearly blown off, damaged eye tissue and extensive head injuries.
The surgeon succeeded, but for years he wondered to what end.
Now he has some answers, as does the soldier.
A16 DOROTHY, THE WIZARD AND GOD
At the annual convention of the American Academy of Religion, scholars rushed to sessions on topics like reincarnation in Hinduism, Ugaritic ritual texts -- and the religious significance of "The Wizard of Oz." A16 WHERE DID AIDS COME FROM?
In a provocative hypothesis that has startled experts, an Oxford University researcher has proposed that AIDS may have entered the human population in a bizarre series of malaria experiments.
B14 A PROFESSOR'S PAST
Events of half a century ago have become a center of controversy at the University of Chicago, where a visiting professor has been accused of writing anti-Semitic views as a young woman in Nazi Germany.
B16 The text of the President's Thanksgiving Day proclamation.
B18 Maryland proposed linking welfare to "greater personal responsibility." B17 A plot against Puerto Rican independence advocates was uncovered.
A21 The Atlantis astronauts passed a tricky test.
A16 METROPOLITAN Digest, B1 LEARNING ENGLISH AND MORE
On Thanksgiving, Americans usually go home.
But the students enrolled in the English as a Second Language class in Brooklyn have left their homes far behind.
The class gives the students English, and brings them closer to making America their home.
A1 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 The Home Section  Sailing through a skyful of Thanksgiving reveries.
C1  Explaining thankfulness to the young.
C1  Sitting down in style.
C1  Parent &amp; Child.
C2  Making an understatement.
C8 Arts/Entertainment  Court eases curb on biographers' use of unpublished material.
C13  Music: Music Notes.
C13  Juan Luis Guerra y 440.
C13  Dance: Three by Balanchine.
C13  Word and Image: "Deadline," a memoir by James Reston.
C18  Home Video.
C19 Obituaries D23  Norman B. Norman, former ad and marketing adviser Sports B20-28  Baseball: Mets land Murray.
B21  Reds send Davis to Dodgers.
B21  Boxing: Dismissal of charges in Tyson case denied.
B26  Column: Anderson on good guys in sports.
B21  Football: Handley seeks light touch amid troubles.
B21  Soccer: U.S. women blaze way to final.
B21 Editorials/Op-Ed  Editorials A26  Israel's coffee spoons.
Talking turkey about the bird.
End to the slaughter at sea.
David Anderson: Homeless.
Letters A26  Tom Wicker: Bypassing Congress.
A27  William Safire: Langley greets Lubyanka.
A27  David Hackett Fischer: Multicultural fowl.
A27


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 580 money market mutual funds increased by $1.14 billion, to $481.95 billion, for the week that ended yesterday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 214 institutional funds increased by $827.4 million, to $160.13 billion.
The assets of the 275 general-purpose funds were up by $882.2 million, to $176.10 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $564.7 million, to $145.72 billion, the institute said.


BUSINESS DIGEST LP&gt; The Economy    Congress approved two broad bailout measures that total more than $100 billion, one for the nation's banking industry and one to continue the Government's rescue of savings and loans.  [ Page A1. ]  Senator D'Amato got $6 million added to the bill to help charitable groups that lost money in two New York bank failures.  [ B1. ]


U.S. Women Advance to World Cup Final


Two Big Games For Texas A&amp;M
First the Super Bowl, then the Cotton Bowl.
That is the way Texas A&amp;M's Kevin Smith looks at his team's final two games.
The Super Bowl is Thursday, when the Aggies play their bitter rival Texas (5-5), needing a victory to complete their first undefeated Southwest Conference record since 1956.
The Aggies are 9-1 over all.


Review/Dance; Having Fun With Life, Even When Life Is Hard
The Movement Research at the Judson Church series presented an unusually varied program on Monday night.
There was hard-edged tomfoolery from Christopher Caines.
Lucy Guerin contributed a solo filled with inspired playing with shape and the quality of movement.
And Jaime Ortega offered a dance that drew one in with all the seductiveness of a soothing dream.
Mr.
Caines dealt with the hard life of the artist in the darkly funny "Rainwater and Grass," set to music composed and performed by Edward Ratcliff, a wonderfully spunky and imperturbable trumpet player.
Mr.
Caines, dressed in white, was the artist.
Karl-Peter Hermann, a tall figure in black, was his nemesis.


Markets Closed For Holiday
Because of the Thanksgiving Day holiday, all financial markets and banks in the United States will be closed today.
Most markets overseas will be open.


Court Denies Dismissal in Tyson Case
A judge today denied motions by defense attorneys seeking dismissal of rape and related charges against Mike Tyson.
During a 50-minute hearing, Judge Patricia J. Gifford of Marion Superior Court denied five defense motions, four dealing with the status of charges against Tyson and a fifth seeking assignment of a new judge for the case.


Mets Are Banking on Murray and His Big Bat
With the signing of free-agent first baseman Eddie Murray yesterday, Al Harazin, the Mets' general manager, made the public splash he wanted to.
It remains to be seen whether the Mets got soaked in the process.
Murray, who will be 36 at the start of the 1992 season, yesterday signed a two-year deal with the Mets for a surprising $7.5 million, all of it guaranteed.
The deal, which does not include an option for a third season, provides for a signing bonus of $1.25 million, a 1992 salary of $3.5 million and a 1993 salary of $2.75 million.
The package also includes an assortment of bonuses for awards won during the two seasons.


Congress Moves to Force Icahn to Insure T.W.A. Pensions
Congress served notice today on Carl C, Icahn, chairman of Trans World Airlines, that he would be personally liable for the pensions of T.W.A.'s employees even if he proceeded with plans to restructure the ailing carrier.
Unions representing workers for the carrier, which has its hub in St.
Louis, persuaded members of the Missouri delegation to sponsor a measure that would force Mr.
Icahn to retain liability for the unfunded portions of T.W.A.'s pensions, even if his stake in the company dips below 80 percent, the legal limit at which shareholders assume that liability.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Named Tom Trebelhorn, third base coach.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Named Joe Niekro pitching coach of Class A affiliate.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Traded Tim Belcher and John Wetteland, pitchers, to the Cincinnati Reds for Eric Davis, outfielder, and Kip Gross, pitcher.
NEW YORK METS -- Agreed to terms with Eddie Murray, first baseman, on a two-year contract.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Named Keith Champion, manager of the Waterloo team in the Midwest League.
International League  ROCHESTER RED WINGS -- Named Joe Altobelli general manager.
SCRANTON WILKES-BARRE RED BARONS -- Named Lee Elia manager.
Eastern League  READING PHILLIES -- Named Carlos Arroyo and Kelly Heath coaches.
Pioneer League  HELENA BREWERS -- Extended the contract of Harry Dunlop manager.
South Atlantic League  SPARTANBURG PHILLIES -- Named Roy Mcjatyka manager; Buzz Capra pitching coach; and Tony Scott hitting coach.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association  CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Placed J.R.
Reid, forward-center, on the injured reserve.
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Waived Chucky Brown, forward.
Activated Jimmy Oliver, guard, from the injured list.
Continental Basketball Association  ROCKFORD LIGHTNING -- Signed Troy Muilenburg, forward.
Waived Stevie Wise, guard.
TRI-CITY CHINOOK -- Traded Ozell Jones, center, and Jay Taylor, guard, to Tulsa for the rights to Robert Reid, guard, and Tony Costner, center.


Renewing Copper Pots
Retinning and Copper Repair
525 West 26th Street, New York, N.Y. 10001; (212) 244-4896.
Good copper cookware will last forever, says Jamie Gibbons, brandishing a heavy copper saucepan.


Money Market Fund Yields Fell Slightly in Latest Week
Yields on tax-exempt and taxable money market funds fell slightly in the week that ended yesterday, according to IBC/Donoghue's, the Holliston, Mass., publisher of The Money Fund Report.
Walter S. Frank, chief economist at IBC/Donoghue's, said the small change in yields showed that the demand for tax-exempt funds was keeping pace with the high level of money that is currently on the market.


All-Americans Named
Quarterback CASEY WELDON and three of his Florida State teammates were named to the Walter Camp All-America team on Wednesday.
The other Seminoles on the squad are running back AMP LEE, linebacker MARVIN JONES and defensive back TERRELL BUCKLEY.


METRO DIGEST
HIGH WIRE OVER THE DELAWARE
Since 1987, the Delaware River Water Commission and its member states -- New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware -- have thrashed their way toward tough new water-quality regulations, writing and rewriting terms and proposed policies and, in effect, trying to walk a high wire: maintaining first-rate water quality without choking development.
B5.
THE NEW NEEDIEST


Strategy of a Tax Cut
After months of hesitation and often aimless economic debate, the White House and Congress have suddenly decided that now is the right time to talk about a tax cut, even if it is not the right time to enact one.
It remains unlikely that Congress will actually act on tax reduction until next year, even after completion of hearings on the issue that House and Senate chairmen today scheduled for December.
There are strong pressures against a cut now, including economic arguments that it might not be the best way to speed the economy's recovery.


Sports of The Times; Some '91 Thank-You Notes
ON too many other days of the year, the schemers and the scoundrels of sports are in the headlines.
But on Thanksgiving Day, it's time to remember the good people who just by being themselves make sports' little corner of the world a better place to be:
Phil Simms, who showed for 10 weeks how a backup quarterback should act before he showed in the Giants' 21-14 victory in Tampa how a backup quarterback should perform.
Even though he never deserved to be a backup quarterback at all.


Reporter's Notebook; 3 A.M. in the Capitol, and Not Pretty
About 3 this morning, Representative Charles Wilson, the lanky Texas Democrat, could be found sprawled out on a bench just outside the House chamber, snoring away.
Passers-by hardly noticed him.
Several other members were sitting nearby, eyes shut, in wingback leather chairs and in an anteroom off the House floor, and the couches in the cloakrooms were fully occupied.


Sailing Through a Skyful of Thanksgiving Reveries; Our Luck: Chips, but No Breaks
THE way in is the most American way -- not through the front door or the kitchen door, but through the automatic garage door.
We had to extend the garage a few feet to accommodate our cars, which are large, though we are small; even so, parking is a trick.
My father, ever ingenious, has suspended an old license plate as a handy guide.
When the car grille taps it, the driver should stop.
Everything then is just right: The car's in its place; we are home.


4-State Commission Moves to Preserve the High Water Quality of the Upper Delaware River
The upper 121 miles of the Delaware River, the playground of hundreds of thousands of canoeists, hikers, swimmers and anglers, runs clean and clear.
Some call it pristine.
Not quite, the experts say, because man has intruded.
Still, they quickly add, the upper Delaware's water quality ranks among the highest in the East.
And that's the way they want to keep it.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Capitals Top Canadiens  The Washington Capitals took the lead on a controversial second-period goal, then held off the visiting Montreal Canadiens behind the goaltending of Don Beaupre for a 3-1 victory last night.
The teams are tied in first place of the overall National Hockey League standings with 36 points, although the Canadiens have played three more games.
The Capitals took a 2-1 lead at 7 minutes 8 seconds of the second period on a goal that had to be confirmed by instant replay.
Al Iafrate skated past J. J. Daigneault and took a close-in shot that bounced off goaltender Patrick Roy.
Iafrate's momentum took him into Roy, who was left defenseless as Kelly Miller stuffed in the rebound.
Todd Krygier scored with 56 seconds left to wrap up the victory. (AP) Whalers 7, Flyers 3: Andrew Cassels scored his first two goals of the season and Pat Verbeek added two more as Hartford defeated the slumping Flyers in Philadelphia.
Hartford, which defeated Philadelphia in all three meetings last season, helped keep the Flyers without a victory in their last four games (0-3-1).
Hartford took a 1-0 lead just 31 seconds into the game when Verbeek got his sixth goal of the season.
Kjell Samuelsson tied the game for the Flyers at 7:24 on a point drive that eluded Hartford goaltender Kay Whitmore.
Cassels stuffed the goal past Ron Hextall at 15:36 for his first goal of the season to make it 2-1 Hartford.
Rob Brown's 10th goal, midway through the second period, increased Hartford's lead to 3-1.
The Flyers cut the lead to 3-2 at 17:25 of the second as Rod Brind'Amour scored.
Goals early in the third period by Cassels and Mikael Anderson put the game away. (AP) Nordiques 4, Sabres 4: Greg Paslawski scored his second goal late in the third period to give Quebec the tie at Buffalo.
The Sabres overcame a 3-1 second-period deficit by getting goals from Donald Audette, Tony Tanti and Dave Andreychuk to take a 4-3 lead.
Paslawski tied it at 15:05 when he dug the puck out from behind the Buffalo net and scooped a backhander past Sabre goaltender Tom Draper. (AP) TENNIS  Davis Tops Fitzgerald  Scott Davis defeated John Fitzgerald, 6-3, 6-3, in the South African Open at Johannesburg yesterday and advanced to the quarterfinals.
Todd Witsken eliminated sixth-seeded Kevin Curren, 6-4, 6-3, and fifth-seeded Wayne Ferreira beat Mark Kaplan, 7-6 (7-2), 6-0.
Grant Connell, seeded seventh, defeated his doubles partner, Glenn Michibata, 6-4, 6-4. (AP) VOLLEYBALL U.S.
Is 5-0 in World Cup  The United States defeated Tunisia, 15-1, 15-3, 13-15, 15-13, yesterday in the final Group A match in Hiroshima, Japan, to remain undefeated in five matches in the men's World Cup volleyball tournament.
South Korea clinched the only remaining berth for the 1992 Olympics, beating Iran, 15-12, 15-4, 15-5, in Matsumoto.
The victory improved South Korea's record to 3-2, the best among teams in the World Cup preliminaries that have not already qualified for the Olympics.
The United States, the Soviet Union, Japan, Cuba, Brazil and Algeria have qualified. (AP)


For Breast-Feeding
To the Editor:
David A. Hidalgo, a plastic surgeon, and the patients he writes of who want breast implants so they will "look better in clothing" must be allowed their dubious values (Op-Ed, Nov. 14).
But he is wrong and irresponsible to refer to "breasts atrophied by breast-feeding."


High Court to Review State Airline Ad Rules
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether states can regulate airline advertising, or whether such regulation is solely the province of the Federal Government.
The case is an appeal by the State of Texas, which was successfully sued by several airlines after announcing three years ago that it intended to protect Texas consumers by reviewing airline advertising in the state for false or misleading claims.


After Senate Backs Bush and Blocks Anti-Crime Bill, Congress Goes Home
Congress went home today fighting over crime after House Democrats suddenly brought up and passed an anti-crime bill, and Senate Republicans just as promptly killed the politically charged measure with a filibuster threat.
The Senate action represented a victory for President Bush, who had faced an emboldened Democratic challenge on his handling of the economy and other social issues.
Mr.
Bush had asked that the anti-crime legislation include tougher restrictions on criminal appeals in Federal courts and looser restrictions against police searches and seizures of evidence, but his differences with Democrats on the issue had taken on broader political meaning.


Equitable Backs Plan To Go Public
Directors of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, moving to shore up the capital base of the nation's third-largest insurer, yesterday approved a plan for the company to become publicly owned.
The plan, proposed last year, would make Equitable the largest policyholder-owned company to convert to public ownership.
Access to the capital markets will allow the company to raise money to offset large losses on its junk-bond and real estate investments. 'Win-Win Situation'
The conversion is the largest element of a revitalization plan for Equitable that was begun by Richard H. Jenrette, the chief executive.


Performance Canceled
Tonight's preview performance of "The Rose Quartet," a comedy by Tom Cumella at the Circle Repertory Theater, has been canceled because of illness.
Previews are to resume tomorrow night with a replacement for the actress Anne Pitoniak.


Corrections
A report on Sunday about the marriage of Gali Freedman to Oz Ben-Amram was published in error that day and misstated the marriage date.
As noted in a correct report that appeared yesterday, the wedding was on Tuesday.


Russ Togs in Talks
Russ Togs Inc. said it was negotiating the sale, sublicense or other termination of its interest in its Diane Von Furstenberg, Diesel and Children's divisions.
The bankrupt apparel maker said on Tuesday that it had reached an agreement with its creditors, including its bank group, for $18 million in cash-collateral financing and that it would put itself up for sale.
Russ Togs, based in New York, has also hired Alan Cohen of Alco Capital Inc. to run the company until it is sold.


If You Want to Make an Understatement
MUJIRUSHI RYOHIN means "no-brand quality goods." You can call it Muji.
The Japanese chain opened its first store outside Japan in the Soho section of London in July.
It is a place for minimalists: people who like their wastepaper baskets made of corrugated cardboard and their shirts made of cotton, plain but well made, without frills, flashy colors or company emblems.


Analysts Skeptical of I.B.M.'s Plan for Independent Units
I.B.M.'s intention of restructuring as an organization of increasingly independent businesses was greeted with skepticism by analysts today.
The analysts said that I.B.M.'s greatest strength was the company's high degree of integration, and that would be hurt by selling off pieces or splitting the company.
Consequently, they doubt that any significant units will be sold or spun off.


When It Hits TV, Season Has Started
The ski season is under way.
You can tell not simply because of snow and cold weather in the mountains, but because major ski racing events are showing up on network and cable television.
Last weekend, the World Cup season started with men's slalom and giant slalom races in Park City, Utah.
Alberto Tomba won both events as well as $45,000, the largest money award in World Cup history.


Consumer Spending Drops 0.3%
The Commerce Department said yesterday that spending by American consumers, which accounts for two-thirds of the nation's economic activity, fell a sharp three-tenths of a percent in October, the biggest decline since April, when spending fell five-tenths of a percent.
Coming after two bleak assessments of consumer confidence released on Monday, the decline suggested a mood of extreme caution among shoppers at the start of the crucial holiday season.


Jets' Brim Is Making Most of His Chance
The first time Mike Brim got a chance to start at cornerback for the Jets this year it was against Buffalo in Giants Stadium Sept. 15, but he wasn't really
the
starting left cornerback for the Jets as he will be when the teams meet again on Sunday in Buffalo.
"They always come out with three receivers, so we came out with a form of the nickel," said Brim, a 6 foot, 192-pound fourth-year pro out of Virginia Union University.
"It wasn't like our dime. We opened with an extra defensive back in the game though."


Chinese Goods Listed for Higher Tariffs in Trade Dispute
The United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, proposed steep tariffs on about $1.5 billion worth of Chinese imports today, while Chinese negotiators and American importers criticized the decision to seek the trade sanctions after patent and copyright negotiations failed.
Mrs.
Hills said that the list of imports affected would be trimmed at the end of a 30-day public-comment period beginning Tuesday.
A final figure of $750 million would be "in the ballpark," she said at a news conference this morning, and a decision on whether the tariffs are imposed will be made at the end of the comment period.


A Medical Emergency That Ended Well
To the Editor:
Saturday, Oct. 23, I was waiting in line for Julia Child to sign my copy of her new book.
I began to have severe chest pains and to fall.
The people on either side kept me from hitting my head.
When I came to, the ambulance from St.
Clare's Hospital had arrived.
Someone at Barnes &amp; Noble had called.
The medical team went right into action.


Theory Links AIDS to Malaria Experiments
In a provocative hypothesis that has startled AIDS experts, an Oxford University researcher has proposed that AIDS might have entered the human population in a bizarre series of malaria experiments.
The researcher, Dr.
Charles Gilks of Oxford University and the Kenya Medical Research Institute, has discovered reports of a series of little-known malaria experiments in which people were inoculated with fresh blood from monkeys and chimpanzees.
He suggests that this blood may have infected humans with primate viruses that were the ancestors of the AIDS virus.


Oversight of Doctors Is Criticized
The way New York State disciplines doctors -- a process that led the authorities to suspend the license of a Manhattan abortionist on Monday -- has for years been described by critics as slow, cumbersome and ineffective.
Now those complaints are being raised again with the revelation that the New York State Department of Health had been investigating the abortionist, Dr.
Abu Hayat, on and off for several years.


U.S. and British Demand the 2 Libyans
The United States and Britain turned up the pressure on Libya today, demanding that it surrender two intelligence agents who have been indicted in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 in December 1988 and accept responsibility for the deaths of 270 people.
A statement by the White House and the British Government declared that Libya must hand over the agents, take "responsibility for the actions of Libyan officials," pay compensation for the bombing and furnish witnesses and evidence in the case.


Doctor Denies Mistreating Kahane After Shooting
A Bellevue Hospital Center anesthesiology resident who worked for a Jewish ambulance service denied yesterday that he mistreated Rabbi Meir Kahane after the rabbi was fatally shot last year or that he wanted him dead.
"Didn't you do everything in your power that night to see that Meir Kahane never reached Bellevue alive?" William M. Kunstler, a defense lawyer in the Kahane murder trial, asked the witness, Dr.
Steven M. Stowe.


Buchanan Sets the Date
Patrick J. Buchanan said today that he would announce on Dec. 10 whether he will challenge President Bush for the 1992 Republican Presidential nomination.
Friends and associates of the conservative columnist say he plans to run, but a spokeswoman for Mr.
Buchanan said today that no final decision had been made.
The time and place of the announcement were not scheduled.


Officials in Puerto Rico Aimed to Kill, Panel Hears
A Puerto Rico Senate committee investigating the 1978 killings of two radicals by the police has uncovered the existence of a group of Federal officials and Puerto Rican police officers whose aim was to kill advocates of independence for the island.
In the course of its inquiry, the committee has also found that the Federal Bureau of Investigation mishandled its part of the investigation of the killings.
Last week, the president of the Senate read a 1990 letter from the Director of the F.B.I., William S. Sessions, acknowledging the bureau's failures.
Mr.
Sessions said in the letter that the F.B.I. should have given greater credence to newspaper interviews with a witness who said he saw the two victims being beaten by the police before they were killed.


Officials Seek Money for Emergency Repairs to Shoreline
While New Jersey awaits an answer to its request for $72 million in Federal money to repair the damage left by an October storm that raked the shoreline, state officials are trying to find just $3.2 million to make emergency repairs before the next big storm.
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy has identified nine points along the state's 127-mile coastline where artificial and natural defenses against ocean tides and storms have been seriously damaged.
Gov.
Jim Florio asked the Governor's Advisory Council for Emergency Services this week to appropriate the money for emergency repairs.


Panel Votes to Trim Money for Train Park
The House Interior Subcommittee on National Parks and Public Lands approved legislation today that would substantially reduce the money to be spent developing a national park in an abandoned railroad yard in Scranton, Pa.
On a voice vote, the panel limited development spending to $53 million, which is $20 million less than what was originally planned for the park and about what has already been appropriated for development.
The legislation also restricts land acquisition and sets at three the number of locomotives that could be restored to operation.


Norman B. Norman, 77, Is Dead; Former Ad and Marketing Adviser
Norman B. Norman, a retired New York advertising man and marketing consultant, died on Tuesday at the Miami School of Medicine hospital in Miami.
He was 77 years old and lived in Key Largo, Fla.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Track Greats Competed at 168th Street Armory
To the Editor:
David C. Anderson's nostalgic review (Editorial Notebook, Nov. 10) of how important to track and field was the Fort Washington Armory (known more to those who followed the sport as "the 168th Street Armory") started and stopped with what the sturdy drillshed meant to scholastic participants in New York City.


Edward M. Lynch, 71, Veteran Union Leader
Edward M. Lynch, a veteran union leader who retired as international president of the National Association of Broadcast Employees and Technicians, died Friday at his home in Gaithersburg, Md.
He was 71 years old.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


U.S. Effort on Mideast Talks Founders on Israeli Holdout
The Bush Administration's effort to restart the Middle East peace negotiations is in serious trouble, senior American officials conceded tonight, but they said they were not ready to give up hope.
After a day of frantic manuevering, only the Israelis continued to resist the State Department's plan to begin substantive talks here between Israel and its neighbors on Wednesday.
Sensing an opportunity to score a propaganda coup over the Israelis, who said they would not show up until Dec. 9, Syria and the Palestinians quickly dropped their own resistance to certain aspects of the American proposals.


CHRONICLE
ELINOR C. GUGGENHEIMER vowed that she would find a man to succeed her as the president of the Child Care Action Campaign.
It took her eight years, but last week she finally passed the torch to RICHARD B. STOLLEY, the editorial director for all the Time Inc. magazines.
"It took me eight years because I care so desperately," said Mrs.
Guggenheimer, a crusader for child care since the 1930's who founded the coalition in 1983 as a research and advocacy organization.
"I wanted a man because it is about time that we have real recognition of the fact that this is a man's issue as well as a woman's," she said.
"In fact, it is more of a man's issue in this economy. Men are still in charge of industry and business, and they are depending increasingly heavily on women in the labor force."


Music Notes; Washington Opera Cancels 3 Productions
The Washington Opera announced yesterday that because its negotiations with its orchestra musicians have made no progress, it has canceled the three productions that were to have been offered at the Kennedy Center starting on Dec. 28.
Martin Feinstein, the company's general director, said the decision was made by the executive committee of the board.
The canceled productions are Offenbach's "Tales of Hoffmann," Handel's "Agrippina" and the American premiere of "The Savage Land" by the Chinese composer Jin Xiang.


Contract On Jail Plan Is in Dispute
Claiming they were unfairly disqualified from competing for a $1.9 million contract for electronic surveillance of released New York City prisoners, three companies have urged authorities to reopen the bidding process.
The BI Monitoring Corporation, which was tentatively awarded the contract on Monday, is to provide electronic ankle bracelets for monitoring inmates who have been released while awaiting trial.


U.S. Backs Competition In Satellites
After months of internal debate, the Bush Administration announced today that it would relax a longstanding restriction that prevents operators of private satellites from carrying international telephone calls.
The decision marks a compromise between the Communications Satellite Corporation, or Comsat, which staunchly defended the restriction, and a Connecticut entrepreneur, Rene V. Anselmo, who introduced the world's first privately owned international satellite in late 1988.
Mr.
Anselmo's Long Campaign
As founder of the Alpha Lyracom Corporation in Greenwich, Conn., Mr.
Anselmo has built a $30 million business based primarily on relaying television broadcasters' signals between the United States, Latin America and Europe.
Almost from the start, however, he has campaigned for permission to enter the much bigger business of carrying voice and data communications.


No Thanks: Richter's Shutout Streak Is Over
The magic finally left goaltender Mike Richter in the second period, and then his unenchanted Ranger teammates were left to fend for themselves.
They did not fare well tonight, dissipating a two-goal lead before losing to the streaking Jets, 3-2.
The loss dropped the Rangers to 2-3 on their current road trip, a mark that could have been better with a bit more staying power, and good luck, in Winnipeg Arena.


Thanksgiving
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  PARADE: Begins at 9 A.M. at 77th Street and Central Park West, then heads to Columbus Circle and down Broadway to 34th Street.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Saturday schedule, some extra service in Manhattan.
Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedule.
Metro-North on holiday schedule with some extra service.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J. Transit on Sunday schedule. CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on holiday schedule, with some extra service.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co., Chicago, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $2 billion in debt securities through Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.


Quotation of the Day
"These are people who have paid their way all their lives and are now in difficult circumstances. They are not eligible for food stamps because they have a house or a car, and they're trying to hang on so they can hunt for work. They are at the end of their rope when they ask for free food." AUDREY TRIOLO, director of the Food Bank of Lower Fairfield County.  [ B1:4. ]


Seeking Hope as the Holiday Season Begins


Years After War's Trauma, Lives of 2 Men Reconverge
Ever since he was wounded in Vietnam in the fall of 1968, the autumn months have been troubling for Kenneth J. McGarity.
Without warning, the battle scenes and sounds heard by a 19-year-old soldier come raging back, bringing tension and anxiety and a painstaking effort by Mr.
McGarity's wife, Theresa, to avoid the countless arguments they have caused over the years.


More Changes Are in Store At City Hall
Two top-level city officials have informed Mayor David N. Dinkins that they plan to leave their posts early next year as the administration approaches the midpoint of Mr.
Dinkins's term, senior administration officials say.
The two are the Deputy Mayor for Economic Development, Sally Hernandez-Pinero, and the Sanitation Commissioner, Steven M. Polan.


Light Touch for Handley Amid Troubles
All was serene in Giants land today as Coach Ray Handley laughed and wisecracked about his walkout in Monday's news conference.
That aside, all was not well.
There was good news about Jeff Hostetler, the quarterback who suffered three broken bones in his back in Sunday's 21-14 victory over the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
He left a Tampa hospital and flew home in a private plane.


A Khmer Rouge Suffers Beating By Cambodians
Cambodians screaming "murderer!" and "kill the monster!" beat and bloodied a senior Khmer Rouge leader in Phnom Penh today, only hours after he returned to the Cambodian capital under the auspices of a United Nations peace treaty, witnesses said.
The leader and other Khmer Rouge officials later fled to Thailand.
The attack put in jeopardy the fragile international peace plan for Cambodia, and left the 60-year-old Khmer Rouge figure, Khieu Samphan, dazed and bleeding from the head after the four-hour assault by dozens of Cambodians on a white brick villa that was to be his new Phnom Penh residence.
Rescued by Soldiers
Mr.
Khieu Samphan, Cambodia's titular leader during the first part of the reign of terror by the Communist Khmer Rouge in the late 1970's, was rescued by soldiers and police officers carrying riot shields and assault rifles.
Witnesses reported that the enraged assailants had strung wire through a ceiling fan in the villa and were preparing to hang Mr.
Khieu Samphan.


In the Nation; Bypassing Congress
There may be an ominous link between White House efforts to reinterpret the Civil Rights Act of 1991 and President Bush's veto of the so-called "gag rule" bill for doctors practicing in federally financed clinics.
Congress first authorized such clinics in 1970, though it specifically banned use of Federal funds to perform abortions.
Nearly two decades later, in 1988, the Reagan Administration issued a new interpretation of the 1970 legislation, ruling that doctors in the clinics could not even discuss abortion with a pregnant woman, or refer her to a doctor who could.


Analyzing Freud's Menorah
A BRASS menorah, made in the 13th century and once owned by Sigmund Freud, is on view through Feb. 12 in the exhibit "The Sigmund Freud Antiquities: Fragments from a Buried Past" at the Jewish Museum at the New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West at 77th Street.


ISRAELIS REJECT DATE SET BY U.S.
In a blunt and somewhat surprising challenge to the United States, Israel today rejected an American call for a new round of peace negotiations in Washington next week.
It proposed instead that the talks be delayed for five days and then moved quickly to a new site in or near the Middle East.
The Israeli Government offered a concession on one important matter, saying that it was prepared to discuss substantive issues right away with Palestinians and neighboring Arab countries, and not confine the Washington talks merely to procedural questions, as previously demanded.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about a rape complaint by a man who visited a Barnard College dormitory misstated the New York State law on sodomy.
While forcible sodomy is illegal, sodomy between consenting adults is not, as a result of a 1980 ruling by the State Court of Appeals.


Sailing Through a Skyful of Thanksgiving Reveries; Dreamlike Hollywood Celebration
WHEN I was a child growing up in Hollywood, Thanksgiving was Passover with food I liked better.


Inspired Penguins Honor Johnson
About an hour before the Pittsburgh Penguins and the New Jersey Devils squared off inside the Civic Arena tonight, a game the inspired Penguins would win, 8-4, R. J. Woods, a 49-year-old musician from the local area, sat outside the arena with a trumpet beneath an electronic sign that read, "Bob Johnson: 1931-1991."
With a freezing wind blowing through his hair, Woods, his face partly hidden beneath a high collar that helped keep him warm, lifted the trumpet to his lips and began playing "Amazing Grace."


Whatever Foie Gras Is for Humans, It's Murder for the Geese
To the Editor:
"Can Foie Gras Aid the Heart? A French Scientist Says Yes" (front page, Nov. 17) quickly dismisses concerns about the treatment of the ducks and geese.
One farmer claims that the process of causing fatty livers in ducks and geese is natural because birds, before migration, develop fatty livers to store energy.
She further claims that since her ducks "don't run away from me," she can't be mistreating them.


McRae's 'Technical' Violations
A spokesman for Syracuse University said yesterday that Conrad McRae, the basketball team's 6-foot-10-inch center, had been declared ineligible to play basketball by the National Collegiate Athletic Association on Tuesday because of minor rules violations that occurred during the course of his recruitment.
"There were four violations of what I'd call a technical nature," said Robert Hill, the university's spokesman.
He refused to elaborate.


Colombia Judges Call Strike To Protest Killing of 7 Aides
Colombia's judges declared an indefinite protest strike, and army and police units around the capital were placed on maximum alert today after guerrillas killed seven judicial officials and a police officer.
The police blamed the Marxist Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces for ambushing a convoy carrying judicial officials on Tuesday.
The aides were going to investigate a murder in Usme, six miles from Bogota.


Student Held in Gun Case
A 15-year-old student at Eastern District High School in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn was arrested yesterday after a school security officer saw him handing a fully loaded semi-automatic pistol to another student in the school cafeteria, the police said.
The guard and another security officer seized the gun from the student, the police said, and two police officers arrived and took the youth into custody.
He was not identified because he is a minor.
Eastern District is one of 16 city high schools participating in a metal-detector program, but yesterday was not one of the days when screening was to take place at the school, officials said.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Rickie Lee Jones  Carnegie Hall
As much as any other contemporary singer and songwriter, Rickie Lee Jones has a Beat poet's intoxication with the sound as well as the meaning of words, especially when those words describe a private romantic universe that is almost impossible to verbalize.


JUDGE HALTS DUMP FOR ATOMIC WASTE
A Federal District Court Judge on Tuesday issued an injunction that indefinitely barred Energy Secretary James D. Watkins from opening the nation's first permanent repository for nuclear wastes.
The action by Judge John Garrett Penn comes six weeks after New Mexico was joined by Texas and four environmental groups in a lawsuit filed here that said Mr.
Watkins violated Federal law by seeking to open the repository in New Mexico without Congressional approval.


Suffolk County Legislators Approve Tax Increase
HAUPPAUGE, L.I., Nov. 27 --
Suffolk County legislators, who promised earlier this month that they would hold the lid on taxes, approved a $35.7 million property tax increase early today after nine hours of debate.
The increase will avert a cash-flow crisis and help cover checks to welfare clients and county employees through the end of of the year.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Richie Sambora  The Academy
The guitarist Richie Sambora, on leave from the metal heavyweight group Bon Jovi, squeezed an entire arena rock show into the theater-size Academy on Tuesday night.
There were laser lights in a palette of hues and a drum riser that practically scraped the ceiling.
There were smoke machines and back lighting that silhouetted the members of Mr.
Sambora's band.
There were even special light patterns for Mr.
Sambora's guitar solos.
During the guitar breaks in "Church of Desire," from his recent solo album "Stranger in This Town" (Polygram), the lights began flashing at a frenetic speed.
Mr.
Sambora first played an orange solo, then a pink one.


Synod of Bishops to Discuss Eastern Europe
For the first time since the fall of Communism broadened religious freedoms in Eastern Europe, Pope John Paul II will open a Synod of Bishops on Thursday, called to discuss the future the Roman Catholic church in the former East bloc and to promote the Pope's vision of a Christian revival spreading from the Atlantic to the Urals.
In some ways the discussions mirror the continuing political debate over the new relationship between East and West Europe now that the Iron Curtain between them has fallen.


Indian March Marks Bittersweet Holiday
Hundreds of American Indians and their supporters marched, chanted and danced up Central Park West last night in a parade meant to commemorate what is to them a bittersweet holiday.
"The first Thanksgiving was all right," said 47-year-0ld Bill Wasden, an Indian from British Columbia who took part in the parade.
"It started to fall apart after that."


Where Hallway Shootings Erupted, Teachers Are Afraid
At the insistence of teachers, New York City school officials agreed yesterday to continue to provide tighter security at Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn on Monday, one week after a shooting in a hallway there left a student dead and a teacher wounded.
The teacher, Robert Anderson, 48 years old, a computer instructor, was listed in satisfactory condition at Brookdale Hospital in Brooklyn, where he is recovering from a bullet wound to his neck.


In Medicaid Vote, Congress Limits How States Can Pay
Congress today passed legislation that sets new ground rules for the financing of Medicaid, severely restricting the states' use of certain taxes and other devices to pay for the health care of 27 million poor people.
The bill follows the contours of an agreement negotiated last week by the Bush Administration and the National Governors' Association, which lobbied for the bill in the hope that it would slow the explosive growth of Medicaid.


Most Basques Condemn Political Violence
To the Editor:
My respect for your newspaper and its readers dates back to my days as correspondent in New York City for Barcelona's La Vanguardia and Madrid's ABC, and continues undiminished in my present capacity as president of the International Press Center in Barcelona.
I would like to correct several inaccuracies in "Basques, Too, Want a Peace Conference" (letter, Nov. 18).


U.S. and Iran Sign a Compensation Pact
The United States and Iran have reached agreement on compensation of $278 million to Teheran for undelivered Iranian-owned, American-made military equipment dating from before the 1979 Islamic revolution, State Department officials said today.
The long-awaited agreement was signed on Tuesday at the special United States-Iran Claims Tribunal in The Hague.
Under its terms, Washington will turn over a check for $260 million to the Iranian Government.


Congress Restricts Robot Phone Dialers
Riding a wave of popular annoyance over telephone sales calls, Congress today approved and sent to President Bush a bill that would ban the use of automated dialing devices that deliver recorded messages to the home.
The measure would also allow consumers to try to block calls from human salespeople by placing their names on a "do not call" list.
The bill, which passed on voice votes in the House on Monday and in the Senate today, was supported by both Democrats and Republicans, some of whom have recounted their own annoying experiences with unsolicited sales calls.
Although the White House has expressed concerns about what it views as unnecessary regulation, the President has not threatened to veto the bill.


Back Surgery Sidelines Divac 6 to 8 Weeks
Three weeks after their All-Star guard, MAGIC JOHNSON, announced his retirement, the Los Angeles Lakers lost another starter when VLADE DIVAC, their 7-foot-1-inch center, underwent surgery yesterday for a herniated disk in his lower back.
He will be out a minimum of six to eight weeks.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 9 about a panel that will study New York City's hospitals referred imprecisely to its makeup.
It includes one hospital official, Dr.
Sterling B. Williams Jr., chairman of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Harlem Hospital.
The article also referred incorrectly to the organization headed by the panel's chairman, Dr.
Jeremiah A. Barondess.
It is the New York Academy of Medicine.


Small British Brewers Make a Dent
Keith Thomas swirls a dark brown liquid in a pint glass, inhales the aroma and lets out a sigh of approval as if the bouquet were that of a fine wine.
To Dr.
Thomas, a 39-year-old microbiologist with a beer-making sideline, the beer is better than a vintage wine.
But, then, he made it.


American Women In Final In Soccer
In a plain stadium where a loudspeaker boomed out rousing Chinese folksongs, the United States women's soccer team defeated the German team tonight, 5-2, and won the right to take America into its first world championship soccer match.
Having reached the final of the first women's soccer championship, the United States team now has a chance to bring home a new trophy, and create a new image for American soccer.


Remembering the Neediest in a Difficult Time
Last year at this time Alberto R.'s biggest worry was Christmas presents.
Then he lost his job.
Then came a winter without new coats for his wife and three children, macaroni in place of meat, months of a futile search for work and then -- inevitably, it seemed -- an eviction notice.
At his lowest moment he silently pleaded, "All I want is a hand to bring me up." He was desperate enough to try anything, the 44-year-old Manhattan resident recalled last week.
"Anything to keep my home, anything to stay off welfare."


Premiere of Documentary
A documentary film exploring the 45-year collaboration between the composer John Cage and the choreographer Merce Cunningham is to receive its New York premiere on Wednesday at the Anthology Film Archives, 32 Second Avenue, at Second Street, Manhattan.
The 95-minute film, "Cage/Cunningham," was directed by Elliot Caplan.
It is to run through Dec. 29.
Tickets are $6; $5 for students and the elderly; $4 for Anthology Film Archives members.
Information: (212) 505-5181.


Carnegie Opens a Gift Shop
Carnegie Hall has opened its first gift shop, adjacent to the recently opened museum on the first-tier level of the building.
The shop is open to the public 7 days a week from 11 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., and to concertgoers from 30 minutes before concerts through intermission.
Items for sale include mugs, aprons, tote bags, note cards, T-shirts, beach towels, music boxes, jewelry, Christmas tree ornaments and compact discs of live recordings made in the hall.
Prices range from $1 to $150.
The entrance is at 154 West 57th Street.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing in some editions of Business Day yesterday misidentified the advertising agency that will handle media buying for Modell's Sporting Goods, New York.
It is Maramedia, with headquarters in Old Bethpage, L.I., and Manhattan.


Islanders' Ice Gets Thin
A little more than a month ago, when the Islanders made major, multiplayer trades with Buffalo and Chicago, they sent away their two best centers, Pat LaFontaine and Brent Sutter.
Among the six players they acquired were Pierre Turgeon from the Sabres and Adam Creighton from the Blackhawks, two established centers.
Although not quite the equal of the tandem they replaced, they seemed more than adequate, especially when both got respectable amounts of goals and assists in their first few games.


Prices of Treasury Issues Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed yesterday, as credit market participants sifted through seemingly conflicting economic reports and worried that policy makers in Washington might return after Thanksgiving to consider quick passage of a package to stimulate the economy.
Reports that upset traders early in the session included news from the Labor Department that initial unemployment claims fell by a larger than expected 80,000 during the week ended Nov. 16, and that new orders for durable goods rose by 3 percent during October, the first increase in three months.


Pop and Jazz in Review
King Missile  Maxwell's
Before King Missile started its set on Saturday night, the lead singer, John S. Hall, held a question-and-answer session.
Audience members raised their hands, and if Mr.
Hall called on them, they were allowed to ask random, pointless questions like "What is the fastest land animal?" and "Where is Damascus?" It was just like an elementary-school classroom.


Small-Town Cinema Chain Thrives
Michael W. Patrick has not set foot in Hollywood in five years and most big city moviegoers will never get near one of his theaters.
But in this out-of-the-way mill town on the Chattahoochee River, he has created one of the most unlikely success stories in the movie theater business.
While most big chains have scaled down their expansion plans, Mr.
Patrick's Carmike Cinemas Inc., North America's fifth-largest exhibitor in terms of the number of screens it operates, has doubled its screen count during the last three years.
By catering to customers in places like Ponca City, Okla., and Nacogdoches, Tex., rather than New York City or Los Angeles, Carmike has become the Wal-Mart of the theater business.


Review/Pop; A Dominican Sound With a Broad Appeal
Waving Dominican flags and white handkerchiefs, clapping in the syncopated clave rhythm, shouting and singing along, the audience at the Paramount welcomed Juan Luis Guerra y 440 as heroes when they opened a sold-out three-night engagement on Tuesday.
Mr.
Guerra and 440, his backup vocalists, have become international hit-makers, topping the charts across the Caribbean, South America and Spain with pop songs that show off their ties to local Dominican tradition.
By mixing city and country styles, putting well-turned melodies atop kinetic dance rhythms and writing playful, ingenious lyrics, Mr.
Guerra has forged pop songs that delight outsiders while reminding Dominicans of home.
The singer was a cheerful but oddly reticent figure on stage, dressed in black with changing accessories and rarely speaking between songs.
A head taller than the two men and one woman of 440, he danced along with them or plucked an imaginary bass guitar, looking studious while they grinned and twirled.


Calendar: Dollhouses To Reality
House Tour and Boutique
Reeves-Reed Arboretum, 165 Hobart Avenue off Route 24, Summit, N.J.; (908) 273-8787.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Mexican Government's plan to transform agriculture referred incorrectly to the town mentioned in the opening paragraphs.
It is Tepalcingo.


Flat Bellies Count, But Not Totally
"YOU have to think about making exercise accessible," said Liz Oliver, the president of Apex, a new exercise studio on the Upper East Side.


Sailing Through A Skyful of Thanksgiving Reveries
THESE are some of the things that come to mind when some people think of Thanksgiving: starchy Pilgrims wearing weird hats with big buckles; hearty helpings of turkey with all the trimmings eaten in laughter-filled kitchens crowded with loving relatives.
These are the things that come to mind when
I
think of Thanksgiving: starchy Pilgrims wearing weird hats with big buckles; less than bountiful portions of turkey accompanied by strange stuff eaten in noisy restaurants with glum-looking strangers.
Please understand: it's not that my mother couldn't cook (actually, except for the limpest broccoli known to man, she could be quite good when she set her mind to it); it's just that she found more joy in cleaning and scrubbing the floor.
And since we were only four (three until my sister was born) and the turkeys were huge, my father would announce that our holiday meal would surely be better served if we
ate out!
Which was fine with me because I always found Thanksgiving the biggest of bores including that song we sang in school -- "the glory of the turkey is the drumstick and the glory of the pumpkin is the pie."


Essay; Langley Greets Lubyanka
Five months ago, as he was plotting the coup to seize power from the isolated Gorbachev, K.G.B. chairman Vladimir Kryuchkov invited members of our C.I.A. to Moscow.
The C.I.A., presumably after checking with President Bush, agreed to send a delegation to its rival service.
From July 27 to Aug. 7, a team of three U.S. intelligence officers led by a senior C.I.A. official met with an aide to the K.G.B. chairman.


White House Memo; In Scripts For Bush, Questions On Images
Of the last two Presidents, one is widely regarded as a master of the unrehearsed news conference who delights in sparring with the most aggressive members of the press.
The other was viewed as a genial politician who excelled at reading speeches, but frequently tripped when forced to think on his feet.
Question: Which of the two has many of his exchanges with ordinary citizens scripted by aides so that questions are known in advance and answers are readily at hand?


U. of Bridgeport Dismisses Law Dean
The dean of the University of Bridgeport School of Law was dismissed today, as the struggling university, nearly out of money, began fighting to block the law school's plans to affiliate with another institution.
But the dean, Terence H. Benbow, refused to accept the letter of termination held out to him by President Edwin G. Eigel, who had come to Mr.
Benbow's office to dismiss him.
And he refused to obey Mr.
Eigel's order to leave.


INSIDE
Shoppers Showing Caution
Consumer spending, which accounts for two-thirds of the nation's economic activity, fell a sharp three-tenths of a percent in October, the biggest drop since April.
Page D1. 2 Leaving Dinkins Team
A deputy mayor and a commissioner have told Mayor David N. Dinkins that they plan to leave their posts early next year.
Page B1.
To Have and Have Not
Some have food, clothing and shelter; others have not.
Today many parents will try to explain why to their children.
The Home Section, page C1.
U.S.
Women in Soccer Final
The United States women's soccer team defeated Germany, 5-2, and has a chance to bring home the first world trophy for women.
Page B21.


EXECUTIVES
*
Circle K Corp., Phoenix, a convenience store company, named Mitch Telson executive vice president of operations. *
First Interstate Bank of California, Los Angeles, a subsidiary of First Interstate Bancorp, named James Shoaff senior vice president in the management reporting-finance division.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.68
4.52
7.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.39
4.40
7.07
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.44
4.46
7.02
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.99
6.99
8.17
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.96
7.93
8.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.94
8.94
9.66
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.90
6.90
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Dance; 3 Works Highlight Balanchine's Musical Partners
George Balanchine established a dialectic with the music he used in his ballets, and it was this activist response to a score that gave his choreography such a distinctive profile.
He did not, as his early detractors insisted, merely visualize musical structure onstage with patterns or dancers.
Balanchine's genius lay elsewhere: in commenting on the music as he explored it, to reveal aspects that others would not have imagined.
The give and take between composer and choreographer explains the subliminal tension between music and dance in Balanchine's ballets.


Raymond Smith Willis, Professor, 84
Dr.
Raymond Smith Willis, emeritus professor of Spanish at Princeton University, died on Sunday at his home in Jamesburg, N.J.
He was 84 years old.
Dr. Willis died of heart failure, the university said.


Data Delayed By Maxwell
The Maxwell Communication Corporation announced today that it was postponing the release of its financial results, which had been scheduled for Thursday.
In London trading, the company's stock price plunged by 10 pence, or 18.2 percent, to close at 45 pence (79.7 cents).
Investors have been nervously waiting to hear if Maxwell Communication would cut or eliminate its dividend and to get more information on the heavily indebted company's financial health and divestiture plans.


U.S. Base Is an Oasis To Haitians
In a dusty clearing ringed by double rows of concertina wire and patrolled by armed American guards, scores of Haitian refugees stood in long lines for lunch today at an emergency camp being built here to guard their welfare.
"We don't know how long we'll be here, but we know we can't go back" to Haiti, said Celius Pierre Williams, a 39-year-old math teacher, voicing a sentiment loudly seconded by several young men clustered around him.
"The army would kill us."


CHRONICLE
Abbie Hoffman, the antiwar protester who symbolized radical activism of the 1960's, would have been 55 years old on Saturday, so JILL SEIDEN, a longtime friend, and JOHANNA LAWRENSON, who lived with him for 15 years and said she married him in several ceremonies, are planning a party.
Mr.
Hoffman killed himself in April 1989.
"We decided that he should be remembered," Ms.
Seiden said.


For Your Very Own Eiffel Tower, Roses, of Course
JEAN-PAUL BEAUJARD is the very image of the sophisticated Paris-New York commuter, though these days he seems to be spending a little more time in Paris than New York, where for the last 20 years he has been an antiques dealer and interior decorator.


Dinkins Has a Meeting With the President
Mayor David N. Dinkins met with President Bush at the White House yesterday.
The Mayor said later that they discussed the plight of Haitian refugees, the volume of AIDS cases in New York City and why the Mayor believes that major cities need more Federal aid.
"I pointed out to him, as go the cities, so goes the country," Mr.
Dinkins said, adding that the President did not disagree.
But Mr.
Dinkins noted that Mr.
Bush did not agree, either.


Cinema Verite Radio Comes to the Home Screen
This time the famous, mesmerizing voice was on the telephone; apparently Garrison Keillor didn't have time for a face-to-face conversation.
No wonder: suddenly, he seems to be everywhere at once.
He is on the radio on Saturday nights (though tomorrow's show is a rerun).
He is in bookstores as part of a nationwide tour promoting his novel "WLT: A Radio Romance" (Viking).
And tonight he will be on television, with "Garrison Keillor's Home," the first of three specials on PBS.
The television show is a glimpse of "A Prairie Home Companion," the radio variety program that Mr.
Keillor did for 13 years from St.
Paul.
That program was a folksy weekly cavalcade that immortalized Lake Wobegon -- a made-up place that he chronicled in a monologue midway through each broadcast -- as "the town that time forgot, that the decades cannot improve, where all the women are strong, all the men are good-looking and all the children are above average."


Review/Television; Lively Portrait of a Disappearing Sect
The prospect of a television retrospective is usually about as inviting as a banquet of warmed-over fast food.
But occasionally the distinction is merited, and such an occasion is at hand.
Inspired by a retrospective of Ken Burns's work at the Walker Art Museum in Minneapolis, PBS is bringing back four early documentaries by the creator of "The Civil War." The first, his 1985 hourlong program "The Shakers: Hands to Work, Hearts to God," can be seen tonight at 10 on Channel 13 and is very much worth a second, or first, look.
"The Shakers" displays many of the elements that would make "The Civil War" so accomplished and rewarding a series.
There is the mastery of the camera in bringing the past to life by the graceful merging of grainy old stills and carefully framed new pictures; the use of diaries, letters and music to evoke the feelings of another time; the well-edited interviews and straightforward narration (delivered as usual by David McCullough), and, most affecting, the respect and affection for America's past.


A New Road for Transportation
Some frantic last-minute horse trading was necessary before Congress finally approved a transportation bill.
But the result justified the struggle.
The bill dramatically, and for the most part sensibly, refocuses national transportation policy for the first time since the Interstate System of highways was launched 35 years ago.
The bill is bigger and better than President Bush wanted, but he has agreed to it.
Given the uncertain state of the nation's economy, he had little choice if he hoped to escape blame for slowing the recovery.
Prolonged Congressional haggling has already delayed work on dozens of projects.


RESULTS PLUS
HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL  Catholic AA Title  James Knight threw one touchdown pass and ran for another score as the Mountaineers clinched the Catholic High Schools Football League's Division AA title yesterday by crushing Cardinal Hayes, 34-0, at Columbia.
It was the 11th consecutive year Mount St.
Michael (7-3) had defeated Hayes (4-6) on Thanksgiving Day.
The Mountaineers hold a 24-17-5 series advantage over the Cardinals.
Hayes kept it interesting in the first half and allowed only one touchdown, on a 26-yard run by Nate Adams (5 rushes for 67 yards in the game).
But Mount St.
Michael opened the second half with a 71-yard three-play drive that was capped with a 27-yard option run by Knight.
Mount St.
Michael didn't score again until the first play of the fourth quarter, when Chris Mayo (11 carries for 79 yards) walked it in from 1-yard out.
Midway through the fourth quarter, Mount St.
Michael recovered a Hayes fumble to set up a 21-yard scoring strike from Knight to Carl Shaw.
Shaw found the end zone again (45-yard run) after Hayes muffed a punt to complete the rout.
Xavier 24, Fordham Prep 13: Ken Ritter (18 carries for 93 yards) ran for two touchdowns and Thomas Lee (17 carries for 84 yards) and Alan Booth (7 carries for 24 yards) each scored a touchdown to help Xavier (4-6) slip past Fordham Prep (5-5-1).
The game marked the 65th consecutive year the two teams had met on Thanksgiving.
Their rivalrly is the oldest in the city, dating to 1905.
Iona Prep 40, New Rochelle 21: Phil Sapione (16 carries for 63 yards) rushed for three touchdowns and Brian Cummings (8 of 12 for 161 yards) threw one and ran for another to help power Iona Prep (5-4) past New Rochelle (3-5-1).
Iona scored on four of its first five possessions and led, 27-0, at halftime.
New Rochelle got on the scoreboard at the start of the third quarter when Ricky Sullins ran the ball in from 4 yards out.
But on Iona's next possession, Cummings scored on a 13-yard run.
New Rochelle countered with a William Whitfield touchdown.
But Peter Gerosa put the game away when he recovered a fumble and ran in for a score.
Midwood 34, John Jay 0: Tremain Darby (3 carries for 132 yards) scored on a 67-yard double reverse and rushed 17 yards for another as Midwood (5-5-1) trounced John Jay (4-3-1).
Eddy Zeva kicked two field goals, including a 46-yarder and converted 4 extra points.
COLLEGE FOOTBALL  Texas A&amp;M Wins  Texas A&amp;M's Kevin Smith returned a punt 73 yards to break open a fierce defensive duel and lead the Aggies to a 31-14 victory over Texas last night in College Station, Tex.
The Aggies (10-1, 8-0 Southwest Conference) will play Florida State in Cotton Bowl on New Year's Day.
Texas A&amp;M's defense, ranked first in the nation, held Texas (5-6, 4-4) in check.
With the Aggies leading by 17-7, Smith gave the Aggies breathing room with 5 minutes 59 seconds left in the third period when he fielded a punt, made a move to his right and darted 73 yards for the touchdown. (AP) HORSE RACING  Senor Speedy Wins  Senor Speedy, who stumbled at the start, recovered in time for a one-length victory yesterday in the Sports Page Handicap at Aqueduct.
Owned by Robert M. Perez, the favored Senor Speedy rallied in the stretch to win over Shuttleman and seven others.
Ridden by Jorge Chavez, Senor Speedy ran the six furlongs in 1:091/5 for his third victory in 15 starts this year.
Gallant Step, ridden by Carlos Marquez, was third, 5 1/2 lengths behind Shuttleman, ridden by Angel Cordero.
The 4-year-old Senor Speedy last won on Oct. 13 in the Boojum Stakes.
He returned $5.60, $4 and $2.80 for $2 across the board.
TENNIS  Woodforde Advances  Mark Woodforde fought back repeatedly with piercing ground strokes yesterday to defeat third-seeded Jakob Hlasek, 7-5, 2-6, 7-6 (7-3), in the South African Open in Johannesburg.
Top-seeded Petr Korda narrowly avoided an upset by Grant Stafford, winning, 2-6, 7-6 (7-5), 6-3.
Fourth-seeded Anders Jarryd swept past Robbie Koenig of South Africa,6-3, 6-3.
N.H.L. 19th Goal for Hull Brett Hull scored his 19th goal to pull into a tie with Quebec's Owen Nolan for the league lead as the Blues defeated the Nordiques, 5-2, last night in St.
Louis.
Also scoring for the Blues were Dave Christian, Brendan Shanahan, Rich Sutter and Nelson Emerson.
Scoring for the Nordiques were Greg Paslawski and Claude Lapointe Curtis Joseph made 32 saves for St.
Louis.
Flames 5, Kings 3: Theoren Fleury scored a goal and added three assists as Calgary beat visiting Los Angeles.
Paul Ranheim, Gary Roberts, Robert Reichel and Mark Habscheid also scored for theFlames.
Habscheid and Reichel both scored on the power play.
Tony Granato scored two goals and Jari Kurri had a power-play goal for the Kings.


Major Drought Is Feared As Reservoirs Hit Lows
Facing the worst water shortages in more than a decade, with the sprawling Catskills reservoirs looking more like prairies than lakes, officials in the New York metropolitan area prepared last week to declare a drought emergency.
Then it poured.
That was good news for the city, the northern suburbs that share its water and many communities in New Jersey and on Long Island.
But public health experts say the rain will do little to deflect an inevitable reckoning.
While portions of the region have all the water they could possibly require, many others have entered dry spells so severe that only torrential rains or a series of blizzards will prevent a withering drought.


The President's Inept Tax Plan
Desperate.
Inept.
Unpresidential.
Pick your own adjective for Mr.
Bush's 24-hour turnabout on tax cuts.
Last week he said he would wait until next year's State of the Union address to outline a tax cut plan that would spur the sagging economy.
Monday night he gave lukewarm endorsement to tax cuts proposed by Representative Newt Gingrich, the House Republican whip.
By Tuesday night, lukewarm had become wholehearted: Mr.
Bush called on Congress to pass, hours before it was scheduled to adjourn, a tax cut bill not even written yet.
Mr.
Bush's leap to legislative madness invites suspicion that his calculations were driven by politics, not economics.
The tax cuts he lauds won't stimulate instant spending but would bury the economy under mountains of future debt.
Indeed, the President would be hard pressed to draw up a sillier plan to fight the recession.


Art In Review
Yasumasa Morimura  Luhring Augustine Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Dec. 21
Yasumasa Morimura continues to blend East and West in these new examples of his elaborate photographic tableaux, in which he inserts himself into masterpieces by artists like Rembrandt, Millet and Rossetti.
Where before Mr.
Morimura typically took paintings with only a single figure as his starting point, here he re-creates a number of works that feature veritable crowd scenes, among them Goya's "Third of May, 1808" (1814-15), in which a line of French soldiers fires upon a group of citizens of Madrid.
Mr.
Morimura plays all the roles in these images himself, as well as making the costumes and props.
He then uses a computer to blend the various figures into the background of the original painting.


Houston Shows the Fight Inside, Too
Byron Houston has a powerful body that enables him to muscle and maneuver his way past defenders for easy baskets.
The Oklahoma State forward is brutish and bullish in the paint.
When he gets the ball, look out.
In build and voice, the 6-foot-7-inch, 250-pound Houston resembles Mike Tyson.
Houston talks so softly about his antics on the court that it is hard to imagine his reputation as one of the dirtiest players in the country, a charge he vehemently disputes.


Bridge
A father-and-son combination led into the two final sessions of the Blue Ribbon Pair Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here today.
Richard Pavlicek Sr. and Richard Pavlicek Jr. of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., were a board and a half ahead of their nearest rivals at the end of semifinal play on Wednesday.
The father has won many national titles, and may be challenging for world honors next summer, and his 21-year-old son is moving rapidly up the tournament ladder.
Zia Mahmood of New York City, who had won the first two major events, failed to qualify for the Blue Ribbon final, ending his dream of a tournament sweep.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Government's top auditor says the money provided by Congress to handle the banking crisis may not be enough.
Charles Bowsher, the Comptroller General, said the $70 billion in new taxpayer loans approved on Wednesday could be completely used up by the failure of just one of the nation's largest banks.
Existing accounting standards have enabled banks to conceal huge amounts of potential liabilities, he said.  [ Page D1. ]  When it comes to winning friends in Washington, these are not great days for bankers.  [ D3. ]


CHRONICLE
The dancer JACQUES D'AMBOISE came to realize, he says, that with the dearth of Government and private financing for the arts, "the best resources that artists have is each other." So he turned to his colleagues for help.


Camembert Journal; The Message to Europe: Don't Mess With Cheese
In the normally placid valleys around the village of Camembert, the damp air is stirring with preparations for a battle between bacteria and bureaucrats.
Angry charges are being fired at far-off city people who are accused of wanting to drive the flavor out of life, squelch aroma, assassinate the character of cheeses and threaten a united Europe with a dull blanket of sameness.


In Guilty Plea, Father Admits Role in Son's Death
The father of Yaakov Riegler, an 8-year-old boy whose mother has been charged with beating him to death, has pleaded guilty to endangering the child's welfare.
Under a plea bargain, the father, Moses Riegler, 37, was placed on three years' probation.
During that time, he is barred from seeking custody of the couple's other four children, who are under foster care, although he can visit them under supervision, said Patrick B. Clark, a spokesman for the Brooklyn District Attorney.


CHRONICLE
These days, stores start decking out for Christmas before you can say Halloween.
But come Thanksgiving, the season revs up in earnest.


VIOLATIONS SEEN IN YUGOSLAV TRUCE
A cease-fire in the war between Croats and Serbs agreed to last weekend was still being violated today in various parts of Croatia but fighting had lessened noticeably in comparison to previous days.
There was only small-arms fire exchanged around the besieged city of Osijek and mortar shells lobbed around Nova Gradiska in Western Slavonia.


An Alternative to Football: the Interfaith Service
Like the local high school football game and the family turkey dinner, the interfaith service, which brings Catholics, Protestants and Jews together for community worship, has become a great, if unheralded, American Thanksgiving tradition.
Take the Hollender family of New Rochelle.
This morning as the men of the family went off to watch New Rochelle High School face off against Iona Prep at McKenna Football Field, the women were off to the Community Thanksgiving Service at St.
Simon's Episcopal Church.


Flip Side in Hoboken
Patty Dellatorre discovered why her friends talked up Hoboken's nightlife on her first visit here two weeks ago.
On a late Friday night, the sidewalks were full, the pubs were packed and the mood was as giddy as a fraternity party.
"It's a fun place to hang out," said the 21-year-old, who danced on a bar and won a trophy for her efforts.
Ms.
Dellatore, who lives in Ridgefield Park in Bergen County, has since decided to make Hoboken a regular weekend event -- and she has plenty of company.
On weekend nights thousands of young people descend by the carload on this mile-square city of 33,000 people, coming from nearby towns and counties, as well as Brooklyn and Queens, and swelling the population by 2,500 to 10,000.


From Diffident Youth to Student Advocate
When he came to America from his native South Korea nine years ago, Won So's English was so poor that he could not summon the words or the courage to ask his third-grade teacher for permission to go to the bathroom.
"I would always run to my father's store after school to use the toilet," said Mr.
So, now a loquacious 18-year-old senior at Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan.
"That always makes me laugh."


People
*
Peter Gibb, 42 years old, and Richard Kelley, 38, have been promoted to executive vice presidents and senior creative directors at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, from senior vice presidents and creative directors.


Ellen Butler Wed in London
Ellen Pardee Butler, the daughter of Allan C. Butler of New York and the late Augustine Shaw Butler, was married at the Chelsea Registry in London yesterday to Martin Smeaton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Smeaton of Church Eaton, Staffordshire, England.
Mrs.
Smeaton, an artist, graduated from the London Central School of Art and Design.
She is 39 years old.
Her husband, 42, a sculptor, graduated from St.
Martin's School of Art in London.


Father Battles State Over Comatose Daughter
Eleven months after the death of Nancy Cruzan closed the books on a bitter Supreme Court fight, lawyers for the State of Missouri are in court again to block a parent from making a decision of life or death for a brain-damaged daughter.
Since a traffic accident four-and-a-half years ago left her in a coma, Christine Busalacchi, 21 years old, has been kept alive with a feeding tube.
Doctors refused her family's request to have the tube removed almost a year ago although she was in a vegetative state.


Beijing's Subtle Nuclear Diplomacy
China does not share the sense of urgency that the U.S., South Korea and Japan feel about heading off a North Korean nuclear weapons program.
But despite appearances, both sides are not in dispute over the issue.
The gap between them reflects several things: how China's policy is evolving, the dilemma Beijing faces in trying to separate its messages to domestic and foreign audiences, and its attempt to appear to be the Communist world's last great bastion.
Surprisingly, nobody here says China has different information than Washington does on how near North Korea is to producing a bomb.
On the contrary, a senior official said Beijing had learned little from Pyongyang directly and that most of what it knows comes from U.S. sources.
But that information has been tightly held inside China's officialdom.
Those who don't possess that information have not been discouraged from arguing that Washington is exaggerating and trying "to bully, as it usually does" to line up support from others for its stand.
Apparently, China's top authorities don't want lower-level officials to know about U.S. cooperation on this sensitive issue.


Catholic Synod Cites Judaism's Role in Europe
Roman Catholic bishops from both sides of the former Iron Curtain began a European synod today with an unexpected acknowledgement of Judaism's contribution to the Continent's development.
The synod opened with a solemn Mass in the soaring Basilica of St.
Peter's at which Pope John Paul ll urged the 136 bishops to find ways to restore what the church calls Europe's Christian roots after the fall of Communism.


H.M.O.'s Are Thinking People's Medical Care
To the Editor:
Toby Cohen's "Health Care and the Class Struggle" (Op-Ed, Nov. 17) is long on sarcasm and innuendo, short on fact and analysis, and false in its basic premises.


Europe Is Expected to Move More Slowly on Ukraine; Poland Backs Ukraine Ties
Poland, which shares a border and a bitter wartime past with the Ukraine, said today that it plans to grant diplomatic recognition quickly if the Soviet republic votes for independence this Sunday.
"We know how our friends and partners in the international community regard this issue, and we think in the same way," said Wladyslaw Klacynski, a spokesman for the Foreign Ministry.
"The effect of this vote will the same."


The Main Attractions Were Skyward


Who Should Be Vaccinated
Federal health officials advise influenza vaccination for anyone over 6 months old, but particularly for these groups:
*People 65 or older.


CENSUS IN NIGERIA HALTS NORMAL LIFE
Nigeria closed its borders, shut down shops and factories, and ordered tens of millions of people to stay home this week as the Government began a large-scale effort to count Africa's biggest population and to find out just how big the country is.
Beginning early Wednesday morning, nearly 700,000 census workers crisscrossed the West African nation, using everything from Land Rovers and horses to donkeys and canoes, in an effort to sketch what officials hope will be the first reliable statistical portrait of Nigeria in a four-day census ending Saturday.


Battle of Specialists When Jets Play Bills
When Jets Coach Bruce Coslet was asked earlier in the week what he thought it would be like to go up to Buffalo and face Steve Tasker of the Bills and Chris Burkett, who used to play for the Bills but now plays for Coslet, he likened the prospect to a nightmare.
So did his special-teams coordinator, Al Roberts, when asked to discuss what's so special about the two special-teams players.
Roberts has coached both.


Sounds Around Town
Melodic Shrieks
Shelley Hirsch, Dance Theater Workshop, 219 West 19th Street, Manhattan, (212) 924-0077.
Shelley Hirsch's vocal improvisations respect no borders or categories as she swoops and coos and wails and shrieks in tongues in a melodic stream-of-consciousness.
She will unveil a piece called "O Little Town of East New York." Tonight and tomorrow at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.; tickets are $12.
Hard-Bop Tribute
Candid All-Stars, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, (212) 749-2228.
Two generations of hard-boppers meet in what is billed as a tribute to Miles Davis.
That means they're likely to play anything from modal jazz to suspended-time ballads to high-speed, harmonically daunting zigzags, and they'll be on their toes because the music is being recorded by Candid Records.
The group includes Donald Harrison and Ricky Ford on saxophones, Claudio Roditi on trumpet, Kenny Barron on piano, Larry Gales on bass and Joe Chambers on drums.
Sets begin tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 10:30 and midnight; there is a $15 cover and a $10 minimum.
Tonight's first set is to be broadcast on WKCR-FM (89.9).
Tinkling Vibraphones
Vibration Industrial Park, the New Music Cafe, 380 Canal Street, at West Broadway, Manhattan, (212) 941-0900.
Four virtuosic vibraphonists -- Damon Choice, Bryan Carrott, Bill Ware and Wilson Moorman 3d -- and the rhythm section of Marcus McLaurine on bass and Thurman Barker on drums join forces in music that tinkles, shimmers, skitters and plinks.
Tomorrow at 10:30 P.M.; admission is $8.
Week's Caribbean Album
Our Boys Steel Orchestra: Pan Progress (Mango).
Too many steel bands sound magnificent when they march but somehow lose both their best songs and their impact in the recording studio.
That doesn't happen to Our Boys, a 13-member group from Trinidad and Tobago that is based in San Francisco.
"Pan Progress" captures the joyous propulsion of modern steel-band soca.
The pieces, most of them written by Len (Boogsie) Sharpe, shimmer and strut, with one ebullient melody unfolding, then another and another.
Andy Narell, the new-age musician who produced the album, contributes a piece that tries modern-jazz harmonies (with a nod to Herbie Hancock's "Maiden Voyage"), then wisely abandons them for more lighthearted melodies.
A few ballads allow Our Boys (who include one woman) to demonstrate their orchestral blend.
But by far the best part of the album is its uptempo songs; music doesn't get much happier.


Art in Review
Michael Kenna  Germans van Eck Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Dec. 23
Michael Kenna's small, precisely framed and printed black-and-white photographs seem like refugees from an earlier time.
Mr.
Kenna, an Eng lishman who now lives in California, delights in the kinds of atmospheric effects -- of smoke, clouds, mist and so on -- that characterized the work of such turn-of-the-century Pictorialist photographers as Clarence H. White and Alvin Langdon Coburn.
The subjects of the pictures seem to come from another time as well, including as they do such romantic standbys as a colonnade at night, a wind-bent tree on a barren hillside, and lonely pilings in a fog-shrouded harbor.


Game Finally Ends As Penn St. Beats Pitt
With a victory today over Pitt, the Nittany Lions of Penn State finished their regular season at 10-2.
But the contest probably won't figure into many players' fond memories of this successful season.
The 32-20 victory over the Panthers took 3 hours 54 minutes to achieve.
But to the players and to the 52,519 spectators at Pitt Stadium, who endured a light rain and icy temperatures, it seemed even longer.


Art in Review
Michael Jenkins  Jay Gorney Modern Art 100 Greene Street Manhattan Through Dec. 21
Contact and loss -- loss of childhood, of one's partner, of life itself -- seem to be the main themes of Michael Jenkins's ostensibly innocent, subtly mournful drawings and sculptures.
His color of choice is bright yellow -- a sunny hue that is also the international symbol, at sea, for quarantine -- and daisy chains are a favored motif.
Both his drawn images and his simple wood and cardboard structures, redolent of the playroom or summer camp, sometimes come two by two, like the animals on Noah's Ark.


Books of The Times; Entering the World of Bats, Whales and Others
The Moon by Whale Light  And Other Adventures Among Bats, Penguins, Crocodilians and Whales  By Diane Ackerman  249 pages.
Random House. $20.
"Being ecstatic means being flung out of your usual self," Diane Ackerman wrote in a memoir about learning to fly ("On Extended Wings").


Decisions of Life, Death And Transition Between
YOU know those forms that everyone completes on the battered clipboard at the doctor's office, the ones asking how your grandfather died, any history of cancer and whether you have ulcers or hemorrhoids?
Well, nowadays Dr.
Donald E. Berman also uses a startlingly different type of questionnaire to interview new patients at his office here.
He calls it the Values History Form.
It asks such questions as: What do you fear most?
How important is self-sufficiency in your life?
What will be important to you when you are dying?
The need for such information, so effectively denied by many Americans, is a revealing reflection of how much health care and dying have changed during one generation of medical technological advances.


Red Cross Talks Deferred Over Palestinians
The Red Cross has postponed a humanitarian conference scheduled for Friday in Budapest because the United States and Israel refuse to allow a Palestinian delegation observer status.
Every five years, the conference brings together representatives of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent and about 165 countries that are party to the Geneva convention of 1949.


Bloomingdale's Christmas Wish
About 200,000 shoppers are expected to descend on Bloomingdale's flagship store in Manhattan today, looking for that perfect gift.
Behind the scenes, Bloomingdale's executives are trying to tie a bow on their most important Christmas season in years.
After nearly two years in Federal Bankruptcy Court, dealing with uncertainty about its fate and the future of its legendary boss, Marvin S. Traub, Bloomingdale's is trying to put all of that behind it and buck all the gloomy projections for Christmas sales this year.


For Winners in Visa Lottery, Round 2
Foreigners wanting to live in this country inundated the Government with nearly 19 million applications for 40,000 slots in an immigration lottery held last month, nearly four times the number expected, according to figures released this week.
Now the applicants, some of whom sent in as many as 1,000 applications, are being taken by surprise by a Government decision to issue notifications to 50,000 people that they were winners and then let the first-round winners scramble for the 40,000 visas available.


Msgr. James A. Healy Dies at 71; Led New York Mediation Board
Msgr.
James A. Healy, a Buffalo priest, economist and one of the country's best known labor mediators, died on Wednesday at Sisters of Charity Hospital in Buffalo after a three-week illness.
A lifelong resident of Buffalo, he was 71 years old.
In the course of some four decades, Monsignor Healy was in the middle of countless contract disputes, hundreds of them involving public employees.
He also sat on fact-finding panels and, from 1977 until his retirement two years ago, served as chairman of the New York State Mediation Board.


The Homeless Don't Belong in Bus Terminal
To the Editor:
As a daily New York City commuter myself, contrary to Chris Gillespie (letter, Nov. 19), I support the removal of the homeless from the Port Authority Bus Terminal.
I do so not because the presence of the homeless makes me uncomfortable, but because the bus terminal was not meant to be a homeless shelter.
The busy corridors of the terminal shouldn't be home for people to sleep, drink and loiter in.
Certainly, if I were to lay out a picnic blanket with some friends, drink whisky and snooze, I'd expect to be arrested.


Mirror Group Stock Rises
Speculation that the Australian financier Kerry Packer may be interested in the Maxwell family's Mirror Group Newspapers unit sent its shares higher today.
Mr.
Packer, Australia's wealthiest man, pulled out of a group bidding for the John Fairfax Group in his native country, a move analysts said could allow him to concentrate on studying Maxwell's assets.


A New Theory: A Beach Has a Right to Its Sand
Utility companies dam rivers for hydropower.
Developers line creek bottoms with concrete to prevent flooding.
Coastal cities build rock jetties to keep their harbors open.
These projects offer clear benefits.
But all carry a cost that has only recently become apparent: They steal sand from beaches.


Bank Aid Is Called Insufficient
The Government's senior auditor says he believes the money provided by Congress this week to handle the banking crisis will not be sufficient and that it could be completely used up by the failure of just one of the nation's largest banks.
Charles A. Bowsher, the Comptroller General, said that existing accounting standards had enabled banks to conceal huge amounts of potential liabilities that could easily deplete the $70 billion or so that Congress, at the end of its session on Wednesday, provided in new taxpayer loans to keep afloat the insurance fund that protects bank deposits.


Art in Review
Ford Beckman  Tony Shafrazi 130 Prince Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
The list of artists sideswiped in this show is impressively long: from Robert Rauschenberg, Andy Warhol and Bruce Nauman through Richard Prince and Ross Bleckner to Ashley Bickerton, Kenny Scharf and Donald Baechler.
Some paintings have multiple silkscreened images, often of clowns; others sport big red polka dots that can extend to the deep frames of these large-scale works; still others have hard, shiny surfaces and motifs that suggest decals and logos.


Sports of The Times; Regarding Bonilla: Just Do It
NOT a bad autumn in New York.
The Knicks actually seem to be listening to Pat Riley.
Both the Jets and the Giants have a shot at the playoffs.
And Mark Messier's cave-man jaw makes the Rangers at least look ferocious.
So how come I want to talk about Bobby Bonilla?
How come I want to talk about a sport that won't play even an exhibition for three months?


The Art Market
Coveted Painting Sold
After a battle that began a little over a year ago, the Century Association has finally sold one of its most coveted paintings, William Sidney Mount's "Power of Music," to the Cleveland Museum of Art, reportedly for $4 million.
The association plans to use the money to pay for an extensive renovation of its 100-year-old building at 7 West 43d Street in Manhattan.


U.S. RUNNING SHORT OF VACCINE FOR FLU
The nation is on the verge of running out of influenza vaccine just as the flu season is off to one of its earliest starts, distributors of the vaccine say.
Experts attribute the shortage to an unexpectedly heavy demand for flu shots that developed after Federal health officials warned in October that the predominant flu virus this year would be unusually widespread and deadly.


The Olympic Delgudice
He has a 1-3-1 record in 7 games this season, but as a backup to Boston Bruin goalie ANDY MOOG, rookie MATT DELGUDICE didn't figure to see all that much action this season.
Now, however, the 24-year-old goalie's career has taken a turn toward glory.
He has been assigned to Team USA, the squad that will provide the players for the United States Olympic team at the 1992 Winter Games in Albertville, France, in February. (AP)


TV Weekend; Peggy Ashcroft in 'She's Been Away'
Made-for-television movies this weekend are dominated by three actresses giving superb performances in two disappointing vehicles.
On "Masterpiece Theater" this Sunday, Channel 13 at 9 P.M., there's "She's Been Away," starring Dame Peggy Ashcroft and Geraldine James, formerly co-stars in "The Jewel in the Crown." And directly opposite on CBS, there is the "Hallmark Hall of Fame" presentation of "One Against the Wind," with Judy Davis as a World War II hero.
Long one of England's most acclaimed actresses, Dame Peggy died in June at age 83 and, Alistair Cooke points out, this presentation, augmented by a brief remembrance essay, is "by way of paying tribute." Her final film, "She's Been Away" is written by Stephen Poliakoff and directed by Sir Peter Hall.
Dame Peggy plays Lillian Huckle who, after being kept in a mental hospital for 60 years, is released into the custody of her stockbroker nephew Hugh Ambrose (James Fox) and his wife Harriet (Miss James).
Still a rather difficult woman, the ominously silent Lillian has family and friends guessing whether she remembers anything or is, in fact, devilishly clever.


And Now, a Laurel from the U.N.
Burma, now called Myanmar, is a beautiful country ruled by a military junta that in 1988 adopted the unlovely name of Slorc, or State Law and Order Restoration Council.
The Slorc's only creditable act was to hold free elections last year; when the Burmese overwhelmingly rejected the Slorc, the vote was voided and the opposition leader Daw Aung San Suu Kyi kept under house arrest.
Fortunately, the Slorc's writ does not extend to Oslo, where this brave woman will receive the Nobel Peace Prize in absentia on Dec. 10, Human Rights Day.
It is an honor fully earned.


TV Weekend; Peggy Ashcroft in 'She's Been Away'
Made-for-television movies this weekend are dominated by three actresses giving superb performances in two disappointing vehicles.
On "Masterpiece Theater" this Sunday, Channel 13 at 9 P.M., there's "She's Been Away," starring Dame Peggy Ashcroft and Geraldine James, formerly co-stars in "The Jewel in the Crown." And directly opposite on CBS, there is the "Hallmark Hall of Fame" presentation of "One Against the Wind," with Judy Davis as a World War II hero.
Long one of England's most acclaimed actresses, Dame Peggy died in June at age 83 and, Alistair Cooke points out, this presentation, augmented by a brief remembrance essay, is "by way of paying tribute." Her final film, "She's Been Away" is written by Stephen Poliakoff and directed by Sir Peter Hall.
Dame Peggy plays Lillian Huckle who, after being kept in a mental hospital for 60 years, is released into the custody of her stockbroker nephew Hugh Ambrose (James Fox) and his wife Harriet (Miss James).
Still a rather difficult woman, the ominously silent Lillian has family and friends guessing whether she remembers anything or is, in fact, devilishly clever.


For Children
'Remember the Children: Daniel's Story'  Museum of the City of New York Fifth Avenue at 103d Street (212) 534-1672 Recommended ages: 7 and up Through May 15
In this subtle, moving exhibition, a 6-year-old German named Daniel beckons young viewers to listen closely to his story.
Daniel's experiences are a composite of actual children's lives during the Holocaust.
Organized by the United State Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, the exhibition was designed especially to draw in young viewers by focusing on one child's high hopes and shattered dreams without presenting violent or graphic images.
The show begins and ends with short powerful videos that act as frames for the telling displays in between.
Simple audiovisual effects and a minimal text tell the story calmly but deliberately.


Review/Art; The Case for Holograms: The Defense Resumes
Whatever happened to holograms?
Twenty years ago these strange pictures, which usually take the form of glass plates on which murky photographic images marked by an intense illusion of three-dimensional space can be seen, enjoyed a flurry of attention as a medium for making art.
A number of major artists -- Bruce Nauman, Yaacov Agam, even Salvador Dali -- tried their hands at making holograms, and a variety of institutions presented exhibitions of the new pictures.
But then a pioneering survey of work in the new medium, held at the International Center of Photography in Manhattan in 1975, met with a considerably less than enthusiastic response, and the art world's infatuation with holography soon faded.
Not that it disappeared.
The process continues to have important technical and commercial applications, notably the identifying holograms that appear on many credit cards.
But although it has resurfaced occasionally as an art medium, most artists and critics have long since ceased to take holography seriously.


Art in Review
Anne Ryan  Washburn Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
Over the last few years, several shows at this gallery and one at the Metropolitan Museum of Art have focused on the work of Anne Ryan (1889-1954).
This selection of small abstract collages from museums in Houston, Minneapolis and New Haven is the latest reminder of her distinctive and lyrical gifts.


Noah Says He Won't Play Unless There's an Injury
Two hundred years ago the ultimate in rally songs, the Marseillaise, had its debut in this gilt-edged room in the Town Hall here.
Today, Yannick Noah, debuting this year as captain of the French Davis Cup team, fired off a rally song of his own.
And like everything Noah does, it delivered a surprise.
It happened at the draw ceremony to determine the personnel and scheduling for this weekend's Davis Cup finale between France and the United States, the defending champion.
With his dreadlocks backlit by the 17 crystal chandeliers that provide the rococo glow in the Grand Salon, Noah announced that he had not nominated himself to play for the French team.
And he said he wouldn't spring into action unless one of the veterans he has selected to lead his army, Guy Forget and Henri Leconte, is injured.


Art in Review
Zeke Berman  Lieberman &amp; Saul Gallery 155 Spring Street SoHo Through Jan. 11
In what might seem a somewhat perverse twisting of media, Zeke Berman photographs crisscrossed and knotted patterns of string against a background of draped black velvet.
At first the strings appear to have been incised in the negatives, or perhaps drawn on a sheet of glass in front of the lens.
But Mr.
Berman never attempts to hide the artifice of his method, never lets the string become anything more than string.
In this way he plays out elegant perceptual games that point up the quirky nature of photographic depiction, and especially of the spatial illusion created in the image.


China Expects Eventual Ties With Israel
China's Foreign Minister was quoted today as saying that China and Israel were on course toward an eventual establishment of diplomatic relations, but the pace of progress seemed likely to depend on the Arab-Israeli peace process.
China, the only one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council not to recognize Israel, has good relations with Arab countries but has moved slowly in recent years to develop ties with Israel.
Some Chinese officials believe that after establishment of relations, China would be able to play a role in Middle East peace negotiations.


At the Movies
Horton Foote Screenplay
Don't expect to see him carrying a pick or wearing overalls and a helmet with a lamp, but the writer Horton Foote is a man who likes to mine.
First and foremost, he mines memories, and right now his literary light is focused on the past.


Big Science on Easy Street
Not long ago, I attended a conference where members of an exclusive group bemoaned their mistreatment by the Government.
Common complaints: grants to struggling young members of the profession are being slashed; intrusive new conditions are chilling creativity; politicians are seizing on the mistakes of a few to ridicule all.
A gathering of poets and dancers supported by the National Endowment for the Arts?
No.
The conference was for scientists.


Israel's Move: A Message on Talks
With its announcement on Wednesday that it will go to Middle East peace talks in Washington, but at its own pace and not necessarily when American leaders say so, the Israeli Government sent the United States an unmistakable message:
As far as it is concerned, there are no more co-sponsors in this complicated process.


For Businesses, Recycling Of Trash Begins Today
The useless memo, the old piece of corrugated cardboard and the file cabinet that no one wants: these and other trash generated by businesses in New York City now have to be recycled, under regulations that take effect today.
The new rules are meant to force city businesses to recycle 5,000 tons of the 10,000 tons of trash they produce each day.
Much of that garbage is now being incinerated or shipped at increasingly high rates to Fresh Kills and out-of-state landfills.
Sanitation officials say the recycling effort is essential if the city is to address its garbage problem.


Bush Asks Congress to Prod Economy
With a stern warning to Congress that "hot rhetoric won't fill an empty stomach -- it won't create a job," President Bush called on lawmakers today to "cool off" after the Congressional session and join him in enacting legislation to prod the economy.
In a Thanksgiving address that the White House produced for television and radio stations nationwide, Mr.
Bush said he was well aware of the nation's unemployment problems and sought to put blame on Congress.


Tarnished Congress; Session Hurt Institution's Reputation As Well as Those of Some Members
Every major flaw of the 102d Congress was on display this week as the lawmakers shambled crankily toward the end of a session that may be best remembered for the Clarence Thomas hearings and the bounce-free checks at the House bank.
The session began, in fact, with the decision to go to war with Iraq, a Congressional act that reasserted a constitutional sense of responsibility that had been abandoned to the executive branch since World War II.
Domestically, however, divided government made most problems worse, as the White House and Congress have been in different parties' hands for one of the longest periods in American history.


Abroad at Home; Time to Get Tough
My Fellow Americans:
My subject tonight is one that worries all good Americans.
It is so serious that I speak to you not only as a candidate in this election but as your President.


New Shortfall Is Seen In Bank Deposit Fund
The Government's senior auditor has warned that an additional $70 billion provided by Congress to handle the banking crisis may not be enough.
Charles A. Bowsher, the Comptroller General, said taxpayer loans provided on Wednesday to keep afloat the insurance fund that protects bank deposits could be completely used up by the failure of just one of the nation's largest banks.


NBC Ratings Game Includes Bayou Classic
Network television broadcasts of games between black colleges are rare.
Rare enough to be never.
Whether any such games could upset the conventional wisdom that they cannot draw many viewers is an untested hypothesis.
In a hearing before a House subcommittee earlier this year, Representative Cardiss Collins, an Illinois Democrat, said: "Historically, black colleges and universities have all but disappeared from television, with occasional appearances on BET, ESPN and local cable companies."


Program Offers Quick Comfort to Trauma Victims
A girl, 11 years old, sat in a San Diego County Sheriff's station bent over a coloring book, refusing to look up or to speak, Sgt.
Manuel J. Perez recalls.
Having seen too much, she refused to see any more.
Her mother, a drug addict, had kidnapped the girl from her grandmother, who had legal custody, and led deputies on a car chase before being captured, Sergeant Perez said.
Afterward, as she waited for her grandmother to come and take her home, the child withdrew, frustrating the efforts of deputies who wanted to comfort her.


Poll Finds That National Issues Take Precedence
In New Jersey, contrary to the customary wisdom, all politics -- or at least the most interesting politics -- is national, not local.
This was among the conclusions reached by the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University in a statewide sampling of political sensibilities taken during the final days of this month's local and state legislative races, in which a large turnout handed control of both houses of the Legislature to the Republicans.


Alone With Ken Kesey, Talk Turns to Buses
Ken Kesey expects to be shouting, "Get tough, suck it up" tonight as he twists his big, hard farmer's gut through wrestling moves his father taught him.
The Fighting Ducks of the University of Oregon are at home, and Kesey has never let anything shake his passion for his old varsity team, not even his own son's grave in the backyard.
But he gropes for the words to explain.
"They've got a good team this year," he begins, his thick, nimble fingers, strong from milking and deft from magic tricks, shaving off leaves of cheese and laying them out on Saltine crackers.
He has fed the cows on his farm here south of Eugene and it is dusk beyond the glass sliding doors of the dining room.
The boy's headstone is dim.


Spend the Millions, But Not on Murray
The signing of free-agent first baseman Eddie Murray by the Mets represents one more welcome and merciful break from the organization's tradition of fiscal restraint, a policy generated and sustained for too long by Frank Cashen's nostalgia for a more conservative baseball world.
Once again, though, the Mets have made the proper break but plunged off in the wrong direction.
For General Manager Al Harazin's acquisition of Murray bears an unsettling resemblance to the club's signing of outfielder Vince Coleman to a four-year, $11.95 million deal last December.


Review/Art; Flotsam, Jetsam and Quotes In Colages by Alexis Smith
ALEXIS SMITH is a scavenger of the American imagination.
For more than 20 years, she has made a name for herself by scouring the swap meets and thrift shops of her native California, retrieving assorted flotsam and mixing it with bits of text borrowed from writers like Raymond Chandler and Jack Kerouac.
She has an incredible knack for combining the right object with the perfect quote.
What results are collages that tap into a wellspring of nostalgia for an America distant not in time but in spirit, an America of movie stars and open highways and roadside diners that is a blend of reality and Hollywood invention.
Ms.
Smith's gift is to recognize the appeal of the mythical America while also acknowledging its artifices and pitfalls.
That she does so with wit and affection and a lightness of touch, and without the least bit of political hectoring or condescension, goes a long way toward explaining the quirky but unmistakable fascination of her retrospective at the Whitney Museum of American Art.


At the Bar
No one in America has known more legal movers and shakers than Erwin N. Griswold.
As a student, professor and longtime dean at Harvard Law School, Mr.
Griswold watched generations of young men (and, eventually, a few young women) evolve from hobbledehoys to honchos.
Consider, for instance, Mr.
Griswold's unique perspective on the "Saturday Night Massacre" of 1973.
Archibald Cox, the Watergate special prosecutor cashiered by President Richard M. Nixon, was a former student.
So was Elliot L. Richardson, the Attorney General, who resigned in protest over the dismissal, and William D. Ruckelshaus, Mr.
Richardson's deputy, who also quit.


Art in Review
Jeff Koons  Sonnabend Gallery 420 West Broadway, near Spring Street SoHo Through Dec. 21
Just when it looked as if the 80's were finally over, Jeff Koons has provided one last, pathetic gasp of the sort of self-promoting hype and sensationalism that characterized the worst of the decade.
His most recent photo-based oil paintings go even further into the realm of pornography than the ones he exhibited at the last Venice Biennale.
They depict him and his wife, Ilona Staller, the Hungarian-born Italian porn star and politician, known as Cicciolina, engaged in various sex acts.
Artificial and cheap in their settings and emotions, they are not fundamentally different from what one might see in Hustler magazine, translated almost to the scale of a movie screen.


Pop/Jazz; A Universe Of Sound From an Old, Simple Drum
The frame drum is one of the oldest instruments, mentioned in the Bible and portrayed in ancient paintings and drawings.
It may also be the simplest.
It is just a ring of wood or metal, a membrane and, optionally, some metal jingles or a stick.
In the United States, its best-known version is the tambourine; in Ireland, the jingleless bodhran; in North Africa or Iran, two different instruments called the tar; in Egypt, a fish-skinned drum called the riq.
Held in one hand and usually tapped with the fingers, the frame drum is light, portable and unassuming.
But in the hands of the right musician, it can create its own universe of melodies, rhythm and tones.
Glen Velez, who will perform tomorrow night at Washington Square Church, has devoted himself to frame drums, writing and performing music that draws on ethnic drumming styles but that follows no single tradition.
He performs regularly as a member of the Paul Winter Consort, and until two years ago he was a member of Steve Reich and Musicians, the composer's ensemble.
In Mr.
Velez's music, frame drums carry intricate rhythmic patterns, with notes that patter or slide or ping or thump.


Knee May Fail, but Not Taylor's Heart
If you can't tell how good Lawrence Taylor is by watching him play, look at the numbers.
He has been chosen for the Pro Bowl game and the All-Pro team 10 times in his 10 full seasons.
He has 122 sacks, more than anyone else in National Football League history.
He has played in 162 regular-season and 13 playoff games, missing only one game because of injury.


KREMLIN INDICATES IRRITATION AT BUSH ON UKRAINE STAND
The Gorbachev Government issued a statement of pained surprise today at the Bush Administration's reported plan to "expeditiously" recognize the Ukraine after its independence referendum on Sunday.
"This report is surprising, the more so as it appeared on the eve of the referendum," the Kremlin declared in a press statement from the office of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, who has been opposing Ukrainian independence and fighting to revive the crumbling Soviet Union.


Surfers Unite as an Environmental Police Force
According to the popular culture of the last three decades, surfers are young, carefree creatures whose friends are all named "Dude." They are unlikely to do any work beyond paddling their boards, and express astonishment at the suggestion that anyone would be concerned with anything beyond the next wave.
Not true, says Jake Grubb.
As the executive director of the Surfrider Foundation, a not-for-profit group of surfing environmentalists, Mr.
Grubb speaks from experience.
From its headquarters in Huntington Beach, Calif. -- a converted motel suite decorated with surfing posters and conch shells -- Surfrider has taken on giants in industry and government and won.


Editorial Notebook; Plain Ukraine
The republics of the former Soviet Union, struggling to devise a new form of association, so far can't even agree on a name for it.
One Muscovite suggests calling it the U.F.F.R. -- the Union of Fewer and Fewer Republics.
The second-largest republic won't be among them.
People here prefer to call it by its plain name, Ukraine, dropping the traditional article, and they are voting Sunday in a referendum on independence.
The outcome is a foregone conclusion: Ukraine's parliament has already formally declared independence, and the U.S. is moving abruptly toward diplomatic recognition.


I.B.M.'s Plan Can Work, Experts Say
I.B.M.'s startling plan for decentralization, which the computer maker announced on Tuesday, can work, computer industry and management experts say.
They cite precedents as diverse as A.T.&amp; T., the American automobile industry, Japanese keiretsu and European multinationals as examples of other companies that have developed effective strategies for dealing with unwieldy and bureaucratic management structures.


U.N. Must Rise to Humanitarian Emergencies
To the Editor:
"Where Is the Outrage?" is the headline on Anthony Lewis's Nov. 4 column on the destruction of Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia, and the suffering of its people.
Such a crime does indeed cry out for action.


Europe Is Expected to Move More Slowly on Ukraine
European governments are not likely to recognize a newly independent Ukraine as quickly as the United States will, diplomats said today.
Officials in Bonn, London and Paris were highly reluctant to comment on how their Governments might react if Ukrainians choose independence in a referendum on Sunday.
Their reluctance contrasted with the willingness of Bush Administration officials to say in advance of the expected pro-independence vote that the United States would move quickly toward diplomatic recognition of the Ukraine.


Mars Candy Planning Eastern Europe Effort
Mars Inc., the candy company, plans to expand into several former Eastern bloc countries using the same advertising agency alignment it has in Western Europe, a company spokesman said.
The European offices of three New York-based agencies -- D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Grey Advertising Inc. and Backer Spielvogel Bates -- will handle the same accounts in Czechoslovokia, Hungary, Poland and Yugoslavia that they already handle in Europe, the spokesman added.


H.M.O.'s Are Thinking People's Medical Care; Physician Tax Credits
To the Editor:
The plan submitted by Republican United States senators to provide tax credits to businesses and individuals to cover the cost of health insurance doesn't help the poor and unemployed, for whom a tax credit is meaningless, and it doesn't provide greater access to quality health care for the poor.


Recovery Is in Eye of the Beholder
The President insists the economy is recovering.
Disbelieving businesses and consumers say the recession never ended.
Skittish investors blow hot and cold.
Who is right?
It is partly a matter of perspective.
But to a rare degree, even the experts who track the economy day by day are deeply divided over what is really happening.
Indeed, the normally cocky fraternity of economic forecasters sounds uncharacteristically nervous.
"It keeps you awake at night," one said.


Sighs of Relief, Mostly, for High-Flying Stars in Parade
Kermit the Frog was thankful that he escaped with only a gaping head wound and limb trouble.
Betty Boop was thankful that she did not lose more than the moon.
Spiderman was thankful that his web came untangled from a pesky lamppost.
And -- ay, caramaba! -- Bart Simpson was thankful that he did not, like, totally shrivel up and die on the way downtown, man.
It was not the easiest of days for the big balloons in the Thanksgiving parade.
Sure, the annual eye-popping pilgrimage floated from the Upper West Side to midtown Manhattan at its customary, leisurely pace.
But the people pulling on the guide wires had to run a two-mile gantlet of logic-defying downdrafts and nerve-wracking turns.


Potential Spoiler for Cuomo Keeps the Governor Guessing
First of all, just to clear up one rumor circulating in the State Capitol, there is no "Batphone" on Ralph J. Marino's desk, no speed-dial line to the White House.
But Mr.
Marino, the most powerful Republican in New York State government, does have a regular telephone.
And on it he has already received at least one call from a senior Bush Administration aide inviting him to a skull session on how to run a Presidential campaign against Mario M. Cuomo.


Seeds of Consensus on Homeless Emerge From Bitter Debate
Mayor David N. Dinkins's plan to scatter 24 shelters throughout New York City may be battered, but behind the angry attacks it has drawn lie the seeds of a consensus for profoundly changing the city's despised system for sheltering the homeless.
Despite their fighting over where to put the shelters, Mayor Dinkins, City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone and most of the major players on the issue are embracing a new vision of how best to help homeless men and women, say officials on both sides of the issue.


U.N. Union Plans International Protest Campaign
They work behind the scenes in offices from New York to Addis Ababa to Tokyo, forming the backbone of a sprawling international organization whose diplomats are receiving growing recognition.
But many civil servants at the United Nations -- the administrators, researchers, technicians, clerks and others who attend to the details at its agencies and committees -- say they are neither respected nor adequately paid.
Their unions assert that work conditions have worsened, and they criticize the United Nations for refusing to negotiate with them.


INSIDE
Assessing Congress
Although its achievements were overshadowed by its bickering, Congress did manage some noteworthy successes.
News analysis, page D7.
Nigeria Begins Census
Closing its borders and shutting down businesses, Africa's most populated country began a new census.
Page A7.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Famous Voices in Demand, While the Faces Go Unseen
MORE commercials are being produced on the premise that celebrities can offer advertisers and their agencies more than just pretty faces.
Indeed, the voices of the stars, but not their faces, are increasingly in demand.
"A voice that stands out from the usual professional advertising voices can give us a distinction," said Keith Reinhard, chairman and chief executive of DDB Needham Worldwide, which has used the voice of the actress Colleen Dewhurst in a spot for Amtrak and Stockard Channing's voice for Olympus cameras.


Banks Fail to Overcome a Hostile Environment
When it comes to winning friends in Washington, these are not great days for bankers.
Legislation to give banks sweeping new powers -- a cornerstone of the Bush Administration's domestic agenda -- was tossed out by an unreceptive Congress before it adjourned for Thanksgiving.
The measure that survived would replenish the nearly empty bank insurance fund, something Congress had little choice but to pass.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-21 UKRAINE ISSUE IRKS MOSCOW
The Government of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev expressed pained surprise at the Bush Administration's reported plan to recognize the Ukraine if the republic opts for independence in a vote on Sunday.
A1  European nations are not rushing to embrace the Ukraine.
A20  MEXICO DRUG EFFORT UNDER SCRUTINY
Cooperative efforts by the U.S. and Mexico to fight illegal drugs are under new scrutiny following the killing of seven Mexican narcotics agents by army soldiers who may have been facilitating a shipment of cocaine.
A1
NIGERIA BEGINS A HEAD COUNT
Nigeria has closed its borders, shut down shops and factories, and ordered millions of people to stay home in a large-scale effort to count Africa's biggest population.
A7  ISRAEL'S REBUFF TO U.S.
With its announcement that it will go to Middle East peace talks in Washington, but at its own pace, Israel is sending a message to the United States: there are no more co-sponsors in the process.
A16  Syria accused Israel of sabotaging peace talks.
A16  Beijing sees progress toward relations with Israel.
A3  KHMER ROUGE STICKS WITH PLAN
Despite a brutal attack on their leader, the Khmer Rouge rebels said they would abide by a United Nations peace plan for Cambodia.
A3  BLOODSHED IN SOMALI CAPITAL
Artillery and rocket barrages have turned Mogadishu into a grisly battlefield, with about 6,000 civilians wounded and as many as 1,000 killed, aid workers say.
A12  SCATTERED CLASHES IN YUGOSLAVIA
A cease-fire accord between Croats and Serbs was still being violated in various parts of Croatia, but the fighting has lessened.
A21  Catholic bishops in Europe acknowledged Judaism's contribution.
A13  NATIONAl A22-32, D6-7  FLU VACCINE SHORTAGE
Because of warnings in October about the potential for a severe flu outbreak, an unusually heavy early demand developed for flu shots, and now the nation is on the verge of running out of vaccine just as the worst part of the flu season is beginning.
A1  PROMISING BIRTH CONTROL DEVICE
In the year since Norplant was approved for use in America, about 100,000 women have had the five-year contraceptive implanted under their skin.
Now health and family planning officials say the devices work well, and they are predicting wide use.
A1  AN IMMIGRATION RUNOFF
Nineteen million applications were received for 40,000 available slots in an immigration lottery last month.
Now the Government has begun notifying 50,000 applicants that they were winners, meaning they are in a race to acquire the necessary documentation.
A22  A HAITIAN HAVEN
In rural Indiana is a family consisting of a time missionary couple and their adopted children: 28 of them.
The couple, who could not turn away the pathetic, orphaned babies that kept arriving at their door in Haiti, now live in an old schoolhouse.
A22  CONGRESS EXITS, GRUMPILY
In the end, although it was creaky and it was cranky, the 102d Congress managed to finish work on some significant legislation.
Still, it was a session that will be remembered more for its embarrassing flaws than its accomplishments.
D7  President Bush warned Congress to plan to work on the economy.
D6  CLOUDY ECONOMIC CRYSTAL BALLS
To a rare degree, even the experts who daily track the economy are deeply divided over what is now happening.
Indeed, the normally cocky fraternity of forecasters has begun to sound uncharacteristically nervous.
D1  NEW WARNING ON BANK FUND
The Government's top auditor says that the additional money provided by Congress to handle the banking crisis will not be enough and that it could be completely used up by the failure of just one large bank.
D1  Sixty-seven women won an 18-year suit against the Navy.
A24  A free Thomas Sutherland celebrated Thanksgiving with family.
A27  Detroit agreed to allow a demonstration by the homeless.
A28  Missouri is back in court in another right-to-die case.
A29  Law Page D12  Does a beach have a "right" to the sand that's on it?
At the Bar  METROPOLITAN Digest, B1 MAJOR DROUGHT FEARED
With reservoirs at only 49.4 percent of capacity, officials say New York City is facing the worst water shortages in more than a decade.
But the public, they say, is not concerned enough yet to begin serious conservation efforts.
A1  RALPH MARINO'S QUANDARY
The Republican majority leader in the New York State Senate is in perhaps the best position of anyone to make Governor Cuomo's life miserable if he decides to run for President.
But Ralph Marino is also responsible for reaching a budget agreement with the Governor that his members can live with.
A1 A SAMARITAN'S TRAVAILS
A Bronx businessman helped a nearby school clean up a vacant lot.
But to his surprise, his successful good deed turned into a nightmare when the sanitation police showed up with their guns drawn.
A1  BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Weekend  Rock-and-roll movies.
C1  Theater: On Stage, and Off.
C2  Film: At the Movies.
C12  Music: Andrea Marcovicci.
C3  Dance: Two by Balanchine.
C3  Restaurants C22  Art: Alexis Smith's collages.
C1  A new look at holography.
C24  Word and Image: "The Moon by Whale Light." C27  TV Weekend.
C32 Sports B12-19  Baseball: A Mets mistake?
B14  Columns: Vecsey on Mets.
B13  Lipsyte visits Ken Kesey.
B14  Football: Lions beat Bears.
B13  Taylor's heart keeps him going.
B13  Soccer: U.S women have a mission.
B19  Tennis: Noah says he won't play.
B13 Obituaries D10  Msgr.
James A. Healy; led New York mediation board Editorials/Op-Ed  Editorials A34  The President's inept tax plan.
Now, a laurel from the U.N.
A new road for transportation.
Leon V. Sigal: Plain Ukraine.
Letters A34  Anthony Lewis: Time to get tough.
A35  Ed Rollins: How Bush can win again.
A35  Samuel G. Freedman: Parked today, gone tomorrow.
A35  Gregg Easterbrook: Big science on Easy Street.
A35


Quotation of the Day
"This could mean the loss of a whole wealth of very French flavors. If you kill all the bad bacteria, you also kill the good ones. You eliminate those that provide the aroma and the taste." CLAIRE MARCELLIN of the Normandy Milk Union, on proposed regulations for cheese.  [ A4:3. ]


Wachtler Says New Budget Cuts May Lead to Release of Suspects
The state's Chief Judge, Sol Wachtler, has warned that he would have to close all of the state's civil courts and up to half of its criminal courts by Jan. 1 if the Legislature approves the $26 million cut in the judiciary budget proposed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
Mr.
Wachtler, who has already sued Mr.
Cuomo over previous cuts in the court budget, predicted that thousands of criminal defendants would be returned to the streets.


H.M.O.'s Are Thinking People's Medical Care; The Real Costs
To the Editor:
You report that health plans are gaining favor among New Yorkers (news article, Nov. 11).
Your often fantasylike descriptions of health plans, especially managed health care, personify the lack of reasonable thought that often goes into deciding what makes a plan good.
Managed health care is not a panacea.
It is not a corollary that because health care is directed or controlled by a primary physician it is less expensive or more efficient.


Review/Cabaret; Longing for a Time Unremembered
The nostalgic aura of New York's cabaret world often seems synonymous with the mystique of an earlier era when Manhattan was supposedly an enchanted isle peopled with sophisticates who lived a more graceful existence than could be experienced today.
No cabaret singer conjures that longing more intensely than Andrea Marcovicci, who opened her fifth season at the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, Manhattan, recently in an engagement that extends through Jan. 5.
In her new act, the singer even offers a word, saudades, (pronounced saw-DAJ) to describe that aura.
It is a Portuguese term, she says, that denotes a nostalgia for something that may never have existed.
Ms.
Marcovicci's new show revels in saudades, a mood that is very easy to feel in the cozy, oak-paneled music room of a hotel already wreathed in literary legend.
Weaving quotations from E. B. White, Dorothy Parker and Fran Lebowitz between songs, the singer awakens a shared urbane sensibility that, outside cabaret, is probably best evoked in certain Woody Allen movies.


Diner's Journal
The Supper Club
The old Edison Theater at 240 West 47th Street in Manhattan will come to life again next week when the curtain is raised at a new restaurant called the Supper Club.
The principals behind the 450-seat dining and dancing spot are Jean de Noyer, the owner of Le Comptoir, and Wayne Nish, the chef and owner of March on East 58th Street in Manhattan.
The opening is scheduled for Tuesday.
Carnegie East Room
Carnegie East Room is the new restaurant in Carnegie Hall that is open to ticket holders for performances in the main hall or Weill Recital Hall.
A three-course dinner, served from 5:30 P.M., is $45.
The dining room is open only when there are performances in the main hall.
The restaurant is run by New York Parties, a Manhattan-based catering company.
The dining room is on the first tier of Carnegie Hall, adjacent to the Carnegie Hall Museum.
Reservations: (212) 903-9689.
All major credit cards are accepted.
The Changing Scene
OPENINGS: The owners of Park Bistro and Les Halles, both on Park Avenue near 28th Street in Manhattan, plan to open a French brasserie in the spring in the Paramount Hotel, 235 West 46th Street, in Manhattan.
Max Bernard, one of the owners of Park Bistro and Les Halles, said the new restaurant would have about 140 seats and serve from breakfast to late supper.
"We'll have an accent on seafood," Mr.
Bernard said, "but we'll also serve traditional brasserie food like choucroute garnie." Opening is projected for May. . . .
Richard Krause, the chef and a partner at Rose Cafe, 24 Fifth Avenue, at Ninth Street, in Manhattan, has left to open his own establishment, called Show Kitchen, in temporary quarters at 118 Ridge Street, just below Houston Street, on Manhattan's Lower East Side.
The new restaurant, which is to make its debut on Thursday, will be open Thursdays to Saturdays with a $45 prix fixe dinner.
Telephone: (212) 473-1378.
Phil Scotti, one of the owners of Rose Cafe, said the new chef there is Donaldo -- "just Donaldo" -- who plans to keep the menu fundamentally American.
OPEN: Fishin Eddie, 73 West 71st Street in Manhattan, (212) 874-3474, a seafood restaurant by the owners of Vince and Eddie's nearby . . .
Bistro Ici, an inexpensive French bistro at 1550 Third Avenue, near 87th Street, in Manhattan, (212) 410-7700.
CLOSED: Violetta, 1590 First Avenue, near 83d Street, Manhattan.


Maple Leafs Robbed
When three Toronto Maple Leafs and a couple of friends decided to get something to eat after Tuesday night's 4-4 tie with the Kings, they chose the wrong restaurant.
Moments after they arrived at the fast-food drive-in near their hotel at Los Angeles International Airport they were robbed at gunpoint by two men, who got away with about $1,000 in cash and jewelery, including the wedding ring of goalie JEFF REESE.
According to reports in The Toronto Sun and The Toronto Star, the five men, including left wing CLAUDE LOISELLE and defenseman BOB HALKIDIS, were caught by surprise.


Stores in Britain Rebel Over Sunday Closing Law
Some of Britain's largest retail chains announced this week that they would celebrate the Christmas retail season in their own fashion this year: they intend to keep their stores open on Sunday, in open defiance of a general government prohibition against Sunday shopping.
In the latest round of a dispute that has become as sure a sign of the approaching holidays here as the Christmas lights along Oxford Street, the retailers said consumer demand and the pressure of competition were forcing them to open on Sunday, in spite of government bans.


U.S. Women's Soccer Team's Message: 'No One Will Get in Our Way'
The United States women's soccer team will make sports history here Saturday when it plays Norway for the first women's world championship.
But the bright young Americans don't seem intimidated by their opportunity or their opponents.
Tracey Bates, a 4-foot-11-inch midfielder from Dallas, said that the team was "pioneering women's soccer," but conceded that simply playing in the first world championship match wasn't enough.


On Stage, and Off
A New Alliance to Make Musicals
Sometimes, so suddenly, there is God.
But in a pinch, there's Cameron Mackintosh.
The British producer is behind the Alliance for New American Musicals, a partnership between Lincoln Center Theater, Manhattan Theater Club and Playwrights Horizons.
Its purpose, collectively as well as individually, is to develop new musicals.


Review/Art; The Background of a Darkening Time in German History
Despite its ambitious title, "From Expressionism to Resistance, Art in Germany 1909-1936: The Marvin and Janet Fishman Collection" at the Jewish Museum, is a modest exhibition, one whose overall effect is greater than the sum of its parts.
Its name suggests a thorough survey of the most tumultuous period in 20th-century German art and history, yet it includes no major works by the German Expressionists and nothing at all by such well-known figures as Kurt Schwitters, Hannah Hoch, Lovis Corinth and Oscar Schlemmer.
Its several works by George Grosz and Otto Dix are somewhat disappointing.
It has but one inclusion attributed to John Heartfield: an early watercolor collage from 1921 that gives little indication of the artist's searing photographic montages from the 1930's, perhaps the strongest anti-Nazi art to come out of Germany.


A Folk Music Benefit
The annual Killooleet folk music sing, a benefit for the scholarship fund of Camp Killooleet, a performing-arts camp in Hancock, Vt., will be at 3 P.M. tomorrow at the Ethical Culture Society Hall, 2 West 64th Street, Manhattan.
The performers are to include Tony Seeger, the head of Folkways Records; Kim Wallach; Judy Seeger; Beth Shepard; Kate Seeger; Bill and Sarah Smith; John Calvi, and Andy Stein.
Tickets at the door are $15; $10 for students and the elderly; $30 for a family group.
Information: (203) 354-5728.


METRO DIGEST
DROUGHT EMERGENCY IS AVERTED, FOR NOW
Facing the worst water shortages in more than a decade, city, state and regional officials prepared last week to declare a drought emergency.
Then it poured.
While that was good news for the city, the northern suburbs and many communities in New Jersey and on Long Island, the rain will do little to deflect the inevitable.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Albany Now Needs Voluntary Furloughs
To the Editor:
Officials of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's administration threaten involuntary furloughs for New York State employees to balance the budget.
Yet the administration failed to continue a voluntary furlough program, the voluntary reduction in work schedule.


Somali Capital a Grisly Battlefield As Civilians Die in Clan Warfare
A week and a half of artillery and rocket barrages in the Somali capital, Mogadishu, have turned the city into a grisly battlefield that has left about 6,000 civilians wounded and possibly more than 1,000 dead, according to aid and medical workers who have returned here in the last few days.
"I've been in war for eight years and I've never seen a slaughter like this," said Dr.
Sam Toussie, an American surgeon, who was tending the wounded as part of a medical team financed by the United States Government.
"We were getting 150 casualties a day at one hospital -- 75 percent were children and we were losing five an hour."


Composer, Who Knows He's Heard That Song Before, Sues
The songwriter Gilbert O'Sullivan wishes that the rap singer Biz Markie had left Mr.
O'Sullivan's most famous song alone. (Naturally.)
Mr.
O'Sullivan wrote the song that was on everybody's lips in 1972, the gentle lingering ballad "Alone Again (Naturally)." It was No. 1 on the Billboard charts for six weeks.
It was nominated for two Grammy Awards, and Mr.
O'Sullivan for one.
More than five million copies have been sold worldwide; it has been recorded by everyone from Andy Williams to Ray Conniff to Sarah Vaughan.
Only five or six other songs have been played so much, Mr.
O'Sullivan's lawyer says.


More Troops in Belfast Don't Mean Peace
To the Editor:
I am concerned that your news articles about Northern Ireland of Oct. 29 and Nov. 19 are incomplete and encourage hasty conclusions by the news media and the public.


Economic Scene; Behind the Gloom Of Consumers
WHAT ails the consumer?
The Conference Board's index of consumer confidence has plunged below the lowest level it hit in the 1982 recession.
Consumer spending is down, and the department stores are already announcing pre-Christmas sales, with discounts up to 50 percent.
Many people are trying to explain the gloom of consumers through pop psychology: She or he has been shaken by someone or something.
Here, the villains differ.
The news media are a favorite of some, while others point to the vacillations of President Bush on economic policy, the battles between conservatives who want to hold tight and supply-siders who want to slash taxes, the Republican right's challenge to Mr.
Bush's leadership, the divisions and inertia among the Democrats, public anxiety over both public and private corruption, and racial tensions.


Japanese Are Reluctant On Pearl Harbor Issues
Japanese companies have proved more reluctant to advertise in issues of Time and U.S.
News &amp; World Report carrying cover stories about Pearl Harbor than they were to advertise in Newsweek's.


Retrial on Reservations Slaying Is Opposed
Leonard Peltier, an American Indian who was convicted of slaying two agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation on an Indian reservation, should not get a new trial, a Federal magistrate recommended on Wednesday.
Mr.
Peltier, 46 years old, is trying to reverse his conviction and two life prison sentences for his role in the killing of the agents, Jack Coler and Ronald Williams, on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in June 1975.


Parked Today, Gone Tomorrow
At 11:37 on the morning of Nov. 16, I lost faith in New York City.
In that moment of epiphany, I realized the corrosion of our civic character, the profanation of our public life, the very reversal of our evolutionary ascent.
Yes, on that Saturday, with my pregnant wife beside me, I walked down the block to an empty space where I had last parked my car.
It is not the theft that disturbs me.
It is the quality of the theft and what it told me about the decline of standards in our society, the surrender of excellence to mediocrity.


Fiat Owners Seek Diversity In Bid for French Company
In one of its biggest diversification moves outside of Italy, the Agnelli family, which controls the Fiat automobile group, began a takeover bid today for Exor S.A.
That French holding company owns big stakes in Perrier, the bottled water company, and Chateau Margaux, the elite Bordeaux wine maker.
In a communique today, officials of the Paris Bourse announced that an Agnelli holding company was offering $326 million for 1.36 million shares of Exor, which would raise the Agnellis' holdings to two-thirds of the Paris-based company.


Trebelhorn Signs With Cubs as a Coach
After being dismissed last month as manager of the Milwaukee Brewers, TOM TREBELHORN has landed on his feet, or at least one of them.
He has been signed as a coach by the Chicago Cubs.


Review/Dance; Balanchine's International Influences
Riding its current crest of fabulous dancing, the New York City Ballet presented "Scotch Symphony" and "Bugaku," both by George Balanchine, for the first time this season on Wednesday night.
Jerome Robbins's "In G Major," with Darci Kistler and Damian Woetzel as the new leads, completed the program at the New York State Theater.
"Bugaku" was inspired by the Japanese emperor's highly refined ensemble of musicians and dancers known as Gagaku, and by its music, Bugaku.
But the choreography's high point is an erotic duet in Balanchine's stylized grand manner.
Ballet lore has it that a Japanese delegation invited to the 1963 premiere was not amused.
Imagine a Japanese ballet about sex in the Oval Office at the White House.


Syrian Official Says Israelis Seek to Sabotage Peace Talks
The Syrian Foreign Minister accused Israel today of trying to sabotage the peace process by requesting a five-day delay in the talks and trying to "impose" on those talks conditions unacceptable to the Arabs.
"Israel's objective is to undermine the peace process by delaying it as long as possible so that the momentum is lost," Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa asserted in an interview.


Khmer Rouge Planning to Stick to Peace Plan
The Khmer Rouge, the rebel group responsible for the deaths of more than one million Cambodians when it ruled Cambodia in the 1970's, have announced that they will abide by a United Nations peace plan despite a brutal attack on its nominal leader by a revenge-seeking mob in Cambodia.
In a broadcast late Wednesday by the Khmer Rouge radio, the group said it would "not fall into the trap or maneuvers of the destroyers of the peace agreement."


As Rangers Fly On, Smith Plans Next Trip
While the Rangers made do with a transcontinental Thanksgiving today, their jet-setting general manager, Neil Smith, was already pondering another trip he would make for the next holiday.
Just after Christmas, Smith plans to travel to Germany for the world junior hockey championships, where he will get a first-hand scouting look at Aleksei Kovalev, the team's top draft pick in 1991 and a projected National Hockey League superstar.
The Soviet youngster is doing so well this season, Smith has accelerated his plans to import the fleet left wing.


The Spoken Word
GALLERY TALKS, the Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Washington Avenue, Crown Heights.
"Art in America: New York's Role in the Fine and Decorative Arts," by Jean Tisne, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "Highlights of Islamic Art," by Maribeth Flynn, Sunday at 2 P.M.
All talks free with museum admission of $4 ($2 for students and $1.50 for the elderly).
Information: (718) 638-5000.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"American Life in American Art," by Carl Palusci, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "Alexis Smith," by Mr.
Palusci, tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
Poetry readings will be held in the Lobby Gallery on Sunday as part of "A Day Without Art: A Day of Action and Mourning in Response to the AIDS Crisis." Donald Woods, 1 P.M.; Tory Dent, 2 P.M.; David Shapiro, reading from the work of Richard Horn, 3 P.M.; Assoto Saint and Jaan Urban, 4 P.M.; Catherine Saalfield, 4 P.M.
All free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.


Lions Beat And Tie Bears
Wrap 'em, squeeze 'em.
That was essentially Detroit's formula today in a 16-6 victory over Chicago before 78,879 fans in the Pontiac Silverdome, the Lions' largest home crowd in seven years.
They watched the team's biggest victory in at least that long.
"Close the gate on the ballcarrier and bring him down hard," said Jerry Ball, the Lions' tenacious nose tackle, explaining the persistent tackling technique the defense displayed all afternoon in shutting down the Bears and tying them atop the National Football Conference Central Division.


Game Postponed Because of Bomb
A small bomb found planted in the middle of a football field today forced postponement of the 104th annual game between the Wellesley High School Raiders and the Needham High School Rockets.


Sounds Around Town
Sunday Night Stars
"Varieties!" Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, Manhattan, (212) 631-5000.
The producers who put together the brilliant "Rodgers and Hart Revue," which sold out its recent run at the club, have inaugurated a promising Sunday evening variety show that mixes comedy and music.
Each week two surprise guests will join the regular ensemble of Doug Bernstein, Sharon Douglas, Ellen Foley, Vicki Lewis and the wonderfully zesty Jason Graae.
Returning this Sunday are Chris Durang and Dawn (the playwright, with the backup singers John Augustine and Sherry Anderson and the pianist Michael O'Flaherty), who portray in deadpan style one of the most musically obtuse lounge acts ever to traipse from one highway inn to another.
Shows are at 7 and 9:30 P.M; there is a $35 cover charge.


Security Patrol in Jerusalem


A True Tree, A Tree's Tree, A Tree to See
THIS month, a monumental evergreen -- 65 feet high, 44 feet wide at the base and weighing in at 12 tons -- arrived in the heart of Rockefeller Center.
For two weeks, workers have been grooming and decorating the newcomer.
By tomorrow, the scaffolding will be removed, and the center's 59th Christmas tree will be ready to greet visitors.
The big red button that turns on the 25,300 lights, strung on five miles of wiring, will be pressed on Tuesday at 6 P.M.


Tszyu to Australia
The only Soviet boxer to win a gold medal in lask week's world amateur championships has decided to pass up the 1992 Olympics in favor of a professional career in Australia.
KONSTANTIN TSZYU, a light welterweight who has won 259 of his 270 amateur fights, said he had signed with Australian promoter BILL MORDEY as his manager and would work out in Sydney under the trainer JOHNNY LEWIS.


Critic's Notebook; Is It Time, Already, To Put Rock In a Museum?
AT first it was just a novelty, something even Jayne Mansfield could do.
Then it blossomed into the full-scale excitement of Beatlemania and the intensive mellowness of the hippie years.
Later on it evolved into disco, rap and the decadence of heavy metal, and it became a slick commercial fixture on the video screen.
Now it's where none of its early fans or innovators ever expected to find it: in a museum.
At the American Museum of the Moving Image in Astoria, Queens, an official Monkees tambourine and a pair of Sonny and Cher dolls are currently on exhibit, so a new program of rock-and-roll movies will fit right in.
"Play This Movie Loud: A History of Rock on Film" is an enterprising six-week series beginning today and covering all known bases of the rock world, from Motown to punk to reggae, and also venturing to a few places where real rock has never been.


Critic's Choice/Theater; Living on the Fringe
In one way or another, all the work being presented in the Public Theater's ambitious new two-week performance series starting this weekend, "Moving Beyond the Madness: A Festival of New Voices," concerns people who stand on the fringes of mainstream American culture because of race, ethnicity, sexual orientation or low economic status.
Among the performers who will appear are the comedian and performance artist Danitra Vance, whose considerable talents were largely wasted several years ago on "Saturday Night Live" (Dec. 11 and 14), and Pomo Afro Homos, a San Francisco trio that explores the contradictions of black gay life (Dec. 13 and 14).
Amy Hill's "Tokyo Bound" (next Friday) is a multi-media, one-woman personal odyssey that examines the complexities of Japanese women.


Restaurants
The bistro stampede in New York City continues unabated.
It's only natural, really, since this homespun, unaffected genre offers just what cash- starved diners want today.
Wholesome food at a good price in a familiar environment.
It's a great time to be in the checkered tablecloth business.
In many ways, Quatorze has been a paradigm since it opened in 1984 on West 14th Street along a strip of bodegas, open-air clothing emporiums and bilingual driving schools.
The owners, Peter Meltzer and Mark DiGiulio, often visit France and bring back ideas to fine-tune their restaurant.
The setting, like the food, is simple and unstudied.


5-Year Contraceptive Implant Seems Headed for Wide Use
Nearly a year after the Food and Drug Administration approved Norplant, the contraceptive that works for as long as five years after it is implanted in a woman's upper arm, public health officials and family-planning clinics say the device works well and is on its way to wide usage.
About 100,000 American women have received Norplant, fewer than 1 percent of the number who take daily birth-control pills.
But more than 25,000 doctors and nurses have been trained to perform the 10-minute insertion procedure, in which six matchstick-size capsules are placed under the skin through a small incision.


On the Injured List
After missing four games with a back problem, forward-center J. R. REID of the Charlotte Hornets has learned that he has a stress fracture in the fourth lumbar area of the lower back that will keep him out for as long as six weeks.
Reid, who was placed on injured reserve, has averaged 9.1 points and 6.4 rebounds a game.
A decision on a roster replacement is expected today. . . .
Forward TERRY CUMMINGS of the San Antonio Spurs fractured a rib in the 106-100 victory over the Nets Wednesday night when he caught a knee from Nets center SAM BOWIE. . . .
University of Texas forward VICKI HALL has been lost for the season after tearing a knee ligament in the season opener against Southwest Missouri last Saturday.
A senior who averaged 17.5 points and 8.8 rebounds last season, Hall was considered a key player for the high-ranked Lady Longhorns. (AP)


Kenyan Opposition Welcomes Delay in Aid
Kenya's nascent opposition group has welcomed a decision by Western donors to delay aid to Kenya pending economic and social reforms.
"We are very pleased. It is not fair for the donors to give funds that in the end are stashed in individuals' pockets," Martin Shikuku, a founder of the opposition group, the Forum for the Restoration of Democracy, said on Wednesday.


Teen-Ager Held in Slaying
An 18-year-old youth was charged with second-degree murder yesterday in the fatal stabbing of his neighbor in a South Bronx housing project, the police said.
The youth, Prince Backman, lived two floors below the victim in the same building at 281 East 143d Street.
The victim was identified as Sheila Stalling, 26.
Officer Janice Johnston said the charges against Mr.
Backman also included criminal possession of a weapon.
The victim's body was found at 4:42 A.M. in her apartment in the Patterson houses.
She had been stabbed several times.
It was not immediately known what the motive for the stabbing was.


H.M.O.'s Are Thinking People's Medical Care; Dental and Eye Services
To the Editor:
Now that health care has finally surfaced as No. 1 on our domestic agenda (editorial, Nov. 8), decades after most other countries in the civilized world have instituted plans, it is important that we avoid the irritatingly wasteful affliction of fragmentation when putting together our own.
A complete fundamental health program must include basic dental and eye care along with other necessary services.
BERNARD INZEL Seattle, Nov. 12, 1991


A Vaseline Commercial That Looks Like News
Television viewers are likely to do double takes when they watch a new commercial for Vaseline Intensive Care products that simulates a television newscast.
The commercial, by McCann-Erickson New York, stars Joan Lunden, the co-host of ABC-TV's "Good Morning, America." Seated at what looks like an anchor desk in a television news studio, she delivers the first in a series of "Skin Science Updates."


Drug Shootings in Mexico Draw Scrutiny to Joint Efforts With U.S.
The killing of seven Mexican narcotics agents by army soldiers who may have been facilitating a shipment of cocaine has brought new scrutiny to cooperative efforts by Mexico and the United States to fight illegal drugs.
While the National Commission of Human Rights continued its investigation into the Nov. 7 incident, Mexican officials said mounting evidence indicates that the shootings were not accidental, as was initially claimed.
The officials said at least some soldiers appeared to have been waiting at the remote airstrip where the shootings took place in order to refuel a plane carrying Colombian cocaine to the United States.


Market Place; Integrated Bonds: The Hidden Value
IT is hard to imagine a security with less apparent economic value than a bond issued by Integrated Resources Inc., the bankrupt syndicator of real estate partnerships.
But those bonds still trade for prices greater than zero, and with good reason.
The bondholders have the power to be heard in court, and possibly the power to delay an eventual resolution of the bankruptcy.
That power provides the hope that the senior debtholders of Integrated Resources will eventually be willing to cut a deal that gives the bondholders more than they deserve on the strict basis of seniority.
If that does not happen, the bondholders are likely to get nothing.


2 Bronx Messes: One Trash, One Bureaucracy
It seemed like a good idea at the time.
Carlos A. Padilla was tired of hearing complaints about an empty lot near his children's school in the South Bronx that was knee-deep in litter, resulting in a large population of rats, horrendous smells and occasional fires.
The school's principal, Sister Pat Howell, had repeatedly called the Department of Sanitation to complain.
But she said she was referred to umpteen people in umpteen different offices, all of whom said there was nothing they could do about the privately owned lot.


Fearful Consumers Cut Back Plans for Gifts
To save money, Rocky Nelson of Lincoln, Neb., plans to make most of her Christmas presents by hand this year, and she is giving each of her two married children a certificate redeemable for a night of free baby-sitting.
"It used to be 1,001 presents under the tree," she said.
"This year, Christmas is going to be a little skimpy present-wise."


Markets Closed For Holiday
Because of the Thanksgiving holiday, financial markets in the United States were closed yesterday.
An article about overseas trading appears on page D5.


CHRONICLE
Some people will go a long way to help a cause, others will travel far to go dancing, but it would be hard to match 15-year-old LINDSAY FEINSTEIN, who came from Redwood City, Calif., to attend the AIDS Dance-a-Thon tonight in New York.
More than 8,000 people are expected to gather in the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center for the five-hour dance at which ERIC BOGOSIAN, DEBORAH HARRY and CYNDI LAUPER will serve as masters of ceremonies.
Proceeds will go to the Gay Men's Health Crisis.
This is, in fact, the second time Miss Feinstein has crossed the country for the dance.
"I first heard about it last year on an MTV news broadcast," she said yesterday from her father's home in Newtown, Pa.
"I love to dance, and I'm always trying to educate myself and others about AIDS."


Classical Music in Review
Neal Ramsay
Saxophonist Weill Recital Hall


No Headline
Companies
General Motors canceled a $600 Christmas bonus for every salaried worker.
The bonus was paid for the first time last year as a way of putting salaried workers' compensation at parity with that of hourly workers.  [ Page 35. ]
The Fed approved two big bank mergers, Chemical-Manufacturers Hanover and NCNB-C&amp;S/Sovran, clearing an obstacle to the creation of the nation's third- and fourth-largest banks.  [ 35. ]


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.87
4.38
7.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.36
4.39
7.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.40
4.44
7.01
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.94
6.99
8.14
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.93
7.96
8.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.94
8.94
9.69
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.90
6.90
7.47
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
Former Secretary of State HENRY A. KISSINGER is to receive the 1991 Elie Wiesel Remembrance Award tomorrow evening at a State of Israel Bonds dinner at the Grand Hyatt.
More more than 300 Holocaust survivors will be among the guests.
The award was established in 1985 to honor individuals who, ELIE WIESEL explained yesterday, "survived and then somehow contributed -- through their work, writing, art or philanthropy -- to the welfare of the Jewish people and humanity." Mr.
Kissinger played a role in international diplomacy second to none, Mr.
Wiesel said.


Top Executives Leaving Hawker Siddeley Group
Hawker Siddeley Group P.L.C., the British-based electrical engineering company, has announced that its two top executives will be stepping aside.
Hawker's chairman, Sir Peter Baxendell, 66, will be succeeded by Sir Owen Green, the chairman of BTR P.L.C., the British industrial conglomerate that gained control of Hawker Siddeley in a $2.59 billion bid on Nov. 22.
Dr.
Alan Watkins, 52, who joined Hawker Siddeley as chief executive in 1989 from Lucas Aerospace, will be succeeded by BTR's chief executive, Alan Jackson, a 55-year-old Australian.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall


Wonya Lucas Wed to Bruce Kirton
Wonya Yvette Lucas, a daughter of Rubye M. Lucas of Atlanta and the late Bill Lucas, was married yesterday in Atlanta to Bruce G. Kirton, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan J. Kirton of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Melvin Shorter officiated at St.
Paul of the Cross Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Kirton, 30 years old, is an associate product manager in the marketing department of Coca-Cola Foods in Houston.
She graduated from Georgia Institute of Technology and has an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.


Dole Urges Bush to Act Quickly on Economy
Only days after House Republicans chided the President by suggesting that he had failed to take charge of the nation's economy, Mr.
Bush was warned by the Senate's top Republican today that he was in "rough shape" politically and that he should seek a quick consensus on a program to promote growth.
The advice came from the Senate minority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, who said Mr.
Bush would be wrong to stand by his plans to delay announcement of an economic program until his State of the Union Message in January.


Sports of The Times; The Bully Usually Gets His Way
Come to think of it, the question, or the intended question, was inappropriate, almost silly, if not, as Ray Handley contended, altogether ridiculous.
The reporter, Russ Salzberg of WWOR-TV, certainly had the right to pose to the Giants' coach the futuristic query -- Phil Simms or Jeff Hostetler -- and he admittedly was merely the fastest draw in the posse.
But with Hostetler lodged in a Tampa hospital, three broken bones in his back, listening to medical terminology more complicated than football's, it was akin to asking a sportswriter to file next week's column with his or her computer malfunctioning on today's deadline.


Nassau County Workers Take (Unpaid) Day Off
Hundreds of Nassau County workers reluctantly stayed home without pay today, the first day of a furlough program meant to help solve the county's budget crisis.
And even as the idled employees complained about lost pay and warned of reduced services, officials said that hard times were forcing a dramatic reevaluation of the programs the county can afford to provide.
"Government in general and the county government in particular are going through the process of asking what kind of services the population can expect, especially given the public's outcry about relief from property taxes," said David A. Vieser, a spokesman for Nassau County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta.


U.S. Notes and Bonds Up in Light Trading
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds rose yesterday, and interest rates moved lower.
Traders said prices were lifted by rumors of a possible Soviet coup and expectations that a new round of reports will show that the economy remained weak in November.
Virtually all the price movement occurred during overnight trading in Asia and then later in European financial markets.
Activity in the United States was extremely light, as most domestic participants extended their Thanksgiving holiday.
Trading in the United States stopped at 1 P.M., New York time.


Deli's Biggest Seller Is Lucky Lottery Tickets
Working behind the counter of Russert's Deli, Kathy Neuman had little respite from a steady stream of lunchtime customers, and it wasn't hunger that drew the crowd.
"Give me 1, 7, 2 and 6," said a customer who would identify himself only as Jim.
"And box that, please. And I'll also have five quick six lottos."


Stumping the President
A microphone that's supposed to be dead can cause as much trouble as Dorothy's dog Toto did when he pulled away the curtain to expose the Wizard of Oz as a fraud.
A White House microphone was accidentally left on this week after President Bush finished a closed-circuit television session with a teachers' convention in California.
The press room then overheard Mr.
Bush berating his staff for giving him a faulty script.
He knew the questions in advance, and was tripped up when they came in the wrong order.


KOHL AIDE FAVORS IMMIGRANT QUOTAS
A newly appointed aide to Chancellor Helmut Kohl says she favors opening Germany to immigrants by establishing annual quotas like those in the United States.
"Our people like to say that Germany is not a country for immigrants, so they react against the idea of quotas," said the aide, Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen, who took office last week as Mr.
Kohl's chief adviser on matters relating to foreigners.
"But the fact is that now we are receiving immigrants in an uncontrolled flow. If we regulate the flow, that will be better for everyone."


Experts Seeking New Guidelines On Flu Vaccine
With several areas in the country facing a shortage of influenza vaccine due to unexpectedly heavy demand, some experts today urged Federal health officials to set priorities for those who should receive the available flu shots and to take steps to prevent hoarding of vaccine.
"Some responsible public health official has to say, 'Stop giving flu shots to healthy people until we figure out what's going on with the supply,' " said Dr.
Frank Rhame, an expert in the control of infectious diseases at the University of Minnesota Hospitals and Clinics in Minneapolis.


Noncontact Boxing: Glove Power for Aerobics
Lisa Polansky, the owner of a clothing shop in Brooklyn, likes to exercise when she gets home from work.
But as an apartment dweller, Polansky must choose her time carefully.
Like a musician who worries about when to practice, Polansky is concerned that the rat-a-tat-tat from her workout sessions may bother the neighbors.
Polansky punches at a boxing bag that she has set up on her front deck.
The home gym is draped with a shower curtain to shed rain, and soon enough, snow.
But, sunny weather or not, she steps outside to pummel a speed bag, pound a heavy bag, skip rope and round out stomach crunches.
If she weren't doing this only to keep fit, she might be ready for the ring.


Change Is 'Natural,' Ukrainian Says
As the Ukraine heads for a crucial referendum on independence and a presidential election on Sunday, the front-runner is someone who has just ended 30 years as a Communist Party functionary in the Soviet Ukrainian hierarchy.
Leonid M. Kravchuk, the likely winner for President, today defended his long career as a Communist leader, saying it was natural for a person to change his views in life.


Longley Activated
Ten days after the big man from Down Under became the last first-round draft choice to sign a contract, LUC LONGLEY, a 7-foot-2-inch center, is apparently in playing condition and ready to make National Basketball Association history.
He was activated by the Minnesota Timberwolves for today's game against the Mavericks in Dallas, where he will become the first native Australian to play in the N.B.A. (AP)


Perles Gives Up One Job
Saying he had "no plans at this time to do anything but work hard and take my own advice: work hard and not say a whole lot," Michigan State's GEORGE PERLES decided yesterday to give in and give up his job as athletic director and remain as football coach.
Perles said he would not accept president JOHN DIBIAGGIO'S offer, made last week, that he give up his coaching duties to remain as athletic director.


12 Are Killed as Dust Shrouds Highway
Dust from fields barren from years of drought was driven by winds gusting to 40 miles per hour, shroudinga heavily traveled section of Interstate 5 today and causing pileups that killed 12 people and injured about 150, the authorities said.
Visibility on the highway, California's main north-south thoroughfare, was reduced to zero by the strong wind and dust.
The accidents occurred on a four-mile stretch of road about 15 miles north of Coalinga, and rescue efforts were being complicated by the severe weather conditions, the California Highway Patrol said.


Mole Returns to His Hole Without a Movie Deal but With Love
A year ago, as some of New York's more famous squatters sat under the West Side Highway cooking a turkey and a pumpkin pie in an oven made from an old metal file drawer, they feared that their homes below Riverside Park would not survive to the next Thanksgiving.
This year it looks as if they were almost correct.
Since last year most of the squatters -- who variously called themselves the Mole People, the Rotunda Gang and the Tenants of the Tunnel -- have undergone well-publicized evictions from their homes under the highway and inside a long railroad tunnel.
The most celebrated departure was made by John Joseph Kovacs.
After living alone in the tunnel for nearly 17 years, he headed upstate in March to become the first student in a program training the homeless to become organic farmers.


Chairman Is to Retire From Ford of Britain
Derek Barron, 62 years old, who has been the chairman of Ford of Britain for five years, is to retire on Dec. 31.
Mr.
Barron, who has been with the company for 40 years, was appointed chairman in 1986.
He will be succeeded by Ian G. McAllister, who became managing director of Ford of Britain in September 1991, following a period as general marketing manager of the Lincoln Mercury division in the United States.


Be Calm and Preserve Peace, Premier Urges Cambodians
Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia appealed to the public for calm today and warned that an assault on a senior Khmer Rouge leader earlier this week had threatened a United Nations-sponsored peace agreement.
His appeal in a radio address came as Thailand announced that leaders of the four Cambodian factions involved in the peace agreement would meet in an emergency session next week at a Thai resort town, Pattaya.


Bridge
The world's top-ranked player won yet another major championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here Thursday night.
Bob Hamman of Dallas, who has won nine world titles and was ranked No. 1 one in the world for the 80's, captured his third Blue Ribbon Pair title by a slender margin.
His partner was Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C., a financier who was winning his first national title.
The final standings were:
First, Hamman and Nickell, 760.2 match points;


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball League


Patents; Simplified Software For Computer Systems
In what could be a major breakthrough in computer design, Kendall Square Research of Waltham, Mass., has patented a radically new approach to building "massively parallel" computing systems.
Parallel processing entails yoking together a large number of individual computer processors, each of which works simultaneously on a different part of a large problem.
Massively parallel systems are at the cutting edge of that strategy, and integrate hundreds or even thousands of processors to tackle jobs like calculating the air flow over a jet wing or analyzing climate trends.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Fordham Beats Siena  Fred Herzog scored 26 points and Sanford Jenkins added 21 as Fordham defeated Siena, 90-69, last night in Albany.
Herzog scored 12 points in the first half as Fordham (1-1) used a 13-0 run to break a 16-16 tie.
Siena (0-2) didn't get its first points until Bruce Schroeder hit a 3-point shot 3 minutes 22 seconds into the game. (AP) UConn 79, Yale 55: Scott Burrell scored 20 points and Chris Smith scored 18 as Connecticut held off a second-half rally by Yale and beat the Elis, 79-55, in Hartford.
The victory was the 350th of Coach Jim Calhoun's career and his 100th at Connecticut (2-0).
Smith and Burrell sparked an 11-point UConn run after Yale (2-1) cut a 20-point lead to 56-48 with 7:25 to play on a 3-point shot by Damon Franklin. (AP) SKIING  First Victory for Accola  Paul Accola, a five-year veteran from Switzerland, posted his first World Cup victory, holding off Alberto Tomba of Italy on the second run of a men's giant slalom yesterday in Breckenridge, Colo.
Accola was in front after the first run and had a lead of 1.13 seconds over Tomba.
The Italian was the fastest skier of the second run, 1 minute 9.07 seconds, but Accola's 1:09.25 gave him a combined time of 2:17.23, compared with Tomba's 2:18.18, a difference of .95 seconds.
Fredrik Nyberg of Sweden finished third in 2:18.86. (AP) TENNIS  Korda in Semifinals  Top-seeded Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia beat Scott Davis, 4-6, 6-4, 6-1, yesterday to advance to the semifinals of the South African Open in Johannesburg.
The American kept Korda off balance in the first set, but his game fall apart with a succession of unforced errors and 11 double faults.
Grant Connell advanced when second-seeded Goran Ivanisevic withdrew because of an injury to his right Achilles' tendon.
Wayne Ferreira, the defending champion who is seeded fifth, defeated fourth-seeded Anders Jarryd, 6-4, 6-4 in another quarterfinal.
Todd Witsken reached the semifinals by defeating Mark Woodforde, 6-3, 7-6 (7-5). (AP) SOCCER  Sweden Finishes Third  Sweden surged to a 3-0 lead in the first half and went on to defeat Germany, 4-0, yesterday in Canton, China, to take third place in the first women's world championship.
The United States will play Norway for the title today. (AP)


Review/Rock; For Bowie, One More Change of Pace
In his many past incarnations, David Bowie has appeared suave and seamless, in full control of a self-created theatrical production.
Tin Machine, Mr.
Bowie's new band, is different.
At the Academy on Wednesday night, the performance had the rough edges of a work in progress, just what the music required.
With Tin Machine, Mr.
Bowie has sloughed off his past.
He made an album in 1989 with Tin Machine, a four-man band in which he is not billed separately; then he played a final arena tour with a different band, performing his old hits for what he said would be the last time.
Tin Machine recently released its second album, and it now has enough of its own material for a full-length concert.


Why Turkey Pursues Kurdish Groups in Iraq; To Oust Hussein
To the Editor:
As an Iraqi democrat who was asked to join in a discussion before a Congressional subcommittee headed by Representative Stephen J. Solarz on Oct. 29, I reply to A. M. Rosenthal's "Mideast Decision Time" (column, Nov. 12).
Mr.
Rosenthal calls on President Bush and the United States Government to support a plan proposed by the Kurdish leader Jalal Talabani to establish an interim government of Iraqi forces against Saddam Hussein on Kurdish territory.
The United States is being asked to recognize and protect such a government.


Kozarac Journal; Serbs Settle in Where Croats Decide to Retreat
It was a touching family scene: Milan Djukic's 20-month-old granddaughter was asleep on the sofa, pacifier in her mouth and flaxen haired doll by her side.
But Mr.
Djukic said he felt like a stranger in this warm, cozy kitchen, and with good reason.
Everything in the room -- from the doll to the wood-burning stove to the souvenir plates on the walls -- belongs to a Croat family who abandoned their house and farm in terror three months ago.


Quote of the Day
"People have to think of the basic expenses, like mortgages and car payments. I have a job right now, but who knows what will happen?" BARBARA ROSS, a holiday shopper at Bloomingdale's.  [ 1:2. ]


New York Must Have a Plan for Water Needs of Next Century; Three-Minute Shower
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 19 water-conservation editorial recommends a three-minute shower.
It's also good for your health.


Courts Propose New Fees To Pay for a Budget Rise
Fighting to recover from budget cuts, the state court system today proposed a menu of new fees, including a 1 percent levy on civil judgments and a $50 fee for the filing of motions, to pay for a $61 million budget increase.
Spokesmen for legal associations said the fees would further limit the average citizen's access to the courts.
But they said they would weigh the impact of the new fees against the prospect of another year of judicial gridlock before taking a formal position on the request.


BRIEFS
*
Citizens Financial Group Inc., Providence, R.I., a unit of Royal Bank of Scotland Group P.L.C., said it was interested in acquiring additional operations in southern New England through the F.D.I.C. *
First Financial Management Corp., Atlanta, a data processing services company, and ALTA Health Strategies Inc. signed an definitive agreement for First Financial to acquire ALTA Health through a merger.


Editorial Notebook; 'We Could Use Our Heads'
"How much do you want to bet there'll be a lot of screaming?" I said to the friend with whom I was walking to the reunion.
But of course there'd be a lot of screaming.
That was how we greeted one another years ago, when we -- former prom queens and cheerleaders, bluestockings, neurotics and all-around good kids -- worked together on a fashion magazine called Mademoiselle.
Three hundred of us had been invited to the reunion, and 175 showed up.
"A very high rate of return," somebody on the steering committee said, and preened.
She was entitled: their names dredged from old Rolodexes and uncertain memories, they arrived from Chicago, from Sikeston, Mo., even London.
The one who came the farthest, though, was the woman from Connecticut.
She, once the college and career editor, is 91.


BEIJING SETS FREE 2 IN '89 PROTESTS
The Government today released a student dissident from prison and dropped charges against an unofficial labor leader, the official New China News Agency announced.
The labor leader, Han Dongfang, was one of the key figures in the Tiananmen Square democracy protests in 1989.
As head then of a newly formed workers' organization, he mobilized laborers to join student demonstrators.


Sleds for Everyone
Children's sleds have come a long way since the days when there was only the Flexible Flyer with its wooden slats on crimson metal runners.
Now there are models to fit just about any purse and age.
There's even something for babies, and some sleds use the images of characters like Barbie and Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles.
Many are built of molded plastic light enough for small children to carry.
And they meet updated safety standards.
Labels often give safety tips, like making sure that children face forward, feet are tucked in and hands grasp handles at all times.
Here are some sleds offered this winter for various ages. (For traditionalists, the classic Flexible Flyer racer is still available in large toy stores for $49 to $79). 2 Years Old and Younger Baby Bob and Baby Boggan, each resembling an infant seat with body strap and tow line; by Norca or SLM.
Some models have a molded Mickey Mouse head and a waterproof cushion or padding.
Cost: $8 to $19.  3 to 7 Years Old Some are rounded saucers or dishes in fluorescent colors with strap handles.
Others have a seat and a steering wheel like a snowmobile.
Examples: Super Saucer and Fazer from SLM.
Cost: $4 to $15.  8 and Over 36- and 48-inch-long bobsleds, many with padded seats.
Most provide a faster and more versatile ride.
Some have rigid grab bars and hand brakes that dig into the snow.
Examples: Snow Tandem and Sno Kart (both two-seaters) from Norca; $15 to $25.  (Sources: Toys "R" Us; Sears, Roebuck; Caldor; Norca Industries; SLM; Flexible Flyer)


Limits on School Buses Anger Parents
When Heritage Hills, a condominium complex in Somers, N.Y., opened its doors, only residents over 40 years old were accepted.
Now it will let in families with young children -- but it tries to make sure they don't act their age.
Swimming hours for children are restricted and bicycles are permitted only on designated roadways.
There are no playgrounds and both balloons and birthday parties are frowned upon.
But the issue that has compelled families with children to seek Federal help is a prohibition against school buses on the condominium's grounds.


Ann Taylor Seeks Its Lost Niche BYL&gt;By STEPHANIE STROM
When the retailing legend Joseph E. Brooks came aboard at Ann Taylor in late 1988, he was greeted as Prince Charming come to rescue a fair damsel in distress.
Now, it looks as if the man who once saved the Lord &amp; Taylor department store chain from eternal dowdiness has failed to define the Ann Taylor chain as anything more than just another women's clothing store.
His method of adding stores at a 30-a-year clip increased sales and generated cash but did little to give Ann Taylor any special offering for the sophisticated career women who have patronized the store for its 37 years.


No Bonus For Many At G.M.
This holiday season will be a bit leaner than last for tens of thousands of salaried auto workers.
The General Motors Corporation, pleading hard times after reporting a $2.2 billion loss for the first nine months of the year, said today that it was canceling a $600 Christmas bonus it had planned to give each salaried worker.


Joseph McShea, 84, Bishop in Allentown
Bishop Joseph McShea, who became the first head of the Roman Catholic Church's newly created Allentown Diocese in 1961 and remained in the post until his retirement 22 years later, died Thursday at his home here.
He was 84 years old.
He had been ill for several years with diabetes and other ailments, said Bishop Thomas J. Welsh, who succeeded Bishop McShea in 1983.


Classical Music in Review
Aequalis
Trio Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


Orin Smith Weds Stephanie Bennett
Dr.
Stephanie Mitchell Bennett, the president and chief executive of Centenary College in Hackettstown, N.J., and Orin Robert Smith, the president and chief executive of the Engelhard Corporation in Iselin, N.J., were married yesterday in Taos, N.M.
The Rev.
Archibald M. Hewitt officiated at the Episcopal Church of St.
James.
The bride, the daughter of Mrs.
C.
S.
Mitchell of Taos and the late Mr.
Mitchell, graduated with honors and has a master's degree in English from the University of New Mexico.
She has a doctorate in American civilization from the University of Iowa.
She is the chairwoman of the Association of Independent Colleges and Universities of New Jersey.


British Air-G.E.
The proposed sale of British Airways P.L.C.'s engine overhaul business to the General Electric Company of the United States will not be referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, the Department of Trade and Industry said in a statement, reducing the likelihood that completion of the deal will be delayed.
British Airways agreed to sell the business, which performs repair and overhauls services for civil jet engines, to G.E. for about $:272 million, or $480 million, in August.


Observer; Bang, Bang, Ha, Ha!
This is the biennial crime bill.
Biennial means "two years." It is called the biennial crime bill because every two years Congress enacts a bill just like it.
Its purpose is to reduce crime.
This is the purpose of every biennial crime bill passed every two years: to reduce crime.
Are there any questions?
Yes, Billy, it is true that each biennial crime bill so far enacted has been followed by more crime than ever before.


EXECUTIVES
*
Alexander Consulting Group Inc., Lyndhurst, N.J., a subsidiary of Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc., named Robert K. Burden chairman and chief executive of its Alexander Consulting Group Ltd.-Canada unit. *
European American Bank, Uniondale, L.I., a subsidiary of European American Bancorp, has promoted Edward Travaglianti to president and chief operating officer from executive vice president for consumer and corporate banking.


U.N. Rebukes Burma Military For Refusing to Yield Power
The United Nations unanimously rebuked the military Government of Myanmar, formerly Burma, today for its persistent refusal to surrender political power to a democratically elected Parliament.
The impetus for the rare criticism of a third world country was Myanmar's continued detention of this year's Nobel Peace Prize winner, the opposition leader Daw Aung San Suu Kyi.


Protecting Privacy on Cellular Phones
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 9 article on the confidentiality of cordless and cellular phone conversations makes the important point that subscribers should always exercise care when communicating over a wireless telephone but overlooks the increased enforcement of cellular privacy laws and industry efforts to improve security.


Correction
Articles on Sept. 7, Oct. 14, and Nov. 14 about racial disturbances in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, referred incorrectly to Rabbi Shmuel Butman.
He is the spokesman for the Crown Heights Emergency Committee, not for the Lubavitch Movement or its leader, Rabbi Menachem Schneerson.


Israeli Theater and Music
"Israel: The Next Generation," the largest Israeli festival of performing arts ever staged in the United States, will be presented at the Brooklyn Academy of Music from Jan. 19 through Feb. 2.
The festival will highlight the theater and music of recent immigrants to Israel.
Performers will include the violinist Shlomo Mintz and the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra; the singer Ofra Haza; the Amka Yemenite Dance Troupe; the Cameri Theater of Tel Aviv; the Gesher Theater Company, and the singer Shlomo Artzi.
Information: (718) 636-4111.


Why Turkey Pursues Kurdish Groups in Iraq
To the Editor:
"U.S. Condones Turkish Attacks on Kurds" (letter, Nov. 13) by Vera Beaudin Saeedpour, criticizes Turkey's antiterrorist operations in Iraq.
The writer misleads your readers or is naive in asserting that innocent Iraqi Kurds are victims of Turkey and that President Turgut Ozal of Turkey is like Saddam Hussein.


France Moves Troops to Block Togo Coup
President Gnassingbe Eyadema today urged soldiers to give up their attempt to restore him to power, while 300 French troops remained poised to intervene a thalf-hour away.
Rebel soldiers were besieging the oceanside palace of reformist Prime Minister Joseph Koffigoh, which they surrounded with tanks on Wednesday, refusing to let food into the complex.


Critic's Notebook; Commemorating Pearl Harbor: Books That Analyze and Revise
If you ask Martin Gilbert what's new about some of the books pegged to the 50th anniversary of the Pearl Harbor debacle, and how they differ from histories that appeared after World War II or in recent years, he offers a one-word answer: "Signals."
Mr.
Gilbert, a fellow at Merton College, Oxford, is Winston Churchill's official biographer, an expert on the Holocaust and author of a score of books, including a newly updated edition of his authoritative "Second World War" (Henry Holt).
The book includes fresh information about the interception and decoding of enemy signals, which helped to defeat the Axis in the Pacific and European theaters of war.


Replay, Messier Thwart Sabres
After two weeks on the road filled with inhospitable plot twists, the Rangers tonight found sanctuary in the instant replay and achieved a 5-4 overtime victory that visiting hockey teams are not supposed to get.
The trail could have ended far worse for the Rangers, who squandered three leads and were rescued by another replay ruling with just 9.4 seconds left in regulation.
Buffalo defenseman Jay Wells appeared to score the winning goal on a rebound while tumbling over goaltender Mike Richter.
To the dismay of almost everyone at the Memorial Auditorium, the score was disallowed by the replay judge, Wally Harris, who ruled that Wells had kicked the puck into the net.


METRO DIGEST
THIS IS NOTHING TO CELEBRATE
Despite the best efforts of shopkeepers and President Bush to inspire some holiday cheer, shoppers in and around New York City seemed determined to keep a tight grip on their pocketbooks, on what is normally one of the busiest shopping days of the year.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY MEMORIAL SERVICE FOR SLAIN STUDENT
Relatives, friends and classmates of Darrell Sharpe, the 16-year-old student who was shot to death this week in Thomas Jefferson High School, gathered in an East New York church to mourn his death and to try to understand the senseless spiral of violence that led to it.
Page 23.
PRESIDING OVER THE WATKINS TRIAL
The judge in the Brian Watkins trial, Justice Edwin Torres of State Supreme Court, has risen from a childhood in the barrio of East Harlem to become one of New York City's most experienced and sternest judges and a man known for a crackling eloquence both inside and outside the courtroom.
Page 23. 11 ARRESTED IN CHINATOWN KIDNAPPING
A kidnapping victim was rescued in Brooklyn and 11 Chinese men were arrested in what law enforcement officials said was one in an increasing number of abductions in the trade of smuggling illegal aliens from China.
Page 23.
CITY WANTS TO RESTRICT TANKER TRUCKS
Saying he wanted to avoid "tons of potential bombs thundering along our streets," Mayor David N. Dinkins said that the city has asked the Federal Government to let it retain its restrictions on the type of tanker trucks that can carry flammable liquids, rather than rely on new, looser Federal rules.
Page 23.
REGION  NEW FEES FOR STATE COURTS
The chief administrator of New York State's courts submitted a budget request that asked the Legislature to pick from a menu of new fees -- including a 1 percent levy on civil judgments and a $50 fee for filing motions -- to pay for a $61 million budget increase aimed at reopening courtrooms.
Page 25.
WHAT LOTTERY LUCK DOES TO A DELI
The lottery machine in Russert's Deli in Robbinsville, N.J., has set a record by spitting out its fifth winning jackpot ticket, and things just haven't been the same ever since for William Russert and his employees.
Page 25.
A NEW DRAMA AT A CONNECTICUT THEATER
A British-born producer, Louis Burke, has come forth with a tantalizingly grand proposal to rescue the American Festival Theater in Stratford, Conn., by redeveloping it into a three-theater complex with a drama school and a hotel and restaurant nearby, but many officials, including theater board members, are skeptical.
Page 25.
CONDO WELCOMES CHILDREN (TO A POINT)
When Heritage Hills, a condominium complex in Somers, N.Y., finally agreed to accept families with young children, it tried to make sure they didn't act their age by restricting swimming hours and bicycle paths.
When it tried to prohibit school buses, a father went to the Federal Government.
Page 24.
10 Nassau County police officers test positive for exposure to tuberculosis.
Page 25.
About New York 22  Consumer's World 48


Mongolian Immigrant Tries to Find New Life
To most New Yorkers, the homeless long ago ceased being just people who were down on their luck.
They became fundamentally different, like people from some strange place on the other side of the world.
Mongolia, say.
Amarjargal Dorj, a Mongolian, has lived in homeless shelters since early February, shortly after defecting while working as a journalist covering his President's visit to the United States.
He has feared for his safety, contracted tuberculosis, slept on the streets when waiter jobs kept him out past lockup.


'Jimbo' Leconte Has Davis Cup Boiling Over
It was a Davis Cup baptism by annihilation for Pete Sampras tonight.
Henri Leconte, a player who just about rose from the dead to play this final, according to Yannick Noah, the French team captain, virtually scared Sampras to death inside the Palais des Sports.
The unassuming arena was transformed into an unamicable caldron by Leconte, who stalked the court like the rooster that serves as the emblem for France's national sports teams.
And while Leconte dealt Sampras a 6-4, 7-5, 6-4 thrashing, the crowd did the crowing.


Tough Phrases From the Bench
As lunch hour approached, Justice Edwin Torres of State Supreme Court was viewing the proceedings with clearly mounting impatience.
Restless, standing up frequently to glare down on the Manhattan courtroom from a more imposing perspective, the judge in the Brian Watkins trial was growing more and more irritated with the fruitless attempts by the defense to establish that incriminating statements made by the four defendants accused in the killing of the Utah tourist were obtained by the police under spurious circumstances.
He kept snapping "Sustained, next question" to numerous objections by the prosecutor, Thomas Schiels.


Redmen, of Course, Win
In the opening round of a St.
John's basketball tuneup otherwise referred to as the Joe Lapchick Memorial Tournament, the Redmen breezed past the University of North Carolina-Wilmington, 75-57, yesterday before 5,266 spectators at Alumni Hall.
"The storyline of this game was very simple," admitted Kevin Eastman, the loser's head coach.
"Better players win games."


Citicorp Sells Off 23% Of Its Maxwell Shares
Citicorp said today that it had sold 23 percent of the Maxwell Communication Corporation shares it was holding as collateral for money owed it by the Maxwell family.
The news alarmed some lenders to the family's troubled empire, but there was no indication that the sale signaled a breakdown in the temporary standstill pact to which banks had agreed on Monday.


South African Rivals Prepare for Talks
Led by the governing National Party and its foremost opponent, the African National Congress, a broad array of political organizations came together today to lay the groundwork for the long-awaited formal negotiations on post-apartheid South Africa.
The meeting was convened to prepare for a full-scale convention of political parties in three weeks that would open the way to talks on a new constitution extending equality to the country's black majority.
Under the chairmanship of two prominent judges, Ismail Mohamed and Petrus J. Schabort, the 20 parties attending the talks today agreed that the convention would be held on Dec. 20 and 21 and that it would be called the Convention for a Democratic South Africa.


New York Seeks to Keep Strict Rule on Tanker Trucks
Seeking to avoid "tons of potential bombs thundering along our streets," New York City has asked the Federal Government to let it retain its restrictions on the type of tanker trucks allowed to carry flammable liquids, rather than to rely on new, looser Federal rules, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday.
Mr.
Dinkins said two recent accidents in the city would have been far worse without the city's strict regulations, which limit the trucks to 4,000 gallons, forbid tractor-trailers -- which can jack-knife -- and require that the tank be made of steel and divided into compartments.


Sandstrom Suspended
Two days after his coach was given a 12-game suspension for throwing a stick at a referee, Los Angeles Kings forward TOMAS SANDSTROM was handed a five-game suspension yesterday for using his stick to attack Buffalo defensman KEVIN HALLER.
Although Sandstrom was given only a minor penalty after the high-sticking indident in a game against the Sabres on Nov. 14, BRIAN O'NEILL, the National Hockey League's executive vice president, said a close examination of the video tape made it clear that Sandstrom had swung his stick at Hallar's head in a deliberate act of retaliation and with such force that Haller was momentarily stunned by the blow to his helmet.


Cars for Company
To the Editor:
I run in Central Park weekdays between 6 and 7:30 A.M., part of a sizable group in summer months and a few weeks after the Marathon.
But as winter approaches, our numbers thin, so that there are sparsely peopled stretches of road, where the sight and presence of cars is very welcome.
If cars are banned, they will be missed.
PAULA OFFRICHT New York, Nov. 14, 1991


Toll in Indonesia Is Put at 100
A fact-finding team from the Roman Catholic Church said today that Indonesian troops killed more than 100 pro-independence demonstrators in East Timor on Nov. 12.
The account, by investigators under the aegis of the Bishops Conference of Indonesia, contrasted sharply with testimony by the Indonesian armed forces commander, Gen.
Try Sutrisno.
He told a Parliament hearing on Wednesday that 19 people died in the shootings and 91 were wounded.


The Nation's First Shopper Buys Socks


Errors Hurt Global Warming Theories
To the Editor:
Tom Wicker, in "Time for Action," an Oct. 24 column on global warming theories, states that Richard Lindzen "told a group of scientists in Washington that he had 'withdrawn' the complex hypothesis that was an important element of his skepticism." Mr.
Wicker's conclusion that my "changed position" seems to "justify a heightened urgency in responding to threatening atmospheric developments" is unwarranted.


Ralph Bellamy, the Actor, Is Dead at 87
Ralph Bellamy, a veteran character actor who appeared in more than 100 movies but who attained his greatest recognition on Broadway as the stricken Franklin D. Roosevelt struggling to walk in "Sunrise at Campobello," died yesterday at St.
Johns Hospital and Health Center in Los Angeles.
He was 87 years old.
He had been hospitalized this month with a longstanding lung illness, said Pat Kirk, a spokeswoman for the hospital.


Folger Troupe to Get New Theater After Coming Back From the Brink
Six years ago the Folger Shakespeare Theater was almost forced to ring down its final curtain in failure.
Now it has been revived so successfully that it is moving from the library that gave the company its first home, and its name, to a new theater that will almost double its seating capacity.
The move will be from a largely residential area behind the Library of Congress on Capitol Hill to the ground floor of what used to be Lansburgh's department store a few blocks north of the National Gallery of Art in northwest Washington.


Indian Strike Disrupts Business
A one-day strike called by leftist unions to protest reforms in India's state-dominated economy crippled business across the nation yesterday, officials said.
The strike halted work at state-owned banks and insurance companies, forced cancellation of airline flights and disrupted public transport.
More than 12 million workers and 3.5 million government employees joined the strike.
Youths in Calcutta played cards atop a traffic police stand on a nearly deserted street. (Reuters)


Shops Fill With Thrifty Shoppers As Economy Dims Season's Spirit
The Christmas lights were twinkling, the doors were open for early-bird specials, the store clerks seemed unusually helpful and the Santas had their laps ready.
But despite shopkeepers' intensified efforts to create holiday cheer, many shoppers in and around New York City seemed determined to keep a tight grip on their pocketbooks yesterday, on what is normally one of the busiest shopping days of the Christmas and Hanukkah season.
People were still buying, of course.
But interviews with three dozen shoppers and sales clerks in stores and malls throughout the region found that many customers were sharply reducing the number of people they were buying for, spending less on each gift and substituting homemade presents for purchases that they would normally make.


Dollar Rises Against Mark On Worry About the Soviets
The dollar rose against the German mark yesterday in light trading dominated by concerns about the Soviet Union.
Foreign exchange traders said United States dealings were light because many of them took off the day after Thanksgiving, when the domestic market was closed.


Simms Adjusts to New Task: Getting Ready for a Game
It sounds so easy.
Jeff Hostetler is hurt, so Phil Simms steps into his old position and the Giants hardly miss a beat.
It is not quite that simple.
True, when Hostetler suffered three broken bones in his back last Sunday against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, Simms came on and led the Giants to a 21-14 victory.


Brown Succumbs to McGirt the Maestro
What a revelation James (Buddy) McGirt was tonight.
He did what nobody thought could be done to Simon Brown, the World Boxing Council welterweight champion: He made him look ordinary.


USX Loses Big Decision On Marathon
A United States magistrate has concluded that the USX Corporation should pay $409.5 million to some 12,000 former shareholders of the Marathon Oil Company.
The magistrate said USX improperly accepted some shares that were tendered after a deadline during the steel company's 1981 battle for control of Marathon.
The extra stock gave USX, then known as the United States Steel Corporation, a tactical advantage in its bidding war with the Mobil Corporation but resulted in a lower payout to those who tendered on time.


You Can't Keep Good Tourists Down


Patents; A Low-Fat Butter Made From Dairy Byproducts
Jules Silver, a retired veterinarian in Boca Raton, Fla., has patented a new form of low-fat butter that unlike margarine is made only from natural dairy products.
While ordinary butter consists exclusively of the fat separated from milk, the new butter is made primarily from dairy byproducts -- the protein extracted while making skim milk and the whey produced in making cheese.


Small (and Nearby) Airports Gain Passengers
With virtually no fanfare, many smaller suburban airports on the fringes of major metropolitan areas have been increasing the number, diversity and range of their flights over the past eight years.
Long Islanders, for example, can use MacArthur Airport at Islip, where they can catch daily nonstop flights to Chicago, Boston, Albany, Newark, Baltimore, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Syracuse, Providence, R.I., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Charlotte and Raleigh-Durham, N.C.


Honor for Tony Pena
As one of only five players to have done it both ways, Red Sox catcher TONY PENA should know whether it's harder to win a Rawlings Gold Glove award in the American or the National League.
"The American," Pena said the other day after picking up his fourth trophy, his first as an American League player.


Believe in Miracles? Actually, No Need To
It will never be 1980 again for America's Olympic hockey players.
But these are heady days for the mix of collegians and young National Hockey League players preparing for the 1992 Games in Albertville, France.
"When people see me, the first thing they want to know is: Do we have a chance?" said Dave Peterson, the coach.


Turmoil Hangs Over Investigation of 9 Killings at Phoenix Temple
The release of four Tucson men charged in the killing of nine people in a Buddhist temple last August has perplexed the Thai population and underscored already persistent questions about the conduct of the investigation.
And the apparent turmoil in the case has resulted in a political battle between the county attorney and sheriff that some say could damage both men's careers.


Chicken Kiev, the Sequel
Why is President Bush in such a rush to signal willingness to recognize an independent Ukraine, even before that Soviet republic votes on independence tomorrow?
Putting out word of "expeditious" recognition might placate right-wing critics.
They chafed at Mr.
Bush's "Chicken Kiev" speech in August condemning "suicidal nationalism," calling it ill-advised support for a disappearing center.
But a rush to grant recognition risks squandering America's chance to promote a Ukraine that is both independent and democratic.


Mourners of Slain Student Ask, 'When Does It Stop?'
A memorial service for Darrell Sharpe began yesterday morning as quiet gathering of a few relatives and friends.
The teen-ager's mother, his brothers and sisters and a handful of others huddled in the front pews of the Messiah Baptist Church in Brooklyn, near his open coffin.
But midway through the three-and-a-half-hour service, the church at 866 Sutter Avenue in East New York was ringing with the soulful singing of cousins and classmates, teachers and neighbors who came to mourn Mr.
Sharpe, who was shot to death on Monday at Thomas Jefferson High School.


Serbian Troops Pull Out of Croatian Barracks
In what could be a step toward peace, the Serbian-led federal army withdrew today from two barracks in Croatia.
But new fighting was reported elsewhere in the secessionist republic.
Several hundred Yugoslav Army vehicles began leaving the Marshal Tito barracks near the Croatian capital, Zagreb, this morning, Croatian defense officials said.
A European Community spokesman, Ed Koestal, said the vehicles were not interfered with.


Industry Group Set to Back French Bid for Failed Insurer
An insurance industry group is planning to drop its opposition to a French consortium's purchase of the Executive Life Insurance Company, a move that could speed a resolution of the insurer's failure.
The group, the National Organization of Life and Health Insurance Guaranty Associations, had previously threatened to challenge the selection of the French consortium as the winner of the bidding for Executive Life.
But in a statement today the group said it had asked its members to approve a new plan under which it would cooperate with the French consortium.


Squabble, Sadness And Spite
Thanksgiving came and went with Bernie Nicholls and his wife, Heather, awaiting the birth of twins, the hockey world mourning the death of Bob Johnson and the Rangers being punished for playing like turkeys last spring.
In the Nicholls situation, his agent is spoiling for a financial fight with Glen Sather, the president of the Edmonton Oilers.
In Johnson's case, they are burying and praising the most influential and successful American ever to grace this Canadian-dominated sport.
As for the Rangers, they won't be home for two holidays this season in part because their play angered the general manager at the wrong time last season.
First things first.


Religion Notes
Deteriorating Schools
America's theological schools are in woeful physical shape, an 18-month study by the Association of Higher Education Facilities Officers and the Lilly Endowment has found.


Jets' Frase Wins Ed Block Award For Coming Back From Illness
Paul Frase was voted the Ed Block Award by the Jets' players today in tribute to his courage and determination to play football again.
Although he didn't vote for himself, it was no contest.
"It was kind of between me, A. B. Brown and Dave Cadigan, who both came back from knee surgery," said Frase, a 6-foot-5-inch, 270-pound defensive tackle who battled back from hyperthyroidism, a nonfootball injury that caused him to lose weight, lose strength and miss all of last season.
"I voted for Cadigan."


Funeral for Teen-Ager Killed in High School Shooting


Give Soviet Workers a Stake in Capitalism
How can economic reform help the Soviet Union, or what's left of it, become a pluralist democracy?
The consensus seems to be that the route lies through rapid market reform that consists of ending subsidies, freeing prices and allowing entrepreneurs to take over enterprises that have been run by the state.


3 Companies Said to Invest In Venture
Sony and Motorola have joined Apple Computer in investing in a closely watched Silicon Valley start-up company that is developing a new type of portable computing device, industry executives said today.
The start-up, General Magic Inc., was formed last year by three former Apple Computer Inc. employees with a minority investment from Apple.
It is developing what it calls a personal intelligent communicator, which is believed to be a pocket-sized device that will help people organize personal notes and appointments and will receive and transmit faxes and computer data by radio waves.


10 Nassau County Officers Test Positive for TB
The Nassau County police said yesterday that 10 of 71 police officers tested this week for exposure to tuberculosis had shown positive results, indicating that they had been exposed to TB bacteria sometime during their lives.
But none were contagious or showed signs of having the disease, officials said.
"The fact that so many tested positive is not that significant because nobody showed signs of active disease," said Detective Sgt.
Richard Snizek, a department spokesman.
Tests of the general population show that 5 to 10 percent have been exposed to TB, medical experts say.


Conston's Audit Withdrawn
The Conston Corporation, which operates the 14 Plus and 16 Plus women's clothing chains, said its independent auditor, Coopers &amp; Lybrand, had withdrawn its Aug. 1, 1991, report on the company's financial statements.
Conston said the move reflected the disappearance of Victor G. Incendy, the chairman of both Conston and Cascade International Inc., and investigations into possible illegal activities at Cascade.


In a Specialized School, Young Mothers Thrive
Talaya Goblish, 19 years old, born when her mother was 17, gets off the school bus on the parklike grounds of Honeywell Inc., with her own daughters Tashina, 2, and Takisha, 1.
Then comes Tammy Stofferahn, 17.
She says she got in fights in school, dropped out at 15, ran away, got involved with drugs, tried suicide, met a boy and in June had a baby, Shawn.


Not to Be a Dweeb, O.E.D. Takes on New Words
Dweebs and dinks have made it, and woopies are in as well.
They are among more than 2,000 words and phrases that have come into wide use since 1980 and that have been enshrined -- at least for now -- in the Oxford Dictionary of New Words, a 322-page volume being published on Thursday by the Oxford University Press.
More than half are American, with subjects from drugs to business, health to music.
Tiny drawings indicate the field of each entry: a tree for the environment, a computer terminal for science and technology, an explosion for war and weapons.


Stolen Car Kills Girl, Police Say
A 3-year-old girl was killed yesterday afternoon when the car in which she was riding was hit broadside at a Queens intersection by a car that had been stolen Thursday night, the police said.
Three teen-agers were in the stolen car, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
"They came barreling down the street, ran a stop sign and hit the other car," he said.


Don't Penalize the Poor for Bank Failures
In trying to place the blame for bank failures, Federal officials have unfairly pointed a finger at effective loan programs for low-income Americans.
It would be another sad legacy of the greedy 1980's if the havoc wrought by indiscreet bankers led to the elimination of loans for the disadvantaged.
Last month, the departing chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, William Seidman, called for an end to the Community Reinvestment Act, which was established in 1977 to set guidelines for bank lending to the local communities.
He suggested that the act is "no longer required or affordable" and that eliminating it could prevent bank failures.


In a 90's Quest for Black Identity, Intense Doubts and Disagreement
The ever-changing black experience in America is being assessed with a new intensity.
Skin color, how you talk, more specifically what you say and how you live your life are examples of the tests being used to determine what it means to be black in the 1990's.
Not since the tumultuous 1960's has there been such an intense focus on blackness.
In past years, such highly sensitive issues were seldom discussed outside some black circles.
But they are increasingly being aired in national forums, news articles and books.
The topics range from "What's Black, Who's Black, What's Not" to "Black Like Who?" Films like "School Daze," "Livin' Large" and "Strictly Business" have used satire to explore racial conflict and contradiction among blacks.
Outlooks, Values, Beliefs
"These are valid questions in that there are some distinctions in the ethnic sense as to what it means to be black culturally and psychologically," said Dr.
Roderick J. Watts of DePaul University, Chicago, a consultant on human diversity and assistant professor of psychology.
"Aside from skin color, there is something to being ethnically black in terms of outlook on life, values and beliefs."


Your Taxes; Health Insurance Benefit Extended
Among its last-minute moves this week, Congress passed six-month extensions of a dozen tax breaks that had been due to expire at the end of this year, and among those expected to benefit are professionals, owners of small businesses and poor people.
For lawyers, photographers, candy store operators and other owners of unincorporated businesses, perhaps the most important extension is one that allows them to continue deducting 25 percent of their personal health insurance costs.
To claim the deduction, they must set up a group health insurance plan and accept the same coverage as their employees.


Sparta Journal; Captives of Budget Cuts Yearning for New Prison
Earlier this year, state officials in Georgia were fretting that many of the rural counties due to see new prisons opening this year might not have enough qualified people to staff them.
But at year's end it is the residents of those counties who are fretting, and not about a less-than-adequate labor pool.
They are upset because the recession and a state budget freeze have stalled prison openings and in some cases halted construction of some of them.


SPENDING BY SOVIETS HALTED
The Soviet Union, virtually out of money, was forced to stop payments from its Central Bank accounts today after the Russian republic, led by President Boris N. Yeltsin, struck another crippling blow to the central Government of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev by refusing to authorize another round of deficit spending.
Coming two days after President Bush disclosed that the United States was prepared to quickly recognize the Ukraine's independence, the decision by Mr.
Yeltsin not to bail out Mr.
Gorbachev's foundering Government dramatized the difficulty that Mr.
Gorbachev has in getting support for the union even from those inclined in the past to support it.


Patents; A New Toy That Creates An Illusion
Beam me up, Scotty!
Hoping to make a toy that combines the lucrative accessories of G.I.
Joe with the fantasies of "Star Trek," a New Jersey inventor has devised a "teleporter" that appears to vaporize doll-sized figures and beam them to a different location.
As envisioned, a doll figure is placed inside a box that contains a windowed "transporter" chamber.
Upon activating the device, the youngster looks through the window and watches the figure appear to dissolve.
Upon opening the chamber door, the figure is in fact gone, and it suddenly reappears in a separate chamber elsewhere.


Air Wis Bid Is Challenged
A group including the Heine Securities Corporation, which owns 9.5 percent of Air Wis Services Inc., said it would not back United Airlines' offer to acquire the company's assets.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the group said it questioned whether Air Wis could reasonably insure that the proposed merger with the UAL Corporation, the owner of United, adequately reflected the value of the company.
Heine also questioned Air Wis's efforts to explore all other options to sell or lease the airline or to enter into other arrangements with third parties, including other regional airlines.


Fame Ballots Mailed, Without One Big Name
Ballots for election to the Baseball Hall of Fame were mailed out yesterday with the names of 18 newly eligible candidates, including TOM SEAVER (311 career victories) and TONY PEREZ (1,652 runs batted in) and even TOBY HARRAH (.264 career average), but with no mention of the most famous player who retired five years ago, the game's career leader in hits, PETE ROSE (4,256).
Rose, who retired as a player after the 1986 season, would have been eligible this year but the Hall of Fame's board of directors voted unanimously last February that nobody on baseball's permanently ineligible list could be considered for induction.


Robert McClure, 98; Led Tennis Company
Robert H. McClure, a salesman and tennis enthusiast who late in his life founded the Prince Manufacturing Company, died on Nov. 21.
He was 98 years old and lived in Potomac, Md.
The cause of death was pneumonia, his son, Donald, said.


In Toys, the Question These Days Is: Just How Safe Are They?
In the next five weeks, the toy industry expects to record almost 65 percent of its entire 1991 retail sales, estimated at about $13.4 billion.
And as usual at the start of the holiday shopping season, consumer advocates are focusing on safety.
That is not surprising, given the increasing rate of toy-related injuries and deaths.
According to the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System, last year there were about 165,000 such injuries treated in emergency rooms.


11 Chinese Are Arrested In Abduction
A kidnapping victim was rescued in Brooklyn and 11 Chinese men were arrested in what law-enforcement officials said yesterday was one in a growing number of abductions in the trade of smuggling illegal aliens from China.
The victim, who the police would identify only as a 36-year-old recent immigrant, was stabbed twice in the side when he was abducted on Wednesday night in front of an apartment building at 83 Henry Street in Chinatown.
He was listed in stable condition yesterday at Beekman Downtown Hospital.


Increasing Soviet Instability Causing Market Uneasiness
Signs of increasing instability in the Soviet Union cast a jittery, negative hue over grain futures markets yesterday.
With troop movements in the Soviet republic of Georgia and an independence vote coming in the Ukraine tomorrow, a sense of unease permeated the markets not only for grains but for other commodities as well.


For Strange, Too Many Rounds Feel Like 180 Holes
There are few golfers who palpably relish showdown golf more than Curtis Strange, but the two-time United States Open winner comes to this weekend's Skins Game considerably more concerned about his overall health than his slumping golf game.
The second half of 1991 has been a nightmare for the 36-year-old Virginian, who does not have a victory in over two years.
He played fairly well in the spring, but then suddenly lost his game.
In the midst of the slump, he was hit by a coordination-impairing, energy-sapping illness that doctors have still not been able to diagnose.


Alabama vs. Auburn vs. Controversy
All roads leading to Birmingham will be dotted with either crimson or orange and blue this afternoon as the University of Alabama and Auburn University continue one of the most bitter rivalries in college football.
For approximately three hours the state will stand still.


Israeli Leader Hints He Is Willing To Compromise on Date of Talks
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir suggested today that he was ready to compromise on a starting date for the next round of Middle East peace talks, but said Israel's call for a delay had not changed.
One possibility, Mr.
Shamir said, is that he will send a low-level delegation to Washington to be on hand for negotiations that are scheduled to resume Wednesday, as requested by the United States.


The Court's a Corral As Cowboys Win NIT
Oklahoma State never played out of control last night.
The Cowboys never lost control of the lead to Georgia Tech, either, and that is why they walked out of Madison Square Garden as champions of the Big Apple National Invitation Tournament.
The Cowboys used a suffocating defense to derail Georgia Tech's inside game in the first half and then stumbled for a spell when the Yellow Jackets made the inevitable comeback.
The drought lasted about seven minutes as Georgia Tech trimmed an 18-point deficit to 4, but Oklahoma State regained control and galloped off to a 78-71 victory.
It was Oklahoma State's first tournament championship since winning the Big Eight tourney in 1983.


INSIDE
In Toys, Safety Comes First The focus is on safety in holiday toy purchases.
A look at some recalls and advice on making the right choice.
Consumer's World, page 48.
Ralph Bellamy Dead at 87
Ralph Bellamy, the veteran character actor known for his portrayal of Franklin D. Roosevelt, died at 87 after a long illness.
Page 9.
A Leader in Judaism Dies
Dr.
Louis Finkelstein, the dominant leader of Conservative Judaism in the 20th century, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
Page 9.


New York Must Have a Plan for Water Needs of Next Century
To the Editor:
A Nov. 11 article touts the high quality, good taste and stellar international reputation of New York City's tap water.
Residents of Manhattan's East Side experienced a different water quality last summer.
Our water was brown, murky and not very tasty.
The explanation by the Department of Environmental Protection was that, because of the drought, the city was conserving water from the Catskill-Delaware reservoir system by pumping a larger proportion of lower-quality Croton reservoir water to the East Side.


Pakistan Allegations Remain Unproved
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 19 report on allegations of lawlessness and scandal in Pakistan fails to mention:


Israeli Ambassador Is Looking for a Way Back In
Israel today delicately broached some suggestions with the United States that might enable Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to reconsider participating in Middle East peace talks Wednesday in Washington at the time and in the format proposed by the Bush Administration.
Israel's Ambassador to Washington, Zalman Shoval, met with State Department officials today and suggested that it might be much easier for his Government to send its delegation to Washington on Dec. 4 -- as all the Arabs have already agreed to do -- if Washington were to clarify its positions on certain issues most sensitive to Israel, officials familiar with the talks said.


RASH OF SUITS SEEN AFTER RIGHTS ACT
The civil rights act recently passed by Congress is likely to prompt a rash of new sex discrimination lawsuits, labor experts say, because for the first time it gives employees bringing such lawsuits the right to cash damages and a jury trial.
At the same time, the prospect of more lawsuits -- and more costly ones -- is expected to cause employers to give greater emphasis to workplace programs for resolving disputes before they are brought to court.


Aides Say Bush Is Shifting Focus To Relations Among the Republics
President Bush's move to recognize Ukrainian independence is the first step toward shifting Washington's diplomacy away from President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's effort to preserve the Soviet Union and concentrating instead on the new relations among its splintering parts, Administration officials said.
The focus will shift from trying to influence the relationship between Mr.
Gorbachev and the republic leaders to trying to influence the relationship between officials like President Leonid M. Kravchuk of the Ukraine and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, which Washington sees as crucial to keeping some kind of peace in the Soviet Union.


Mexico Courts the Bus Tourists
Early next month a busload of American tour operators will leave Tijuana, Mexico, on a two-week familiarization tour of a half-dozen Mexican cities, colonial towns and archaeological sites.
Similar tours are planned for January and February, and all will be underwritten by the Government of Mexico.
Mexican tourism officials hope the trips will plant seeds that will lead to more American tourists who will spend lots more Yankee dollars.


June Anderson Recital
The soprano June Anderson is to give her first Carnegie Hall recital on Dec. 12 at 8 P.M. with a program of arias and songs by Rossini, Liszt, Turina, Debussy, Bernstein, Barber and Rorem.
Steven Blier is to be the pianist.
Tickets are $12 to $45 at the box office or through Carnegie Charge, (212) 247-7800.


Theater's Notables Honor the Memory Of Peggy Ashcroft
More than 2,000 people, including Prince Edward and many of Britain's best-known theatrical figures, attended a memorial service today at Westminster Abbey in honor of Dame Peggy Ashcroft, who died in June at age 83.
In an address, Sir Peter Hall said that the fiercely private actress might have found the grand service, with performances by the guitarist Julian Bream, the Westminster Abbey Choir, the English Chamber Orchestra and the Royal Shakespeare Theater Wind Band, embarrassing and "slightly pompous."


News Summary
International 2-6  FISCAL CRISIS IN THE KREMLIN
The Soviet Union was forced into a fiscal crisis as the Russian republic, led by President Boris N. Yeltsin, struck a crippling blow to the Kremlin by refusing to authorize another round of deficit spending.  1  NEW U.S.
POLICY ON SOVIET UNION
President Bush's move toward recognizing Ukrainian independence is a step away from his policy of backing efforts to hold the Soviet Union together, officials said.  1


Public &amp; Private; TV Or Not TV
Ten years ago at some awards banquet I sat next to an actress who was bored out of her gourd (and probably high as a kite) and who proceeded to perform a medley of televison theme songs.
She did "Gilligan's Island," "The Flintstones," "The Patty Duke Show" and "Rawhide," making a very convincing whip sound by whistling between her front teeth.
She did "Green Acres," "The Beverly Hillbillies" and, as her finale, the theme from "The Mickey Mouse Club." Though she'd grown up in the hills of Beverly, I felt we were neighbors.
I like television.
This is unfashionable.
Sniping at TV has become a kind of pedigree, a guarantee of superiority.
One woman said to me proudly not long ago, "We don't even own a TV." Great -- so you missed "The Civil War," the Challenger explosion, the "Who shot J.R.?" episode of "Dallas," the World Series, and a considerable part of American culture over the last 10 years.
We have a generation of parents who were raised on a steady diet of red meat, Pez and "The Brady Bunch" and who now pride themselves on denying their kids sugar and television.


A Regulator's Advice For Buying Safe Toys
Jacqueline Jones-Smith, the chairwoman of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission, believes that her organization's toy-monitoring activities have "a multiplier effect." If consumers are aware of toy-safety issues, she asserts, they will "take that next step, from the safety of toys and children's products to the safety of other products for children and adults."
Since its establishment in 1973, the safety commission has worked with American toy manufacturers to create and revise toy-safety standards and with the United States Customs Service to stop dangerous imported toys before they enter the country.
More Digging This Year
This year, the commission recalled 165 models of toys and children's products, compared with 229 items last year.
The commission "had to do lots more digging" to find dangerous toys this year, Ms.
Jones-Smith said.


Ann Taylor Seeks Its Lost Niche BYL&gt;By STEPHANIE STROM
When the retailing legend Joseph E. Brooks came aboard at Ann Taylor in late 1988, he was greeted as Prince Charming come to rescue a fair damsel in distress.
Now, it looks as if the man who once saved the Lord &amp; Taylor department store chain from eternal dowdiness has failed to define the Ann Taylor chain as anything more than just another women's clothing store.
His method of adding stores at a 30-a-year clip increased sales and generated cash but did little to give Ann Taylor any special offering for the sophisticated career women who have patronized the store for its 37 years.


Prison Sentence for Former Tokyo Minister
In an unusually severe punishment for a politician in Japan, a former Cabinet minister in the ruling Liberal Democratic Party was sentenced today to three years and four months in prison on charges that he made $21 million from insider stock tips and evaded taxes on the income.
Toshiyuki Inamura, a former Minister of State for the Environmental Protection Agency, said he would appeal the sentence.


Tempest Swirls Around Faded Stratford Theater
A new drama -- featuring an elusive Englishman, piqued egos and the loss of lots of money -- has come to the American Festival Theater here, but in keeping with the theater's rather sorry recent history, none of the action has been onstage.
The barnlike former Shakespearean theater, which has been closed for most of the last nine years, is -- depending on whom one talks to -- either on the verge of finally giving up the ghost or about to embark on a bright future.


Long Unlucky, Rail Bridge Hits $55 Million Repair Jackpot
When the Hell Gate Bridge over the devilish waters between Ward's Island and Astoria, Queens, opened almost 75 years ago, it was celebrated as an engineering marvel, a steel symbol of the nation's abiding faith in progress through the power of science and technology.
But in the last 60 years only the only fresh paint that has been applied has been in the form of graffiti.
The longest and by far the heaviest and strongest steel-arch bridge in the world when it opened, and the least famous of the eight across the East River, the bridge has become a flaking and crumbling symbol of urban decay and decline.


Dow Off by 5.36, to 2,894.68; Lowest Close in Six Months
Stocks dropped slightly yesterday, as a last-minute selloff forced the Dow Jones industrial average below 2,900, to its lowest close in more than six months.
It ended at 2,894.68, off 5.36 points for the day and 8.05 for the week.
I.B.M. was the second most active stock on the New York Stock Exchange, losing 1 3/4, to 92 1/2, on trading of more than 1.6 million shares.
Analysts said the drop reflected continued fallout from the company's announcement on Tuesday that it planned an ambitious $3 billion restructuring and 20,000 more layoffs.


Nederlander Says He's In Charge
One week after insisting that the Yankees have a plan for bettering their team, Robert Nederlander, the general managing partner, insisted that the plan was being acted upon and that it was not George Steinbrenner's.
In a telephone interview yesterday, Nederlander rejected the notion that his predecessor was playing a role in Yankee thinking.
He also debunked the notion that he and General Manager Gene Michael were feuding and that the cancellation of a weekend meeting with free-agent third baseman Steve Buechele signaled turmoil within the team's hierarchy.


Louis Finkelstein, 96, Leader of Conservative Jews
Dr.
Louis Finkelstein, chancellor emeritus of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America and the dominant leader of Conservative Judaism in the 20th century, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 96 years old.
Dr.
Finkelstein died after a long bout with Parkinson's disease, a spokesman for the seminary said.


Toward a Fair Fare
No one's going to like it, but New York City's transit fare is about to rise.
How high?
The Transit Authority says it needs $1.40, a 25-cent increase.
Although some increase is inevitable and necessary, that would be a painful jump for many poor riders.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo and the Legislature could help by revising state subsidy formulas that now favor suburban and upstate communities at the city's expense.
The Transit Authority needs to plug a deficit in its operating budget and continue its rebuilding and modernization program.
Fares pay for about half the operating budget, support capital bonds and directly finance some improvement projects.


Romanians Tell the Ukraine It Must Negotiate Territory
The Romanian Government warned the neighboring Ukraine today that it must negotiate the fate of disputed territory if the republic breaks away from the Soviet Union after this weekend's referendum on independence.
Romania said an independent Ukraine could not include northern Bukovina, Herta, Hotin and southern Bessarabia, lands that Moscow took from Romania in 1940 and incorporated into the Ukraine.
The disputed area is home to several hundred thousand ethnic Romanians, who have campaigned against the region's inclusion in an independent Ukrainian republic.


