National Micronetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


EGYPT DENOUNCES WEST BANK SITES
Foreign Minister Amre Moussa of Egypt said today that Israel was jeopardizing the Middle East peace process with its continued building of settlements in the occupied West Bank.
Speaking before the General Assembly, Mr.
Moussa said his Government was renewing an initiative offered by President Hosni Mubarak that called for a halt in the building of settlements in exchange for an end to the Arab economic boycott against Israel.


Democrats Seek More U.S. Campaign Grants
Congressional Democrats have moved to put their party's Presidential hopefuls in a better position to collect Federal money for their primary campaigns than the Treasury Department wanted.
Under department regulations, $16 million in matching grants would have been available in the early months of next year, at the height of the primary campaign.
And, said Fred Wertheimer, president of Common Cause, the bulk of that might have gone to President Bush's campaign because it was in a better position to raise money this year than the Democrats.


Drugs Not Just an Urban Problem, Study Finds
A new study of drug abuse by junior and senior high school students in New York state shows substantial involvement with marijuana, cocaine and alcohol in the rural areas and smaller cities of upstate New York that were previously believed to have escaped the brunt of the national epidemic.
The study, by the State Division of Substance Abuse Services, was based on responses to multiple-choice questions answered by 35,000 students in more than 300 public and private schools.
It is to be made public today.


New Debate Over Humankind's Ancestress
SHE may no longer be called Eve, and her most imaginative and outspoken proponent may have died two months ago, but the provocative notion that our genes hold evidence of a mother of us all is growing ever more powerful.
By this theory on the origins of modern Homo sapiens, all 5.384 billion humans on Earth today can be traced to a woman who lived in Africa about 200,000 years ago, and who left an unmistakable if wraithlike signature on our DNA.


First Monday in October, 2030
The Senate Judiciary Committee's refusal to approve the Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas raises some doubt about a confirmation that once seemed certain.
Senator Howell Heflin, the conservative Alabama Democrat and a cautious swing voter, joined the opponents, producing a 7-to-7 vote, which sends the nomination to the full Senate but without committee endorsement.
Judge Thomas's supporters, still claiming a majority in the entire Senate, seek a swift floor vote lest their numbers erode.
Opponents, hoping for just such erosion, say there's no hurry.
The opponents have the better argument.


Redskins' Sanders Back In Step
The season before Ricky Sanders arrived in Washington in 1986 to become a big-play receiver for the Redskins, he had caught 101 passes (11 for touchdowns) from Jim Kelly with the Houston Gamblers of the now-defunct United States Football League.
In 1988, he made an indelible mark in Super Bowl XXII, snaring an 80-yard touchdown pass from Doug Williams and gaining 193 receiving yards in that remarkable 42-10 Redskins victory over the Denver Broncos.
Sanders caught 73 passes that season and then 80 more in 1989.
But last season, he slipped to only 56 catches.
He dropped balls he had normally caught, and he often seemed in a distant fog.


Peters (J.M.) Co.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Astrosystems Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Miles Ahead
Unless someone soon emerges from nowhere, the trumpeter Miles Davis will be remembered as the most influential jazz artist of the second half of the 20th century.
Mr.
Davis remained iconoclastic through four decades as instrumentalist, composer and band leader.
He felt compelled to change (a "curse," he called it) and when he did, the whole of jazz often changed with him.
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, the revolutionary architect, preached that less was more.
Miles Davis used the same prescription and with similarly dramatic results.
He created a thoughtful, understated jazz that eventually eclipsed the brilliant but baroque music of his mentor, the saxophonist Charlie Parker.


Claire Zeisler, an Artist, Collector And Fiber-Art Innovator, 88
Claire Zeisler, an artist and art collector who helped transform the two-dimensional craft of weaving into the three-dimensional medium called fiber art, died yesterday at her home in Chicago.
She was 88 years old.
She died of heart failure, said her daughter, Joan Binkley of Lake Bluff, Ill.


Deadline May Not Apply to Lindros
ERIC LINDROS may be allowed to play in the National Hockey League this year even if he misses tomorrow's deadline to sign with an N.H.L. team, the head of the Canadian Hockey League said yesterday.
"My gut feeling is the Canadian Hockey League would not be a fly in the ointment in this particular case," the league's president, ED CHYNOWETH, said.


Hershiser Keeps the Dodgers on Top of Things
He missed the first part of the season, but Orel Hershiser is here when the Los Angeles Dodgers need him most: with the season down to its final few games and the race in the National League West ever so close.
Hershiser, in his comeback season from shoulder surgery, pitched a two-hit shutout over seven innings tonight, sending the Dodgers to a 7-2 victory over the San Diego Padres and keeping their precarious one-game hold on first place.


HOCKEY Don't Count Richter Out of Ranger Opener
Mike Richter, unsigned but suddenly probable for Thursday's opener, played half of last night's final exhibition game in goal for the Rangers against Hartford.
Greg Millen, who could be used someday as insurance in a trade of John Vanbiesbrouck, played the other half.


Wausau Paper Mills reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Classical Music in Review
Misha Quint
Cellist  92d Street Y
Misha Quint, a Soviet-born cellist who has been living in the United States since 1989, made a mixed impression at his debut recital on Saturday evening.
In his most inspired moments he shaped the musical line inventively and with deep feeling.
Elsewhere, his sound was slightly anemic and his intonation was not always reliable.


CHRONICLE
Celebrities are often invited to benefits for the cachet they lend to causes, and sometimes they become truly involved.
DAISY EGAN, the 11-year-old actress who won a Tony Award for her performance in "The Secret Garden," put in the winning bid on a stuffed gorilla ($125) at a silent auction Sunday to aid the Child Care Action Campaign, a national advocacy group.


Lesco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


TSR Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Nebraska Senator Enters the 1992 Race
To the strains of Bruce Springsteen's "Born to Run," Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska entered the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination today and asserted that a short-sighted and cynical Federal Government was robbing young Americans of their birthright of good jobs, good educations and national greatness.
Mr.
Kerrey, whose political odyssey began as a Navy Seal in Vietnam, where he won the Medal of Honor, accused the Republicans of a decade of "malignant neglect" that had left the nation adrift.


Exel Limited reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Unusual U.S.-Cuban Team Maps Island's Hidden Cornucopia of Life
FOR the first time in 30 years, American and Cuban scientists are combining efforts to explore and catalogue a plentiful diversity of plant and animal species that are believed to make Cuba the richest island, biologically speaking, in the New World.
A team from the American Museum of Natural History in New York and the National Museum of Natural History in Cuba has already discovered dozens of previously unknown species of lizards, fish, plants and invertebrates, and believes this is only the beginning.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A Blackstone Group subsidiary that owns the Ramada and Howard Johnson hotels agreed to pay $250 million for bankrupt Days Inns, which has some $750 million in debt.
If approved by the court, the combination would create one of the world's largest hotel franchisers, with 2,236 hotels and 284,000 rooms.  [ Page D1. ]


Bergen Brunswig reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Somerset Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Aztec Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Stride Rite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


Suit Against Piniella Is on the Move
A Federal judge in Philadelphia has transferred to New York a lawsuit instituted by an umpire against Cincinnati Reds Manager LOU PINIELLA.
The judge also ruled that the umpires union cannot participate in the case.
The suit stemmed from comments Piniella made after home-plate umpire GARY DARLING reversed a call by first-base umpire DUTCH RENNERT and took away a home run from the Reds' BILL DORAN on Aug. 3.


BRIEFS
*
Borden Inc., New York, said its Borden Japan Inc. unit would build a processed-cheese plant at Usada, Japan, for about $25 million. *
British Petroleum Exploration, Cleveland, a unit of British Petroleum Co.
P.L.C., said its Tex/Con unit had completed the sale of its U.S. gas-transmission and marketing companies.
The buyer was Transok Inc., Tulsa, Okla., a natural-gas company and unit of Central and South West Corp., and the price was $250 million. *
Chevron Corp., San Francisco, sold its 35 percent interest in oil and gas exploration and producing properties in Oman to a division of Neste Oy, Helsinki, Finland, an oil company.
No terms were disclosed. *
Chyron Corp., Melville, L.I., an electronic graphics company, filed a reorganization plan in Federal Bankruptcy Court.
Under the plan, Pesa Electronica S.A., a Spainish supplier of television studio equipment, would invest $10 million in return for 81 percent of Chyron's common shares. *
Computervision, Bedford, Mass., signed a multiyear contract with Sun Microsystems Computer Corp., Mountain View, Calif., a unit of Sun Microsystems Inc.
Computervision will buy more than $200 million worth of the unit's Sparc work stations and servers every year. *
General Cinema Corp., Chestnut Hill, Mass., a movie-theater chain, said it had tenders for 86.7 percent of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc.'s bonds, and it extended its debt offers to Oct. 4. *
General Motors Corp., Detroit, said its Oldsmobile division was offering constomers rebates of $1,000 on the Cutlass Cierra and was extending other incentives of $500 to $2,000 through Feb. 4, 1992. *
Super Valu Stores Inc., Eden Praire, Minn., said it would buy Scott's Food Stores, a 13-store supermarket chain in Fort Wayne, Ind.
Terms were not disclosed.


A Further Reduction For Unisys
The Unisys Corporation said yesterday that it planned to sell its military electronics business through a stock offering that could raise up to $800 million for the debt-burdened computer company.
Unisys was apparently unable to find a corporate buyer for the business, which was on the block for more than a year.
Unisys has been selling real estate and other businesses since 1990 to concentrate on its troubled computer business and to pay off its large debt.
The company had $3.8 billion in debt at the end of June.


U.S. Reclaims Its Pride Along With the Ryder Cup
Besides providing the narrowest victory in the history of the event, the 29th Ryder Cup will go down as the most satisfying achievement for an American team.
When Bernhard Langer of Germany missed a six-foot putt on the final hole that would have tied the competition and allowed the European team to retain the cup, it did more to heal the much-battered image of American golf than anything since a United States team was beaten for the first time in 28 years in 1985.


Our Towns
Nearly 25 years ago Nancy Cohen was an unusual new bride: a Methodist who married a Jew.
She knew something about Jewish foods and holidays.
So for the first Passover meal with her in-laws, the new Mrs.
Cohen had absolutely no bread on the table.
She served spaghetti instead.
Fifteen years later, the senior Mrs.
Cohen pointed out to her earnest daughter-in-law that spaghetti, a sure-fire, safe family staple in many Christian homes, is actually a wheat product, too.
By then, the two women -- indeed the two families -- could laugh about the incident.
But it isn't always so easy for the Cohens or the thousands of couples who find their love spanning wide canyons of belief and tradition, not to mention ignorance and prejudice.


CHRONICLE
JOHN FAIRCHILD'S idea of a party: "Six people is fine, eight I can cope with, but more than that, I don't know," he said yesterday.
About 200 people were invited last night to celebrate the arrival of Suzy at Women's Wear Daily on Oct. 9.
But how do you pare the list of AILEEN MEHLE'S (that's Suzy's real name) nearest and dearest?
The guest list had everyone from BROOKE ASTOR to WALTER ANNENBERG, CALVIN KLEINto LAURANCE S. ROCKEFELLER.


Siemens Buys Rest Of A-C Equipment
Siemens A.G., the German electronics company, said it was raising to 100 percent, from 20 percent, its stake in the A-C Equipment Corporation, a power-plant maintenance and services company based in West Allis, Wis.
It is taking over shares of A-C and the State of Wisconsin Investment Board.
Siemens declined to give any financial details.


Of Concern to All Right-Thanking People
To the Editor:
"They're Trying to Stop People From Being Beastly" (news article, Sept. 21), on the work of Britain's Polite Society, notes that it can take four to six "thank you's" to buy a bus ticket in England.
There are two reasons for this.


Audit Group Eases Loan Proposal
A leading accounting group said yesterday that it had approved restrictions on the types of loans its 300,000 members can get from audit clients, but the package was a watered-down version of the proposal it announced in June.
The group, the American Institute for Certified Public Accountants, said it had decided to ease some proposed restrictions in response to nearly 250 letters from members.
Many members complained about having to refinance all existing loans except for mortgages on their primary residences and about being forbidden to accept new loans of any sort from audit clients.


National Heritage Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Portable Pump Is Keeping Failing Heart Alive
A 33-YEAR-OLD man in Houston has become the first person with a failing heart to recover with a portable, battery-powered heart assist device.
The device has been approved for experimental implant in three more patients.
Further success could eventually help tens of thousands of Americans who die of chronic heart failure each year, said Dr.
O.
H. (Bud) Frazier, who headed the surgical team that implanted the device on Sept. 3 at the Texas Heart Institute.


Sports of The Times; The Rookie Coach And The Ghost
AT Ray Handley's news conference yesterday afternoon, someone asked him a question -- virtually every question had something to do with how come the defending Super Bowl champs are in amongst the chumps in the standings -- and on this question the rookie Giant coach remained silent.
"It's not that I don't have the answer to the question," he said at length, "it's just that I'm trying to find a way to say it."


Robert C. Sprague, 91; Began Sprague Electric
Robert C. Sprague, founder of the Sprague Electric Company, died on Friday at his home in Williamstown, Mass.
He was 91 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, the funeral home said.


GTE Studies Spinoff or Sale of Unit
The GTE Corporation said yesterday that it might sell its $2.3 billion electrical products group, including Sylvania light bulbs, which would allow it to concentrate more on its already huge telecommunications business.
GTE would use proceeds from a sale to raise cash and pay down debt.
But, more importantly, some analysts said, a sale would keep management from being distracted by anything other than the fast-growing, highly competitive telecommunications field.


Weekend Staple: Versatile Jacket
The warm-weather fashion season begins in November, when clothes to be worn in southern resorts arrive in the stores.
It ends in April and May, with the arrival of clothes to wear through August and beyond.
While these clothes include daytime styles that can be worn comfortably in boardrooms and offices and festive dresses to wear to parties, the emphasis is on casual clothes for weekends and vacations.
From the styles designers emphasized in their collections and the ones buyers ordered most heavily, trends are becoming clear.


Wellco Enterprises reports earnings for Year to June 29


On My Mind; The Peace Dividends
How swiftly and richly it has come -- the first great dividend of the disintegration of the centralized Soviet state.
Only a moment ago, the very idea of the collapse of Soviet central authority terrified the governments of Western Europe and the United States.
They did what they could to shore up Mikhail Gorbachev in his struggle to keep the system working through maneuver, reform, tacking.


Money Scarce, Dinkins Warns; Labor Dismayed
The Dinkins administration has warned labor leaders that it is considering paring proposed property-tax increases, a decision that would deprive them of an important source of money for wage increases.
That warning, delivered by Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel in a speech to labor leaders over the weekend, represents the opening of a crucial phase in the city's negotiations with organized labor, which have been badly tangled since the city reached a controversial agreement with the teachers' union a year ago today.


Macyro Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Careers; GMI Institute Turns Out Top Students
ALTHOUGH the GMI Engineering and Management Institute of Flint, Mich., is relatively little known outside the auto industry, the school regularly sees its graduates going to top business schools and employed by top corporations.
The Kellogg Graduate School of Management of Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill., for example, said that the among its entrants this fall were six graduates of GMI.
Stanford University heads the list with 21 GMI graduates.


Don't Use 'Hispanic' To Refer to Race
To the Editor:
"New York's Democratic Experiment" (The Week in Review, Sept. 15) says that 10 of the New York City Council districts intended to increase minority representation "are more than 60 percent black, and five are more than 60 percent Hispanic," continuing: "Another 20 are 60 percent or more white." Later you quote Luther Blake of the District Commission: "There's always been an emphasis placed on race in drawing district lines."


Chess
When Siegbert Tarrasch (1862-1934) enunciated his famous dogma, "Before the endgame, the gods have placed the middlegame," he thought he was laying down the standard strategy for conducting a chess game.
Somewhere in the middle game you outplay the opponent and then use the endgame -- if you haven't scored checkmate already -- as a tying up of loose ends.
He would be shocked if he could see what goes on nowadays.
Typical is the game that the Manhattan grandmaster John Fedorowicz won from his Queens colleague Roman Dzindzichashvili in the New York State Championship in Rockville Center, Aug. 31 to Sept. 2.
By Move 11, the queens were off the board and Fedorowicz parlayed a slight endgame advantage into a winning avalanche.


Harvey Group Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 3


Quotation of the Day
"The President and his staff have been arrested and taken to the army headquarters." -- Jean-Robert Sabalat, the Foreign Minister of Haiti.  [ A1:1. ]


Classical Music in Review
Richard Stoltzman  Metropolitan Museum of Art
It is somewhat amazing that the calm, relatively quiet voice of Brazilian music has been so clearly heard amid the general din of popular culture.
Its sinuous understatement and magical simplicities have attracted musicians from Stan Getz to Paul Simon.
Richard Stoltzman, a clarinetist who has made his reputation at Mozart and Brahms, is another.


Corrections
A report yesterday about the marriage of Risa Sonenshine to Matthew Crandall referred incorrectly to the bridegroom's father, H. B. Crandall.
He is alive, in New York, where he heads Crandall Associates, an executive recruiting firm.


Bradley's Tax Credit Plan: $350 a Child to All Families
Senator Bill Bradley outlined a proposal today to give taxpayers a $350 credit for each of their dependent children.
The plan is intended to take $116 billion from military and domestic programs over the next five years and put it directly in the pockets of middle-class families.
Mr.
Bradley returned to his home political turf to formally announce the program, which he began talking about in July in backyard chats and visits with constituents.
The visits, and the new legislative agenda aimed at the concerns of middle-class voters, came on the heels of Mr.
Bradley's near defeat in his campaign for a third term last November.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Svensson Is Upset  Ronald Agenor of Haiti upset fourth-seeded Jonas Svensson of Sweden by 6-4, 7-6 yesterday in the first round of the Toulouse Open.
In other matches in the French event, Spain's Tomas Carbonell defeated Guillaume Raoux of France, 6-7, 6-4, 6-3, and Sweden's Christian Bergstrom beat Jean-Philippe Fleurian of France, 6-7, 6-1, 6-1. (AP) HORSE RACING  Island Edition Wins  Island Edition took over in the stretch to win by a half length yesterday in the $47,000 Believe It purse at Belmont.
Owned by Hazel P. Marsh, Island Edition carried 115 pounds, including Mike Smith, in the race for horses 3-year-olds and up.
Island Edition covered the mile in 1:35 to earn $28,200 (AP)


Exxon to Pay Higher Criminal Fines In New Pact to Settle Valdez Claims
Five months after their first agreement collapsed, the United States, Alaska and the Exxon Corporation today announced a second, almost identical agreement to settle civil and criminal cases arising from the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill.
A Federal district judge rejected the first agreement, which called for Exxon to pay a $100 million criminal fine and up to $1 billion in civil payments, saying the criminal fine was too low.


Riley's Setting a Place But Will Ewing Show?
Patrick Ewing's state of mind and an overcrowded point guard position are just two of the major issues waiting for Pat Riley this week.
The Knicks, coming off a disappointing and tumultuous 39-43 season, begin their first training camp under Riley on Friday in Charleston, S. C.


Backwards Genetics Finds a Genetic Flaw, Then a Disease to Match
FOR some people the mere act of turning a doorknob, lifting a saucepan or even putting on a shirt can be a harrowing experience.
At the slightest touch, a layer of cells just below their outer skin bursts apart, leaving behind an extremely painful carpet of blisters and offering infectious microbes ready access to the bloodstream.
Some infants with this rare hereditary disease die right after birth, so severely are they blistered by the trauma of being born.


First Report Card Issued on U.S. Education Goals
Two years ago, President Bush and the nation's 50 governors, at a celebrated education summit conference, agreed to six national education goals to be achieved by the year 2000.
It took them two years to decide how to measure progress toward the goals, but today they issued their first "report card" on that progress.
The report offered a baseline from which the nation will have to climb to reach the six goals -- and it will be a steep climb.


2 Killed as Rock Slide Plunges Train Into Colorado Creek


Suprema Specialties Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Hawks Sign Augmon and Drop Moncrief
The Atlanta Hawks have signed STACEY AUGMON of Nevada-Las Vegas, the ninth player selected in the National Basketball Association draft, after renouncing the rights to veteran SIDNEY MONCRIEF in order to free money for the rookie's contract.
Augmon is the first top-10 pick to sign this year.
His five-year deal is worth a reported $6.5 million to $7 million.


Market Place; Round the World, Bond Profits Soar
FOR bondholders around the world, the summer of 1991 was a joyous time.
With interest rates generally falling, their profits soared.
For American investors, the advantages of investing overseas have been enhanced even further by the dollar's recent weakness.
After rising sharply early in the year, the dollar gave up some of its gains in the third quarter, and that served to accelerate profits from foreign markets.


New Team of Lawyers For Salomon Defense
Salomon Brothers Inc., a lawyer's dream because it is a large and abundantly resourceful corporate client in a lot of legal difficulties, has assembled a new team to help it navigate through its current crisis.
Handling the firm's general work and much of the civil proceedings against it will be Frederick A. O. Schwarz Jr., a partner at Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore who became a familiar face to some New Yorkers as the guiding light in re-engineering the government of New York City under Mayor Edward I. Koch a couple of years ago.


Everex Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


By Design; Leader of the Pack
It's quite possible that you have never thought of yourself as a black-leather type.
This season, though, you might.
The swaggering motorcycle jacket of glossy black leather bristling with zippers has become a priority fashion item.
Spurred on by the endorsement of Karl Lagerfeld in his designs for Chanel, the jacket has leapt from downtown staple to uptown status symbol.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-11
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti was ousted in a violent military coup that claimed 26 lives.
President Aristide was arrested and taken to the airport to be deported to France.
Page A1
Ethnic strains in Yugoslavia are tearing at the one remaining federal institution, the armed forces.
With a vacuum in leadership, field commanders face confusing orders, desertions and mutinies that have depleted the 180,000-member military.
A1


E.M.S. Crew Blamed in Childbirth Case
The union representing a Harlem Hospital doctor who refused admission to a woman in labor last week, citing an overcrowded obstetrics unit, charged yesterday that the ambulance crew deliberately cut the patient's amniotic fluid sac to induce labor at the hospital, where the baby was born on a stretcher.
But the leader of the two-member ambulance crew that delivered the baby in the admissions room, speaking for herself and her partner, denied the allegation.


Somatogen Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Classical Music in Review
Young People's Concert
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
Once upon a time, when the path from the parlor piano to the concert hall followed a relatively straight line, getting children to make classical music a part of their future was a problem of degree, not language.
The melodies of Grieg's "Peer Gynt" and the popular ballad of the moment shared syntax and grammar, harmonic vocabulary and way of moving.
Only the level of sophistication varied.


Smoltz, a Second-Half Rose, Throws a Beauty
In July, John Smoltz felt he was only two games away from losing his spot in Atlanta's starting pitching rotation.
Now he and the Braves are only five games away from possibly gaining a spot in the National League pennant playoff.
Smoltz, continuing his remarkable turnaround, stifled Cincinnati on two hits and struck out 10 in eight innings tonight as the Braves downed the Reds, 4-0, and maintained their pressure on Los Angeles in the West Division race.


The Mets' Manager for 1992? Try Cubbage, Says Cubbage
"I never had that much talent as a player," said Mike Cubbage, who was named interim manager of the Mets on Sunday.
"But I've got good instincts for the game."
What then, Cubbage was asked, were his instincts on his chances of remaining as manager past the end of the season?


Tranzonic Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


China Vows to Stay on the Communist Road
The People's Republic of China began celebrating its 42d anniversary tonight with an acknowledgment that the road to socialism is tortuous, but it pledged to keep going anyway.
"The glorious history of the People's Republic of China of the past 42 years has proved and will continue to prove that no difficulty can crush or cow the Chinese people," Prime Minister Li Peng declared, in a possible allusion to the collapse of Soviet Communism.


Packers Trade Harris to 49ers
TIM HARRIS was traded yesterday from Green Bay to the San Francisco 49ers, who gave the Packers two high draft picks for the holdout linebacker.
San Francisco Coach GEORGE SEIFERT said the 49ers gave up their second-round pick in 1992 and will also provide either a second- or third-round pick in 1993.
Seifert said Harris, 27, could be activated for the Oct. 13 game against the Atlanta Falcons.
San Francisco is idle this Sunday.


Dewey Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Named Frank Wren assistant general manager.
Basketball
BASKETBALL HALL OF FAME -- Named Robin J. Deutsch public relations director.
National Basketball Association  ATLANTA HAWKS -- Signed Stacey Augmon, forward, to a 5-year contract.
Renounced the rights to Sidney Moncrief, guard.
LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Named Mack Calvin assistant coach.
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Signed Irving Thomas, Tony Farmer, Roy Fisher and Keith Owens, forwards, and Tony Smith, Demetrius Calip and Jason Matthews, guards.
Continental Basketball Association  GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Signed Walter Watts, forward-center.
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Signed Ricky Butler, center.
Football  National Football League  GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Traded Tim Harris, linebacker, to the San Francisco 49ers for a second-round draft pick in 1992 and either a second- or third-round pick in 1993.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Waived Darrell Fullington, safety.
Hockey  National Hockey League  BOSTON BRUINS -- Sent John Blue, goaltender, John Byce, forward, and Jim Wiemer, defenseman, to Maine of the American Hockey League.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Sent Brian McReynolds, center; Steven King, right wing; Joe Paterson, left wing; Jeff Bloemberg and Peter Laviolette, defensemen, and Mark LaForest, goaltender, to Binghamton of the American Hockey League.
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Sent Mikhail Kravets, Ed Courtenay and David Bruce, forwards, and Artur Irbe, goaltender, to Kansas City of the International Hockey League.
VANCOUVER CANUCKS -- Sent Alek Stojanov, forward, to Guelph of the Ontario Hockey League; Dave Capuano, Shawn Antoski and Rob Murphy, forwards, to Milwaukee of the International Hockey League; and Adrien Plavsic, defenseman, to the Canadian Olympic team.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.00
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.11
5.14
7.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.11
5.14
7.21
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.24
7.28
8.60
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.80
7.81
8.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.93
8.94
9.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.89
6.90
7.78
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellweather bonds, notes and bills


For Babies, an Ounce Can Alter Quality of Life
Cutler Dozier is a quick-witted, lively 4-year-old who gives not the slightest sign of how precariously his life began.
Born after only 26 weeks in the womb and weighing just 2 pounds 6 ounces, he spent the first two and a half months of his life on the precipice of medical calamity in the neonatal intensive care unit of Minneapolis Children's Hospital.
He could not breathe on his own, he was severely jaundiced, his heart had a hole that prevented his blood from being properly oxygenated and he had to be fed through a tube directly into his small intestine.


Topics of The Times; Rockers of the World
Just as President Bush was announcing reductions in nuclear weaponry last weekend, casting new light on 40 years of past rivalry, young people in Moscow joined in two events that cast new light on the future.
In an act of monumental symbolism, Komsomol, the powerful youth movement of the Communist Party, voted to dissolve itself.
Ever since its founding in 1918, Komsomol has been a stepping stone to success; Mikhail Gorbachev was a Komsomol leader during his university years.
Its termination would, in American terms, be something like the simultaneous disappearance of Girl and Boy Scouts, college student body offices and the Young Presidents' Organization.


Fountain Powerboat Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Zenith Labs Stock Declines by $7.50
The shares of Zenith Laboratories tumbled yesterday after the company said its supplier would not be able to provide the raw materials for Zenith to make a generic version of a popular antibiotic.
The shares fell $7.50, to $12.25, in over-the-counter trading.
Zenith officials would not comment on why the supplier, a unit of Sandoz A.G. of Switzerland, would not be producing the materials for Zenith's version of the drug Duricef.


Grace Zaring Stone, a Novelist Under Two Names, Dies at 100
Grace Zaring Stone, a novelist who also wrote under the pen name Ethel Vance, died on Sunday at the Mary Elizabeth Nursing Center in Mystic, Conn.
She was 100 years old and had lived in Stonington, Conn.
Three of Mrs.
Stone's novels were made into films: "The Bitter Tea of General Yen," in 1933, which starred Barbara Stanwyck and Nils Asther; "Escape" (1940,) with Norma Shearer, Robert Taylor and Conrad Veidt, and "Winter Meeting" (1948,) with Bette Davis.


Q&amp;A
Venomous Spiders
Q.
What is the most poisonous spider?
A.
The most poisonous spider known is the black widow, Lactrodectus mactans, which has venom 15 times as toxic as the prairie rattle snake's, according to Dr.
Alice L. Anderson, an entomologist for the State of North Carolina.


Many Sense Politics in Gay Rights Veto
In vetoing a bill intended to protect homosexuals against job discrimination, Gov.
Pete Wilson said Sunday that he was trying to protect California businesses from added costs, rather than playing electoral politics.
But the consensus today among both Republicans and Democrats in California was that the veto by Mr.
Wilson, a moderate Republican who has sought the gay vote in the past, was indeed a political act.
Many people here believe the Governor sought to protect himself and the man he appointed to succeed him in the United States Senate, John Seymour, against the wrath of his own party's conservative wing.


Review/Dance; Images of Horror and Lust In Montreal
Whatever Pina Bausch hath wrought, it hath not been a major influence in the United States, where experimental dance has been virtually unaffected by her brand of dance theater.
But Miss Bausch's penchant for subordinating conventional dance movement to dramatic imagery, often confessional, is still shared by many European and French Canadian choreographers.
Or so things seem at the current International Festival of New Dance in Montreal.
In one performance a bare-breasted housewife had a sexual fling with a wolf peeking out of a console and a live falcon in another troupe presided over the surreal and sunless horror of a Central European hovel.


Meulens Is Hot Over His Winter
Hensley Meulens has endured a rookie season that began with promise and is ending in pain.
He was the regular left fielder in April, lost the job to Mel Hall and has rotted on the bench for most of the second half.
A frustrated Meulens watches other players who did not exceed his impressive minor league statistics playing regularly in the major leagues, and it bothers him.
Meulens would like to play every day somewhere, even if he has to leave the Yankees, and he has a hard time envisioning another season like this one in his future.


Acqua Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


AKIHITO VISITING ASIAN NEIGHBORS
Stirring curiosity abroad and anxiousness at home, Emperor Akihito has been making an extensive tour of Southeast Asia this week, marking the first visit by a Japanese ruler to a region once subjugated in the Emperor's name but now eager for Japanese aid and investment.
So far, Emperor Akihito has referred to World War II only by saying, as he did in Thailand, that "Japan has resolved that it would live as a nation of peace so that it should never repeat the horrors of that most unfortunate war." His reception in both Thailand and Malaysia, to date, has been positive.


Angles Beyond Books
MOST adults quickly forget their high-school geometry, and good riddance.
But we use a kind of intuitive geometry all the time, even when estimating the angle required to get a paper ball to the wastebasket.
An angle-estimating exercise is one component of What's My Angle?, a geometry program from Davidson and Associates of Torrance, Calif., intended for students 14 years old and older.
It covers, the company says, a full year's geometry curriculum.
There are five parts:


Prosecutors Say Gotti Threatened To Kill Lawyer If He Refused Job
John Gotti said in a secretly taped conversation that he would kill a prominent lawyer if the lawyer refused to represent him, Federal prosecutors said yesterday.
The lawyer, James M. LaRossa, has been subpoenaed as a prosecution witness in Mr.
Gotti's pending trial on racketeering charges.
Mr.
LaRossa was the lawyer for Paul Castellano, the reputed Mafia boss whom Mr.
Gotti is charged with killing in December 1985.


Din Echoing From Scripted 'Bonfire' Riot
A scene depicting blacks rioting in a courthouse never made it to the final version of the movie "The Bonfire of the Vanities." And the movie, long since closed in the theaters, is already available on videocassette, but the controversy involving the scene remains.
In fact, a judge on a Federal appeals court here that heard arguments today said that the case could make up "a whole law school course."


Can Mars Be Made Hospitable to Humans?
FREEZING cold and forbidding, bereft of such amenities as a breathable atmosphere, more than a million miles from Earth, Mars might nonetheless become a hot vacation spot with just a little bit of, well, terraforming.
That's the dream of a growing number of seemingly down-to-earth scientists who ponder the possibility of using advanced technologies to make Mars's environment more terrestrial.


Jets Savor the Sweet Taste of Success
Now that the Jets have proved with Sunday's heartwarming 41-23 victory over Miami that they can bounce back from heartbreaking defeats, the next thing they have to prove is that they can keep on bouncing.
"We're going to enjoy it today and they're in there now looking at the films," Coach Bruce Coslet said, trying to keep his head about him after winning his first game in three attempts against the Miami coach, Don Shula.
"This was one game. It happened to be a division opponent, which makes it worth one and a half or two, but, hey, next week is another week."


Corrections
A report on Saturday about the wedding of Lisa A. Blauhut and William E. Demarest misstated the timing.
The marriage is scheduled for Friday.


Rules for Cut In Emissions Are Opposed
In a battle that is likely to be played out from Maine to Virginia, representatives of the automobile and oil industries clashed with state officials and environmentalists yesterday over whether Northeastern states should adopt California's stringent emission rules on cars.
The auto and oil industries, more adept at lobbying Congress than state legislatures and environmental agencies, have already appeared before legislators to argue against state laws that would adopt the California standards.
But with New York being the first of the Northeastern states to hold administrative hearings before imposing the regulations, lobbyists for both industries were quick to denounce the rules, which would force car manufacturers to add new pollution equipment on conventional car models and would require the extensive use of electric vehicles, among other things.


Potomac Electric Power reports earnings for 12mos Aug 31


Traders Bid Up Treasury Prices
Traders in the United States Treasury market, bolstered by a belief that the Federal Reserve will ease credit again soon, bid up prices yesterday, sending bond yields to their lowest level in four and a half years.
Bonds prices rise when there are signs that interest rates are heading down, and traders appear to be growing more convinced that the Federal Reserve will ease credit again soon to keep the recovery on track.


EXECUTIVES CHANGES
*
American White Cross Laboratories Inc., New Rochelle, N.Y., a maker of adhesive bandages and first aid products, named John Mueller chief executive. *
Ames Co., Parkersburg, W.Va., a lawn and garden tool manufacturing subsidiary of Hanson P.L.C., appointed Rick E. Keup president and chief operating officer.


Injury to MacLean Ruins Devils' Evening
The Devils were greatly encouraged by the impressive home debuts of Scott Stevens and Stephane Richer tonight in a 9-1 exhibition romp over the Islanders, but they were completely discouraged by a knee injury to John MacLean.
Although the Devils termed the injury to MacLean's right knee as a sprain, Dr.
Barry Fisher, the team orthopedist, said there was evidence of damage to the medial collateral ligament.


S.E.C. Filings
Units of two large companies filed registration statements yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The IBM Credit Corporation, a unit of the International Business Machines Corporation, filed for $1 billion in tax-exempt, asset-backed certificates.
No underwriter was named.
Heller Financial Inc., a unit of the Fuji Bank of Japan, filed to sell up to $2 billion of debt securities and warrants to buy debt securities.
No underwriter was named.


Again, the Unemployed Need Public Jobs
To the Editor:
Fifty-six years ago, Walter Lippmann wrote a letter to John Maynard Keynes describing some exciting developments in Washington.
The Franklin D. Roosevelt Administration was about to introduce a bill to help the unemployed.


Roger J. Robach, Assemblyman From Rochester, Is Dead at 57
Roger J. Robach, the deputy majority leader of the New York State Assembly, died on Sunday in Strong Memorial Hospital in Rochester.
He was 57 years old and lived in Rochester.
Mr.
Robach, who had a history of heart trouble, died after going into cardiac arrest while waiting in line to exit the New York State Thruway at Victor, N.Y., the state police said.


Mitsui Venture In Real Estate
The Mitsui Real Estate Sales New York Company and the Edward S. Gordon Company said yesterday that they had formed a venture to serve the commercial real estate needs of Japanese companies and nationals in the New York region.
The venture will be called Mitsui/ESG and will be run by executives from both companies.
Mitsui, the dominant commercial property broker in Japan, and Gordon, a leading real estate services company in New York, intend to serve Japanese corporations that have invested in New York properties, as well as Japanese tenants looking for space.


National Environmental Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, New York, said its five-year, multibillion-dollar capital improvement plan would include about $640 million in new bond financing by the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority.


No Madge or Manicures In Palmolive Campaign
Madge the manicurist, the advertising character who has touted Palmolive dishwashing liquid for more than two decades, may no longer be surprising customers with her trademark line, "You're soaking in it."
For the first time since the character appeared, the Colgate-Palmolive Company and its agency, FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York, is introducing a significant campaign without her.
The new theme, "You cook, we clean," emphasizes Palmolive's cleaning strength, said Robert A. Murray, a company spokesman, instead of featuring the actress Jan Miner as Madge, talking about how gentle the liquid can be on hands.


Commtron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Turner Deal Is Held Near
The Turner Broadcasting System is close to making final its acquisition of Hanna-Barbera Productions for about $320 million, according to several executives familiar with the negotiations.
An executive at the Great American Communications Company, which owns Hanna-Barbera, declined to comment yesterday.
Estimates of a sale price have ranged from $150 million to $400 million.
Ned Zacher, a media anlayst at Duff &amp; Phelps Inc. in Chicago, said the price seemed realistic because he had estimated that Hanna-Barbera would bring $275 million to $300 million without the rights to other cartoons held by the Charter Company.


Scientists Enthralled By Bronze Age Body
THE discovery of a 4,000-year-old mummified man in a glacier in Austria late last month is the most complete Bronze Age find in Europe and may also provide new insight into ancient weather conditions, scientists say.
The body was first sighted on Sept. 19 by German mountain climbers at 10,500 feet on the Similaun glacier in the southwestern Austrian province of Tirol near the Italian border.
Its estimated age, a rough estimate at this point, is based on the ax found at its side.
The ax is of a well-known type that appears exclusively from the Early Bronze age, which in Europe started about 2000 B.C.


U.S. STUDY SHOWS PUPIL ACHIEVEMENT AT LEVEL OF 1970
American elementary and secondary school pupils have made some educational progress in recent years, but they are only now reaching the achievement levels of students in 1970, according to a major Federal report issued today, which added that students are unprepared for the complex and demanding world of the 21st century.
"Today's children seem to know about as much math and about as much science and read about as well as their parents did at that age about 20 years ago," Education Secretary Lamar Alexander said of the report, "Trends in Academic Progress."


Public Storage Properties XV reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Edward Weitzen, 71; Led Several Companies
Edward H. Weitzen, former chairman of the American Bank Note Company, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
He was 71 years old and lived in Lawrence, N.Y.
He died of emphysema, his family said.


Public Storage Properties XVII reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CCA Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


CHRONICLE
PETER MAX is hardly resting on his laurels as a central figure of the 1960's Pop Art scene.
On Sunday, he flew from Chicago, where he opened a show, to New York to complete work for a show that opens Oct. 16 at the Hanson Gallery in SoHo.
Yesterday, he was off to Los Angeles to join TED TURNER and JANE FONDA at a dinner, and this morning he was to go to San Francisco.
Over the weekend he worked on 108 portraits of the DALAI LAMA to be shown at the SoHo gallery.
"I wanted to do a multiple amount of images of him so that I could do him in different states of mind and different situations," Mr.
Max said, "so while it is the same portrait, it could be the Dalai Lama in Tibet, at the United Nations, in New York City."


Cooper's Deputy Chairmen
Eugene M. Freedman, the new chairman of the accounting firm Coopers &amp; Lybrand, yesterday announced the names of the deputy chairmen who would begin serving when he took over the top spot today.
Two of the appointees, William K. O'Brien, and John J. Roberts, are deputy chairmen for the first time.


Classical Music in Review
Erik Bergman Tribute
Washington Music Ensemble Weill Recital Hall
Although he has spent his life in one of the geographical corners of Europe, Erik Bergman has listened carefully to his 20th-century colleagues.
The repertory of this Finnish composer -- at least judging by the 80th-birthday celebration given him by the Washington Music Ensemble on Sunday night -- is like an abridged dictionary of contemporary musical thought.


A Wave of Attacks On Foreigners Stirs Shock in Germany
A wave of attacks on immigrants and refugees has shocked many Germans as the country nears its first anniversary of unification.
The violence reached a peak last weekend, when youths in 20 German towns attacked buildings where foreigners live.
That brought the total number of attacks this year to more than 80, four times the number for all of last year.


Executive Signs Pact With McCann-Erickson
Advertising executives who love soap opera must find another to follow: after a summer of wavering, Gordon Bowen, the executive creative director of Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, signed a contract last week with McCann-Erickson New York to become chief creative officer on that agency's Coca-Cola account.


Signs of Past Quakes Found in Northwest
NEW evidence that great earthquakes sometimes struck the Washington-Oregon coastline has been found in the dating of trees submerged by a sudden lowering of the landscape.
They were destroyed about 300 years ago, an estimate based on the extent to which radioactive carbon in the trunks has decayed.
The finding was reported in the Sept. 12 issue of Nature by geologists from the United States Geological Survey and the Universities of Washington and Colorado.
Signs that great earthquakes devastate the region, though less frequently than in California, have been accumulating in recent years, including evidence of sudden sinking of the coastline, as occurred during the great 1964 earthquake in Alaska.


Bubka Is Moving His Poles to Berlin
SERGEI BUBKA, the world-record holder in the pole vault, is to join the exodus of Soviet sports stars by moving to Berlin's Olympic athletics club at the end of the year.
"Berlin offers me the best training facilities in summer and winter," said the 27-year-old Olympic champion, finally confirming a deal that had been rumored for months.


Cuomo Gets Polite Brushoff in Japan
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, churning through his first day of meetings in Japan, repeatedly told government officials here that Japan had to do more to open its markets to American investments and exports.
But he was told repeatedly in return that Japan was doing all that it could.
Mr.
Cuomo thus became the latest United States official to ask Japan to take steps to open its markets, only to hear that the problem of lagging American exports to Japan, the biggest source of mutual friction, was basically for the United States to solve.


Input/Output Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Legislators Seek Exoneration In House Bank Controversy
Stung by criticism from constituents, more than two dozen lawmakers have asked officials of the House of Representatives to certify that they were not among the House members who had insufficient funds to cover checks drawn on the House bank last year, lawmakers and House officials said today.
A study issued this month by the General Accounting Office, an investigating arm of Congress, found that House members did not have sufficient funds to cover a total of 8,331 checks written last year.
In none of these cases, the audit found, did the bank impose penalties.
The accounting office reported that 24 House members wrote at least one uncovered check for $1,000 or more each month for the last six months of 1990.


Hy &amp; Zel's reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


BUSH'S ARMS PLAN: Soviets Reject Fast Reply on Arms, Saying Talks Must Be Held First; Soviet Proposals Expected
American officials said today that the United States was still uncertain how the Soviet Union would respond to the nuclear arms cuts announced on Friday by President Bush.
Administration officials seemed wary that Moscow might try to trump Mr.
Bush with proposals of its own, calling for arms control measures in areas that Washington is reluctant to consider.


Review/Television; The Powers of Hair, and Its Loss
"Nova" begins a new season tonight at 8 on Channels 13 and 49 with "Sex, Lies and Toupee Tape," a pateful of information about how hair grows and why it stops growing and what losers can do about it.
The snappy spirit -- Alan Rachins of "L.A. Law" narrates with the help of billiard balls -- seems appropriate, although for men who invest substantial sums in drugs, transplants and toupees, baldness is evidently no laughing matter. (Young and middle-aged women do not seem to be as prone to fallout.)
The program relays anthropological speculation that humans have kept the hair on their heads while shedding body hair over the millennia to abet "social signaling." For the ancients, as for some moderns, a full mane connoted virility, health and youth.
"A man without hair is like a field without grass," said Ovid, who must have had quite a mop.
But it turns out that injections of the male hormone testosterone tend to bring on baldness -- a hair-curling contradiction.
Anyway, it may be taken as a tribute to the power of hair to make one feel special that new men in the armed forces are compelled to have it shaved off.


Yugoslavs Open Drive Against a Croatian Stronghold; Community Action
Amid fears of a new increase in fighting, the European Community today agreed to expand its cease-fire monitoring activities in Yugoslavia, but it again delayed a decision on whether to send a military peacekeeping force to the region.
The Community's 12 foreign ministers approved an increase in the number of unarmed cease-fire observers from around 100 to 200 and instructed them to patrol the area bordering on Hungary and the republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina as well as Croatia.


Ethnic Conflict in Yugoslavia Tearing Apart Its Army, Too
The colonel suddenly wept.
He was recounting the dilemma of a Serbian officer flying combat missions against Croatia.
The pilot's Croatian wife had called him from Zagreb demanding that he take off his uniform and desert, or she would jump from their 14th-story apartment with their child.
The pilot then called his Serbian mother in Novi Sad, who told him that if he took off the uniform of the Yugoslav Army, he could never cross her threshold again.


In Search of Greener Showrooms
Tony Salcido, who sells Toyotas in Puente Hills, Calif., is the kind of salesman who makes car companies both smile and cringe.
As the top salesman at his dealership, he helps move a lot of cars and keep Toyota's assembly lines humming.
But Mr.
Salcido's loyalty is to his paycheck, not his brand.


An AIDS Blood Test Backed
AN advisory panel of the Food and Drug Administration has unanimously recommended that the nation's 2,500 blood centers begin testing for a rare strain of the AIDS virus by June 1992.
Although the F.D.A. is not required to follow the panel's recommendation, an F.D.A. spokesman, Bradford Stone, said the agency was very likely to start requiring testing soon for the strain of the AIDS virus known as HIV-2.


Club Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Business and Health; Companies Make H.M.O. Deals
TURNING the H.M.O. concept on its head, a handful of companies have pursuaded health- maintenance organizations to charge on a fee-for-service basis, instead of taking the usual prepaid fee that covers employees even if they do not need medical attention.
Honeywell has persuaded H.M.O.'s in Minneapolis and Phoenix to accept this arrangement, and General Electric, Control Data and a few other companies have made similar deals.
These companies say such a system helps slow the rise in employee medical costs.


Cerbco reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sanmark-Stardust Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A U.S. Sumitomo Unit
Sumitomo Bank of Japan said yesterday that it had set up a securities subsidiary in the United States.
The unit, Sumitomo Bank Securities Inc., will initially place commercial paper, privately place all types of debt securities and deal in securities that banks are allowed to trade, including United States Treasury bonds.
Sumitomo said Norah Hughes, who headed a similar operation at the Swiss Bank Corporation, will be president of the unit, which was provided with $40 million of starting capital.


Micro Tempus reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cree Chief Urges State to Cancel Hydroelectric Contracts


What's the Use Of 'First Use'?
Despite the well-deserved praise for President Bush's initiative to reduce nuclear arms, two sentences in his address indicate that the U.S. still clings to a mistaken belief that has distorted its defense policy throughout the nuclear age.
This is the belief that, beyond possessing nuclear weapons in order to deter the use of such weapons by other countries, the U.S. must rely on the threat of using them in order to deter conventional attacks.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


Cancer Treatment Holdings reports earnings for Year to May 31


Fall in Soviet Oil Exports Said to Force Sale of Gold
Leonid A. Abalkin, a senior economic adviser to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, said yesterday that the recent sharp decline in Soviet oil exports had forced the nation to sell off gold reserves to pay for imports and to make payments on foreign debt.
Although Mr.
Abalkin said he did not have figures at hand, he generally confirmed disclosures in Moscow on Friday and yesterday that the central Government's gold reserves were well below Western estimates of how much gold was available to help meet foreign payments.


World Bank Salomon Move
The World Bank, which had suspended its business with Salomon Brothers at least through yesterday, decided to delay a final decision on whether it would continue to suspend its dealings with the firm, which has been rocked since August by a scandal over its bidding practices at some Treasury securities auctions.
By deciding to continue to review Salomon's status, the agency has placed Salomon in a financial limbo, with the original ban apparently continuing past its original time frame, and with no final decision on extending it.


For U.S. Arms Complex, Much Work, Then Less
President Bush's call for the destruction of thousands of nuclear arms will probably keep the nation's huge weapons complex busy in the short term but will eventually speed its contraction, Federal and private experts say.
The coast-to-coast weapons complex, run by the Department of Energy, employs nearly 100,000 people in 13 states and costs about $11 billion a year to operate.
Home to the nation's scientific best and brightest for decades, it has been shaken in recent years by charges of mismanagement, reduced demand for its goods and a legacy of toxic pollution that has prompted a costly nationwide cleanup.


W.F. O'Connell, 78, A Finance Executive And an Accountant
Walter F. O'Connell, a retired executive of the Olin Corporation, died on Friday at his home in Aiken, S.C.
He was 78 years old.
He died of cancer, the funeral home said.


Alcoa Product Faces Delay
The Aluminum Company of America says a ceramic packaging business for microchips may not meet expectations.
The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reported that Paul H. O'Neill, the chairman, made the comment to securities analysts last week at an Alcoa plant in Iowa.
Alcoa has spent at least $100 million on the packaging and had set this year as a deadline.


Nuclear Cuts Pose Threat For Other Arms Programs
By reopening the debate in Congress on the appropriate level of military spending, President Bush's move to reduce the nation's nuclear forces raises the possibility that Pentagon contractors will face deeper and faster cuts in weapons programs than they previously envisioned, analysts said today.
In acknowledging in his speech on Friday that the threat from the Soviet Union is considerably diminished, President Bush made it easier for Democrats in Congress to oppose a wide range of weapons programs, analysts and industry executives said.
Support for the Northrop Corporation's B-2 Stealth bomber, already waning, eroded further over the weekend, with even staunch supporters like Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, the chairman of the Armed Services Committee, saying the program should be scaled back.


Fifth Ave. Mile Goes Open
After 10 years of sponsorship by Pepsi Cola, then the Fifth Avenue candy bar, and finally Mercedes-Benz, the Fifth Avenue Mile race will be staged for the first time on Oct. 19 without a sponsor and, as a direct result, without appearance fees for the elite runners.
But in a novel twist, the New York Road Runners Club has opened the race to 400 ordinary runners to join the world-class athletes, who will be competing for prize money only, up to $5,000 for the first man and woman to finish.


BUSH'S ARMS PLAN: Battle Cry In Congress; Lawmakers Brace For Fight on Arms
In his speech to the nation on Friday night, outlining major reductions in American nuclear armaments, President Bush warned against "unwise or unwarranted cuts in the defense budget" and said he was "counting on Congressional support" for his plans for the future.
On Sunday morning, his national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, said that by pushing ahead with plans for eliminating most tactical nuclear weapons Mr.
Bush might win increased cooperation from the Democrats on Capitol Hill.
The Democratic majority "will be more inclined to give the President what he needs for the defense of the country and less inclined to micro-manage," he said.


Taurus Footwear reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Life Support for the Recovery
With consumers cautious and service industries in the throes of cost-cutting, America's factories are likely to serve as the main life-support system for the weak recovery.
Manufacturing has been fitfully tugging the rest of the economy out of recession.
Factory production has been climbing for five straight months and should continue to outpace sales of services in the coming months, economists and executives say.


Team Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Lights, Cameras and a Sudden Surge in Action
During the hurly-burly of rush hour on a recent afternoon, a film crew had set up on West 58th Street in Manhattan.
Horns honked, cabbies rubbernecked, pedestrians gawked and the New York-born director Paul Mazursky yelled "Action!" The New York-born actor Danny Aiello began speaking on cue in a movie about New York.
It was the first film crew the neighborhood had seen for a solid year.
"We're back, and it's about time, too," Mr.
Mazursky said during a break from directing "The Pickle," a new Columbia Pictures film.
"I think we were in real danger of losing New York as a film community."


No Danger in Airport Route During U.S. Open
To the Editor:
Leonard L. Fleisig's conclusion (letter, Sept. 4) that "diversion" of some airplane traffic from Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens during the United States Open tennis tournament constitutes some unidentified safety problem is erroneous.
Yet he uses it to support his general opposition to the proposed National Tennis Center expansion.


Univar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Books of The Times; Birth of a National Icon, but an Illegitimate One
Iwo Jima Monuments, Memories and the American Hero By Karal Ann Marling and John Wetenhall Illustrated. 300 pages.
Harvard University Press. $24.95
"Iwo Jima" examines what its authors claim is the justifiable purging of a national icon, one that is probably the most powerful patriotic symbol to come out of World War II.
The icon, Joe Rosenthal's Pulitzer Prize-winning photograph and later Felix de Weldon's gigantic statue derived from the photo, is marines raising the American flag atop Mount Suribachi on the South Pacific island of Iwo Jima.


Dick Clark Productions reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Views on Israeli Settlements Have Shifted; Room for Disagreement
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal, in "An Autobiography" (column, Sept. 17), does neither Israel nor Jews in general any favor by his seemingly blind support of the Shamir Government.
To reject unquestioning agreement with any Israeli governmental policy is not anti-Semitic.
The United States has been a very good and generous friend to Israel for decades.
And Israel has been a useful friend of the United States most of the time since President Truman recognized the new state in 1948.


United Services Advisors Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Isco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Bowl America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


B-Zero
B-2 or not B-2?
Once again, that is the question as a Congressional conference committee convenes to resolve differences on the defense budget.
The President wanted full funding for four of the bat-winged Stealth bombers in this year's budget.
The Senate went along by a narrow 51-to-48 vote.
But the House overwhelmingly gave the right answer to the question, how many B-2's does the nation need: None.
President Bush's insistence on spending $3.2 billion for more B-2's, along with $5.2 billion he wants for strategic defenses, contradicts his own appreciation of modern realities.
Consider what he said Friday: "New leaders in the Kremlin and the republics are now questioning the need for their huge nuclear arsenal." The Warsaw Pact has "crumbled." And any threat of a Soviet invasion of Western Europe has evaporated.


FCA International reports earnings for Year to June 30


Topics of The Times; Fair Honoraria Fix
The 1989 Ethics Reform Act, which barred House members and other high Government officials from accepting outside fees for writing articles or giving speeches, was a major advance for clean government.
But the act may have gone too far when it extended the honoraria ban to low- and middle-level workers whose duties make them unlikely targets for disguised payoffs.
Sensible legislation now moving through Congress would strike a fairer balance.
The measure, approved last month by a House Judiciary subcommittee, would continue to bar Federal employees earning more than $101,300, including House and Senate members and their senior staff, from accepting any honoraria.
However, employees earning less than that would be permitted to accept outside fees for articles or speeches unrelated to their job, subject to strict conflict-of-interest standards.


NBC Defends Move on 'Quantum Leap'
NBC executives yesterday denied charges that they had caved into advertiser fear of homosexual themes in deciding to withhold backing for a proposed episode of the drama series "Quantum Leap" that was to deal with a gay teen-ager contemplating suicide.
Perry Simon, the executive vice president of prime-time programs for NBC, said the network had considered the issue of possible advertiser resistance to the episode, but was mainly reluctant to commit to paying for the program out of legimate concerns about its content and the way it had been presented to the network.


TALE OF REVENGE STIRS AIDS FUROR
In a chilling radio interview on Sept. 4, a woman who said she had AIDS told how she was trying to spread the virus out of revenge on the man who had infected her.
Whether the woman, who calls herself C. J. but has kept her identity secret, is telling the truth is a subject of debate.
But her assertion has sent a shock wave through this city.


Times Has Huskies As No. 1 Team
The Florida State Seminoles may have convinced a lot of people that they are the best team in the country after their 51-31 victory over Michigan on Saturday.
But they failed to convince The New York Times computer.


Mobutu and His Foes Bargain Over Cabinet
President Mobutu Sese Seko and opposition leaders negotiated today over the distribution of major positions in a new crisis government that Zairians hope can restore order to their country.
After a week of looting in which at least 117 people died, Mr.
Mobutu finally agreed over the weekend to give up some of the power he has wielded over this vast Central African country for 26 years.


General Kinetics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Claiming Harassment, Aquarium Sues 3 Animal Rights Groups
Battered by years of demonstrations, picketing and lawsuits by animal rights advocates, several of the nation's leading aquariums have vowed to fight back.
In the first move, the New England Aquarium here has filed a $5 million defamation suit against three animal rights groups, accusing them of making false statements about the aquarium's handling of dolphins in fund-raising efforts.
The suit also accuses the groups of filing frivolous lawsuits to harass the aquarium and undermine its program of rescuing stranded whales and dolphins.


Coffee Prices Drop Again As Rain Ends Drought Fear
Coffee futures prices fell for the fourth straight day yesterday after a rainy weekend in coffee-growing areas of Brazil washed away the last hopes for significantly higher prices in the near term.
Coffee for delivery in December fell 2.8 cents, to 82.9 cents a pound.
The decline brought the contract's cumulative decline since last Tuesday to 8.8 cents, or 9.6 percent.


U.N. Officials Seek Mastermind in Charge of Iraq's Nuclear Effort
The United Nations officials charged with destroying Iraq's nuclear weapons sites are searching for an unidentified "mastermind" who they think had overall charge of President Saddam Hussein's secret nuclear weapons program, estimated to have cost $10 billion.
The conviction that there must have be an unknown top official, who could have been a foreigner, in command stems from their belief that none of the Iraqi scientists they have met so far appears to have a full grasp of the complex program that involved both production of enriched uranium explosive and attempts to design a weapon.


Networks Electronic reports earnings for Year to June 30


The U.N. Today
General Assembly MEETS -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Dow Rises 10.73, With Professionals Dominating Trading
Stocks closed higher yesterday in trading dominated again by professionals and institutions.
Many smaller investors remained inactive awaiting Friday's employment data for September.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 10.73, to 3,016.77, as the number of shares traded on the Big Board fell to 149.8 million, from 160.7 million shares traded last Friday.
There were more than twice as many gainers as losers, 1,071 to 514.


Prima Energy Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Parking Rules
Alternate-side parking rules will be suspended today for the Jewish holiday of Simhath Torah.


PVC Container Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Canterbury Educational Services reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Another Strong Quarter for Wall St. Fees
Despite the recession, American corporations maintained their strong appetite for cash from the stock and bond markets in the third quarter, bringing a healthy flow of fees to Wall Street investment houses.
The quarter also saw a significant change in the rankings of the top securities underwriters, as securities firms apparently dashed to capture market share lost by Salomon Brothers Inc., which has been shaken by the Treasury market scandal since August, and from Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Richard Barrie Fragrances Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Dollar Falls as Gold Rises On Soviet Reserves Report
But gold prices advanced.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold bullion for current delivery settled at $354 an ounce, up $4.90 from Friday.
The Republic National Bank of New York said gold rose $4.75, to a late bid price of $353.75 an ounce.
Dealers said the dollar traded in a relatively narrow range throughout the session, while sentiment toward the currency remained bearish.


For Joe McGinniss, Another Grisly Killing Means Another Book
In the annals of crime, there are serial murderers, and then there are the serial authors.
Perhaps there was a moment when Joe McGinniss, the author of "Fatal Vision," the grisly story of an Army doctor who brutally killed his pregnant wife and two daughters, and then "Blind Faith," another grisly story about a brutal wife-killer, felt like scrawling across his bathroom mirror, "Stop me before I write again." If there was, it passed.
In his latest book, "Cruel Doubt," to be published this month by Simon &amp; Schuster, Mr.
McGinniss, who is 48 years old, has once again immersed himself in the details of a small-town family murder.
This time, he has focused on Chris Pritchard of Washington, N.C., who with two college friends in 1988 planned the stabbing of his stepfather, Lieth Von Stein, and narrowly missed killing his own mother, Bonnie Von Stein.
And once again, a stricken family entrusted Mr.
McGinniss -- exclusively -- with their most private thoughts and innermost fears.


Champion Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


U.S. Views on Israeli Settlements Have Shifted
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 18 front-page report that the Bush Administration has tied loan guarantees for Israel to a settlements freeze in the Israeli-occupied territories gives the impression that the United States has always adhered to the position that Israeli settlements in the occupied territories are illegal.
That is not so.
There was a time when the United States didn't even hold to the position that settlements are an obstacle to peace.


New York City In Negotiated Sale
New York City, which usually sells securities through competitive bidding, expects to sell about $1.25 billion worth of revenue anticipation notes next week on a negotiated basis.
The notes, which will be due in June 1992, will be handled through an underwriting group led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Minerex Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Haiti's Military Assumes Power After Troops Arrest the President
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti, Sept. 30
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's first freely elected president, was ousted tonight by the military, the army commander said.
A Government official said Mr.
Aristide was taken to the airport to be deported to France, adding that the United States Ambassador, Alvin Adams, accompanied Mr.
Aristide to the airport.


Blackstone Unit to Buy Days Inns
A Blackstone Group subsidiary that owns the Ramada and Howard Johnson hotel chains agreed yesterday to pay $250 million for Days Inns of America Inc., the 1,214-unit franchise system burdened by some $750 million in debt.
If approved by the bankruptcy court, the transaction, which could be derailed if a better offer appeared -- would create one of the world's largest hotel franchisers.
The three chains combined now operate 2,236 hotels with 284,000 rooms.


Bridge
One United States squad got off to a good start on the first day of the World Bridge Federation's NEC World Team Championships today, but another did not fare as well.
In Group E of the Bermuda Bowl contest for Open Teams, the United States II team, consisting of Bart Bramley, Mark Feldman, Fred Stewart, Steve Weinstein, Alex Ornstein and Jeff Ferro, defeated Surinam and tied with Poland.
The standings were: in first place, United States II with 62 victory points; in second, Brazil, with 50 points; in third, Canada, with 49 points; in fourth, Poland and Sweden, tied with 48 points; in sixth, Hong Kong, with 47 points; in seventh, Pakistan, with 28 points, and in eighth, Surinam, with 26 points.


Golden Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about Oona O'Neill Chaplin misstated her age in some copies.
Mrs.
Chaplin was 66 years old, not 70.


Afghan Leader Calls for Local Elections
In the latest of a series of political concessions, President Najibullah called today for provincial and local elections with the participation of all political groups, including the rebel mujahedeen.
These local elections, the President said, would be a prelude to national elections envisaged for next year.
Over the last several weeks, Mr.
Najibullah has made one proposal after another aimed at finding a political rather than a military solution to the civil war raging across the country.
But rebel groups have refused to even consider negotiations with his Government.


Officials Saw Early Signs Of Brutalization of Girl, 8
Fifteen months before the police found Tiesha Carter scarred, beaten, burned and locked in a closet, teachers at Public School 229 in the Bronx told a child-abuse hot line there was evidence that she was being mistreated, an education official said yesterday.
Despite the call in June 1990, Tiesha, now 8 years old, was not removed from the apartment in the Morris Heights section of the Bronx where she lived with her grandmother, her mother and her stepfather, and where, the police said, she was subjected to brutal abuse and prevented from attending school for the entire 1990-91 year.


S.E.C. Sues Over Stock Sale
The Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday accused a British investor of using confidential information to sell stock in a publishing company that was having trouble finding a buyer.
In a civil lawsuit filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, the S.E.C. said Christopher J. Moran illegally sold 100,000 shares of the Zondervan Corporation in May 1987 after he learned that efforts to sell the company had been unsuccessful.


New Wrinkle in Endorsing: Graying Athletes Cash In
THE graying of jockdom is apparent all along Madison Avenue.
At age 39, Jimmy Connors is urging headache sufferers to "Nupe it with Nuprin" in television commercials and print advertisements created by J. Walter Thompson.
Soon, BBDO Worldwide will add the tennis player to the roster of celebrities featured in Diet Pepsi's continuing "You've got the right one baby, uh-huh!" campaign.
Mr.
Connors is one of a teamful of sports stars with wrinkled brows beneath their headbands or receding hairlines under their helmets who are becoming more popular in advertising and as product endorsers.
Advertising and sports executives attribute the growing appeal of aging athletes to their popularity with the baby-boom generation.


PMG Financial reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Soviets Reject Fast Reply on Arms Saying Talks Must Be Held First
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev indicated today that the Soviet Union would not rush to respond to President Bush's initiative in reducing nuclear weapons, and a senior Foreign Ministry official said it was important to begin discussions with Washington on the issue first.
These and other Soviet officials, however, continued to depict the initiative as a major step and to pledge a "commensurate" response.


INSIDE
Saving a Failing Heart
A Texas man is recovering after a battery-powered device was implanted to assist his failing heart.
Science Times, page C10.
New Pact on Exxon Spill
A new agreement has been reached to settle suits stemming from the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill.
Page A14.


Washington Federal Savings (DC) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Intelogic Trace Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Gates Almost a Side Issue in Hearings
As hearings into the nomination of Robert M. Gates as Director of Central Intelligence move into their third week, some members of the Senate Intelligence Committee and their staffs are growing concerned that the panel has touched on several politically sensitive issues that the senators never intended to explore.
The primary focus of committee members when they hear public testimony from current and former agency officials on Tuesday will be whether Mr.
Gates slanted intelligence, either because of his hardline views of Moscow or to please his boss, William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence from 1981 to 1986.
But these issues raise a much larger and potentially more explosive issue: the quality and integrity of the way the C.I.A. and the intelligence arms of other government agencies have interpreted the world and made their views known to the White House over the past decade.


Dublin Journal; Will Haughey Get the Heave? It's an Irish Riddle
The ancient Celts, fierce in battle though they were, had a nagging fear that if they angered the gods, the sky would fall on their heads.
Their descendants, especially Prime Minister Charles J. Haughey, probably know the feeling.
In recent weeks, a wave of scandals involving public officials has combined with Ireland's worsening economy to shake Mr.
Haughey's proven ability to rule this country of 3.6 million with a firm hand, taking backtalk from no one.


Uniquest Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Can't Find a Playground? Maybe a Pumpkin Patch Will Do


TCG International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Siliconix Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to Sept 8


Cree Chief Asks New York To Drop Hydroelectric Plan
A Cree Indian chief from Quebec's sub-Arctic came to New York City yesterday to urge the state to cancel huge contracts for hydroelectricity that would be generated on his native land, but state officials strongly suggested that they favored moving ahead with the purchase.
The 20-year, $19.5 billion contracts were recently put under a year-long review in the face of bitter complaints from the Cree and environmental groups that the hydroelectric projects would devastate a vast stretch of wilderness near James Bay.


Angry Taylor To Tackle Team Woes
Jeff Hostetler and Bart Oates are frustrated.
Mark Ingram is puzzled.
Ray Handley is more disappointed than upset.
And Lawrence Taylor is angry, angry enough to call a players meeting, probably on Wednesday, to get his fellow Giants to start playing well enough to win again.
Although the head coach, the defensive coordinator and a few other coaches and players are new, these are essentially the same Giants who won Super Bowl XXV last January.


Eagles Lose McMahon as Redskins Dominate
The Philadelphia Eagles had already felt the sting of losing quarterback Randall Cunningham to a knee injury.
Tonight Jim McMahon was lost in the same fashion and maybe the Eagles lost much more, including any hopes for a division title and fruitful playoff run.
Washington smothered Philadelphia, 23-0, before 55,198 fans at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium, producing the Redskins' third straight shutout before the home crowd.
Washington has outscored its opponents here, 102-0.


Farmer Brothers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Parents v. Condom Plan; New York Schools Face Legal Wilderness In Giving Condoms With No Parental Say
Sometime in the next few months, a student at a New York City high school will be handed a condom by a teacher.
The transaction will be discovered by the student's parents and a tempest will swirl up in which the parents, outraged that they were not consulted, will call a lawyer.
This scenario, all sides to the rancorous debate agree, is likely because the school system is heading into an unmapped wilderness of philosophical and legal questions as it becomes the first in the nation to make condoms widely available without any say by parents.


Review/Film Festival; What Was New (and Rude) in 1962
Unlike a lot of avant-garde films, which age faster than fondled gardenias, Jack Smith's "Flaming Creatures" remains as vigorously funny and innocent today as it was 29 years ago, when it outraged the censors and the police on two continents.
The 45-minute transvestite romp, one of the classics of the American film underground, is the centerpiece of "Avant-Garde Visions," a program of three films that will be shown at the New York Film Festival tonight at 9:15.


A.T.&amp;T. Links Breakdown to a Routine Oversight
In a report to the Federal Government yesterday on the latest accident to disrupt its long-distance service, A.T.&amp; T. for the first time attributed the Sept. 17 incident largely to a supervisor's choosing not to dispatch a technician for a routine inspection.
Little else in the report, submitted last night to the Federal Communications Commission, which has jurisdiction over A.T.&amp; T., shed new light on the general picture of equipment failure compounded by human misjudgment.


A Convenient Box
THE Iomega Corporation has increased the capacity and decreased the price of its Bernoulli Box, which is good news even for people who are thinking, "What's a Bernoulli box?"
A Bernoulli Box is a device for storing large amounts of data on a removable cartridge.
The cartridge itself is essentially a hybrid of a floppy diskette and a hard disk, the size of about four conventional 5.25-inch floppy diskettes in a stack.
Not everyone needs one, but they are certainly a blessing for some people.


Lotus Executive Moves To Wang Laboratories
Donald P. Casey has been appointed executive vice president and chief development officer of Wang Laboratories Inc.
He comes to Wang from the Lotus Development Corporation, where he was in charge of development and product marketing for the company's spreadsheet products.
He succeeds Horace Tsiang, who left Wang recently.
Mr.
Casey will be one of three executive vice presidents reporting to Richard W. Miller, chairman and chief executive.


Nestor Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Patterns
Jordache vs. Levi's
Jordache Enterprises is embroiled in a legal dispute with Levi Strauss and Company over the marketing of its Jordache Basics 101 jeans.


Karl-Heinz Kopcke, 68, A German TV Anchor
Karl-Heinz Kopcke, who brought the main evening television news into the living rooms of millions of Germans for more than 28 years, died on Saturday.
He was 68 years old.
Mr.
Kopcke died of cancer at his home in Hamburg, the ARD television network said today.


Judge Denounces 'Lawless' Beating by Police at Rally
A Criminal Court judge in Manhattan declared in a decision yesterday that the police beat an Act Up demonstrator without provocation in February and then did not tell the truth about the incident.
The judge also criticized a Manhattan prosecutor, saying that he badgered the demonstrator over the phone several months after the incident.
The judge also said the assistant district attorney gave evasive answers about the call when asked about later it in court and wrongly implied at a court hearing that he did not have the demonstrator's medical records.


Nursing Mother's Break
To the Editor:
Lisa deMauro makes many valid points for breast feeding in "Beating the Bottle" (Op-Ed, Sept. 21).
As one physician in family practice who counseled many mothers to breast-feed, I found my main opposition coming from grandmothers, aunts and friends.
However, I always advised a bottle of formula at bedtime.
Mother's milk is weakest then, babies sleep better, and the babysitter has no milk to supply.
Remember, husbands need attention, too, and mothers need a rest.
PAUL KATZ, M.D.
Richmond Hill, Queens, Sept. 22, 1991


Atlas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Japan Accuses Nomura Of Stock-Price Scheme
In the most serious accusations leveled in Japan's financial scandals, the Nomura Securities Company, the world's largest brokerage house, was charged today with violating Japanese law by manipulating customers into a flurry of buying that sent the price of a major stock soaring briefly two years ago.
The charges were made in Parliament today by the Finance Minister, Ryutaro Hashimoto.
He effectively accused the firm of running a scheme that left scores of customers with heavy losses but benefited a select few -- including one of Japan's top organized-crime bosses -- after the stock collapsed.
It was the first time in this country's recent financial scandals that a brokerage house has been charged formally with breaking the law.


Hewson A. Ryan, 69, Professor and Envoy
Hewson A. Ryan, the Edward R. Murrow Professor of Public Diplomacy emeritus at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University, died Saturday at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
He was 69 years old.
A spokesman for Tufts, where Mr.
Ryan taught from 1977 to 1990, said he died of a heart attack.


Miscellany
*
An investor group led by Ruth Ratny, publisher of Screen, a trade magazine in Chicago, announced yesterday that it had purchased rights to the Clio Awards from Bill Evans of Clio Awards Enterprises, New York.
Terms were not disclosed, nor were the identities of the other group members.


Maris's Big Moment: Deliveries Differed
Red Barber was never one for broadcasting with naked emotion, so 30 years ago today, on a sunny fall day when Roger Maris hit his 61st home run off Tracy Stallard of the Red Sox, Barber did not let the moment move him.
Speaking recently by telephone from his Tallahassee, Fla., home, Barber remembered his call for WPIX: "There was a restaurant man in Los Angeles who announced he'd give $5,000 for the ball if and when Maris hit it. When the ball went into the lower right-field seats, I described it with the fewest possible words: 'Sixty-one home runs and $5,000.' "


Nebraska Senator Enters Race for President


Naming of 7 Moons
Six moons of Neptune that were discovered by the Voyager 2 spacecraft in 1989 have been named after water nymphs and relatives and lovers of the mythological Greek sea god Poseidon.
And a recently discovered moon of Saturn has been named Pan after the Greek god who was half man and half goat.


Observer; Agley Again, Alas
Dreadful news!
There was a mistake in this column on Sept. 7.
What the poet Robert Burns really said was that the best-laid "schemes" of mice and men gang aft agley.
We had Burns saying "plans" instead of "schemes," and of course we regret the error.
Who, you ask, are these erring "we" who don't know their Robert Burns?
They are the column's literary staff, whose task is to keep the column looking awesome to professors of literature and prevent it from looking stupid on days when the columnist is distracted, as he was when this deplorable "plans" for "schemes" mistake occurred.


Corrections
A dance review on Monday about the Pina Bausch Tanztheater Wuppertal misstated some performance dates at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
"Palermo, Palermo" will be performed through Saturday; "Bandoneon" will be presented on Oct. 8, 9, 11, 12 and 13.


CHRONICLE
From JANE PAULEY , the television personality, to the Guerrilla Girls, who work incognito to focus on discrimination against women who are artists, the winners of the New York Woman magazine's Life of the City Awards cut a wide swath.
The magazine, which celebrates its fifth anniversary at a party tonight, will honor 27 women "who are being innovative and breathing life into the city," said BETSY CARTER , editor in chief.
Winners include GANGA STONE , founder of God's Love We Deliver; WENDY WASSERSTEIN , author of "The Heidi Chronicles"; QUEEN LATIFAH , a rap musician; ELIZABETH LEDERER , who prosecuted the Central Park jogger case, and LINDA FAIRSTEIN , chief of the Manhattan District Attorney's Sex Crimes Unit.


Science and Math Get Most Support
Major corporations that give money to support education in the United States are more interested in giving to mathematics and science projects, and are much less inclined to give money for programs to serve early childhood needs or to keep drugs out of schools.
These preferences emerged in a survey of leading companies' responses to the six national education goals set forth in 1989 by President Bush and the nation's governors.
The survey was made by the Conference Board, a research and information organization based in New York City, which sent questionnaires to 1,600 companies and received 176 replies.


At Thompson, a Program That Reaffirms the Word
HOPING to encourage the young employees of the television generation to work on print advertising, J. Walter Thompson New York has established an agency within the agency that specializes in moving consumers through words and pictures that do not move.
The 60 or so employees in the agency's four creative groups participate in the program, which to set an informal tone has no formal name.
They find small businesses, those that might not normally advertise, and create print campaigns for them.


Older Women Face Estrogen Profiteering
To the Editor:
The day "A New Lease for Estrogen" (editorial, Sept. 16) extolled the good news about estrogen replacement therapy for post-menopausal women, I received notice from my American Association for Retired Persons pharmacy that I will no longer be able to buy estrogen in generic form: "the sole manufacturer of generic conjugated estrogens is no longer producing this product." I have been on estrogen 10 years for osteoporosis.
Now I will have to buy the much more expensive Premarin, the trade name for conjugated estrogen tablets made by Wyeth-Ayerst.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12
The U.S. suspended aid to Haiti and said it would not recognize the military junta that ousted democratically elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who was exiled to Venezuela.
Page A1


Solo Police Patrols Pose Safety Threat
To the Editor:
"Safety and Solo Patrols" (editorial, Sept. 23) states that solo squad-car patrol by New York City Police Department sergeants or lieutenants "poses only a marginal threat to officers' safety." Does this mean the loss of one life is a marginal threat?
Is that what we say to the family of a police supervisor who may be seriously injured or even murdered?


Review/Film Festival; An Artist and His Muse In Jacques Rivette Work
In the South of France near Montpellier, in a magnificent old chateau slightly smaller than the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Edouard Frenhofer, a once-celebrated painter, lives in uneasy bucolic stasis with his wife, Liz, his former model.
Edouard (Michel Piccoli) has not done any work in 10 years, monumentally blocked, it seems, by love or, at least, by contentment.
He eats and drinks and putters around the chateau.
Liz (Jane Birkin) devotes herself to Edouard and, as a hobby, stuffs birds, sometimes members of endangered species.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, named James W. Meyer director of research, succeeding Edwin P. Przybylowicz, senior vice president and director of research, who retires on Nov. 1. *
Lund International Holdings Inc., Minneapolis, appointed James Pfleider chief executive and president, succeeding William McMahon, who resigned on May 1.


Army Accuses Croatia as Fighting Worsens
A cease-fire that had been steadily eroding since it was declared nine days ago was overwhelmed today by a surge of fighting in the republic of Croatia.
Heavy clashes were reported along virtually the entire length of the front between units of the separatist republic and the militia of its rebellious Serbian minority, backed by the Yugoslav Army.


CALLS TO REVIEW BUDGET PACT RISE
The Speaker of the House, Thomas S. Foley, today joined a growing chorus of leading Democrats seeking to reopen last year's budget agreement after President Bush's announcement that he would destroy thousands of nuclear weapons.
Mr.
Foley, a Washington Democrat, said the President's action and changes in relations with the Soviet Union brought on by the failed coup in August should be reflected by a shift in the way Congress views the Pentagon budget.


Review/Television; A New, Hipper Look For Public Broadcasting
Once upon a time, public television wasn't preoccupied with being popular.
That was something for the commercial types to worry about.
PBS would be the alternative that, at least in theory, it was meant to be.
Series like "Dance in America" wouldn't be self-conscious about tutus and tights.
Commentators like Bill Moyers wouldn't shrink from talking-head formats when the talk was clearly illuminating.
Being thoughtful and perhaps even serious was tolerated, even encouraged.
Well, times are changing.
Old PBS has discovered the concept of "event" television that, at least in theory, should appeal to younger, hipper viewers.
That means more celebrities and superstars, more pop-culture essays and, above all, more movement.
Heads may still be talking, but they are never sitting still.
Public television has taken the basic course in Action 101: If it's not moving, it's dead.
Two of the better examples, back to back, are presented on Channel 13 tonight: "Everybody Dance Now" at 8, and "Edge" at 9.


New York Planning Homeless Shelters Across City
Offering the first glimpse of its long-range plans for housing homeless single men and women, the Dinkins administration yesterday outlined a $258 million program to build 20 to 30 new, small specialized shelters scattered throughout the city.
Much of the plan mirrors Koch administration proposals.
But it was the first time that the Dinkins administration has discussed its plans for providing appropriate care for as many as 7,000 single men and women, many of whom suffer from a range of mental and health problems.


Books of The Times; Reading the Notebooks Of a Sad, Anguished Man
The Journals of John Cheever  Edited by Robert Gottlieb  399 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
Loneliness is the theme of "The Journals of John Cheever," which can be read as a writer's notebook, a family chronicle, a brutally honest autobiography and almost as an unfinished novel.
As a book, it's all of these things, adding up to more than the sum of the parts that first appeared in The New Yorker.
The journal is heartrending in its search for love and yearning for recognition, yet all told it is a daring contribution to American letters.


C.I.A. Analysts Said Iran Assessments Were Warped to Back Arms Sales
Central Intelligence Agency analysts working under Robert M. Gates in 1985 complained in documents made public today that their detailed assessments on internal politics in Iran and Soviet influence there were seriously misrepresented to support a program of secret arms sales.
In addition, the documents show that the agency's analysts were shocked to learn that their superiors, including Mr.
Gates, were appproving intelligence reports saying that Iranian support for terrorism was on the decrease, when they had found no evidence to support the assertion.


Theater in Review
Invitations to Heaven (Questions of a Jewish Child)
Lepercq Space Brooklyn Academy of Music 30 Lafayette Avenue (at Ashland Place), Fort Greene, Brooklyn Through Oct. 5


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL National League
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Announced the resignation of Dennis Sommers, lead scout.
NEW YORK METS -- Named Steve Phillips director of minor league operations; Scott Brown administrative assistant of scouting; and Maureen Cooke administrator of minor league department.
New York-Penn League
AUBURN ASTROS -- Announced the resignation of John Graham, general manager, effective November 15.
NIAGARA FALLS RAPIDS -- Named Larry Parrish manager.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Signed Tony Brown, forward, and Greg Wiltjer, center.
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Signed Anthony Jones, forward. Continental Basketball Association
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Signed Nate Johnston, forward.
FOOTBALL National Football League
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Fired Ron Meyer, coach, and Leon Burtnett, offensive coordinator and quarterbacks coach.
Named Rick Venturi coach for the remainder of the 1991 season.
Canadian Football League
OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Acquired Terrence Jones, quarterback, from the Calgary Stampeders for future considerations.
HOCKEY National Hockey League
N.H.L. -- Suspended Ron Hextall, goaltender, of the Philadelphia Flyers and Jim Cummins, right wing, of the Detroit Red Wings for six games and three games respectively for their parts in a slashing incident during an exhibition game on Sept. 22.
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Sent Brian Chapman, defenseman, and Joe Day, center, to Springfield of the American Hockey League and Patrick Poulin, left wing, to St.
Hyacinthe of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Named Scotty Bowman interim head coach.
Named Pierre McGuire assistant coach.
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Sent Felix Potvin, goaltender, to St.
John's of the American Hockey League.
Released Aaron Broten, Dave Reid, Kevin Maguire and Kevin McCLelland, forwards, for reassignment.


Report Card on Educational Goals: At This Rate, the Nation Is Flunking
Monday's report card assessing progress toward meeting educational goals for the year 2000 points to an inescapable conclusion: the nation cannot reach these goals at the rate it is now moving.
What to do about that, and whether enough is being done now, are important questions that remain unanswered.
The report of the National Education Goals Panel, made public on Monday, offered the first chance to grade three sets of people on their actions so far to improve education -- the President, the governors and the American public.
Although the report did not directly evaluate their efforts, the fact that the goals still appear so far out of reach was damning indeed.


Reader's Digest Defies Court
In defiance of a court order resulting from a complaint by the Church of Scientology, the October issue of the Reader's Digest has been mailed to its 326,000 Swiss subscribers, Digest officials said yesterday.
The injunction, handed down in Lausanne, was the latest in a series of legal actions by the Church of Scientology to prevent further distribution of an article entitled "A Dangerous Cult Goes Mainstream." The piece, which originally appeared in Time magazine in May, is condensed in the October issue of the Digest.


AMR Details Spending Cuts
American Airlines expects to cut between $2.5 billion and $4 billion from its $20 billion capital spending plan over the next five years, Robert L. Crandall, chairman of its parent, the AMR Corporation, said today.
Mr.
Crandall, providing details of the previously announced plan for cutbacks, added that the airline had asked aircraft manufacturers to reshuffle jets it has ordered to even out delivery dates over the next several years.
He stressed, however, that American had no plans to cancel any firm orders.
Because growth in passenger traffic is expected to slow, Mr.
Crandall said, about $2 billion of the cuts will come from reductions in aircraft purchases.


Administrator Chosen To Fill ABC News Post
Roone Arledge, president of ABC News, yesterday named Stephen A. Weiswasser, an executive being groomed for future advancement at the network, as executive vice president of the news division.
The move, which surprised many staff members at ABC News, made Mr.
Weiswasser, 51 years old, the No. 2 executive in news under Mr.
Arledge, who is 60.
Mr.
Weiswasser will be in charge of news operations and management.


Carmiel Journal; On Coveted Hill in Galilee, 17 Arab Families Dig In
The tiny Arab hamlet of Ramya does not appear on Israeli maps, and after reaching it, up a rocky dirt trail that passes for a road, there is not much to see except nearby hilltops.
Unmarked Ramya, at the southern edge of this Israeli boomtown in Galilee, is a glum cluster of tin roofs and stone walls filled by nearly 100 people of Bedouin background whose families stopped wandering decades ago.
Because it is unrecognized by the Government, it has had to get by without basic services like running water, electricity and paved roads.


Chile Awakening From Pinochet Nightmare
To the Editor:
The court order authorizing Chile's Government to exhume the remains of more than 120 people killed in the first three months of military rule by Gen.
Augusto Pinochet is indeed extraordinary ("Santiago Journal: Graves Without a Name Yielding Their Secrets," Sept. 19).
With General Pinochet still in command of Chile's Army, few courts have dared challenge the exemption from punishment he insisted on for accepting civilian rule, restored last year after 17 years of military dictatorship.


Montana Power Names Engineer to Be Chief
Daniel T. Berube, an engineer who oversaw construction of Montana's Colstrip power plants, the largest group of coal-fired units west of the Mississippi, will take the reins on Jan. 1 as chief executive of the Montana Power Company.
Mr.
Berube replaces W. P. Schmechel, whom he my also succeed as chairman when Mr.
Schmechel retires on June 30.
Mr.
Schmechel has worked 39 years with the Butte-based utility, which has annual sales of $875 million.


A TV Show Helps Capture Jersey City's 'Most Wanted'
For the mugging suspect, it was a way to make peace with his wife.
She had thrown him out after getting a lecture about "that bum you married" when her mother saw his picture on a local TV show.
For the police, it was an easy arrest: the suspect turned himself in to "keep harmony in the family," according to Deputy Police Chief John A. McAuley.


B.C.C.I. Hearing Is Canceled After U.S. Blocks Testimony
The Justice Department has blocked the testimony of two key witnesses scheduled to appear Wednesday at a Senate hearing on the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, causing Senator John F. Kerry, chairman of the panel, to cancel the hearing.
The cancellation is the latest incident in a dispute between Senate investigators and the Justice Department.
The Senate believes that the Justice Department has tried to hamper the Senate investigation, and the Justice Department said it feared that the Congressional inquiry could undermine its own investigation of the bank.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Chase Mortgage Finance Corp., a unit of Chase Manhattan Corp., filed for $1 billion in pass-through certificates backed by a pool of mortgage loans.
No underwriter has been named.


C.D.'s and Bank Money Funds Fall Again
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts continued to decline for the week that ended yesterday, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, the publication in North Palm Beach, Fla., that focuses on interest rates.
"Not only are the numbers falling quickly," said Robert K. Heady, The Monitor's publisher, "but savers should not expect any rate uptick by banks during the traditional October certificates-of-deposit roll-over period. Weak loan demand is keeping savings rates low, and certain institutions are purposely allowing their deposit bases to erode, thus reducing their cost of funds."


Review/Film; 2 Views of the Homeless, One Aggressive, One Gentle
Mainstream movies like "The Fisher King" and Mel Brooks's recent "Life Stinks" approach the homeless through the comfortable lens of comedy.
But the two works opening today at Film Forum are head-on views likely to make everyone feel uneasy.
"To the Moon, Alice" is a half-hour fiction about a nightmare version of the nuclear family: a homeless couple and their young son camp out by night on the set of a television sitcom.
"Takeover" is an hourlong documentary about homeless people who organized and took over empty houses in eight cities on May Day 1990.
Both are tough, effective complements to the growing list of commercial films on the subject.


About New York
Let not young souls be
smothered out before
They do quaint deeds and fully
flaunt their pride. Vachel Lindsay
"It's a glorious day," Ned O'Gorman said, as he sat on the stoop and watched Harlem dance by.


Guggenheim's Orbit May Take In Spain
Officials of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, which in the past several years has been hatching plans to expand from SoHo to Salzburg, Austria, are meeting in Manhattan this week with representatives of Bilbao, the fourth largest city in Spain, to work out the final details on yet another branch: the Guggenheim Museum/Bilbao.
A design for the new museum -- a sprawling, riverside structure of sand-blasted steel and concrete by the American architect Frank Gehry -- has already been approved.


Excerpts From Senate Hearing on Nomination of C.I.A. Chief
Following are excerpts from hearings by the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on the nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central In
telligence,
as transcribed by the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a private service, including a statement by Senator Frank H. Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, vice-chairman of the committee, and testimony by Melvin A. Goodman, a former division chief in Soviet affairs at the Central Intelligence Agency; Graham E. Fuller, a senior analyst at the Rand Corporation and a former intelligence officer, and Harold Ford, a C.I.A. contract employee:
Murkowski Statement
The allegation that intelligence analysis has been slanted or suppressed, . .goes to the integrity and it goes to the very heart of the intelligence process.
The taxpayers have paid many, many millions of dollars to build an exotic collection and communications system and to maintain a massive intelligence bureaucracy.
But what is that investment worth if the analysis that actually goes to the policy makers at the end of the day is tainted?


U.S. Files Brief In Lotus Lawsuit
The United States Copyright Office has filed a "friend of the court" brief in the software copyright lawsuit brought by the Lotus Development Corporation against Borland International Inc.
Borland said the filing would help protect it from charges that its Quattro Pro spreadsheet infringes copyrights of Lotus's 1-2-3 program.


Dear Wins in Ballot Recount In Disputed Council Election
Councilman Noach Dear, the embattled Borough Park conservative, appears to have won the Democratic primary in his Brooklyn district by a paper-thin margin, according to an unofficial recount released by the Board of Elections yesterday.
But the extremely strong showing by Robert J. Miller, a liberal lawyer, has suggested to many within the Brooklyn Democratic organization that the once-unbeatable Mr.
Dear has become a precariously vulnerable politician in the wake of press reports about his use of campaign money for foreign trips and personal expenses.
Mr.
Miller had had the backing of Assembly Speaker Mel Miller, who is not related to him.


Foreign Affairs; Yes or No to Mr. Gates?
Until last week, the national security club closed ranks behind Bob Gates's quest to be the top spymaster, some actively and most by public silence.
Hardly anyone wanted to oppose a man so personally bonded to George Bush, a President known to settle personal scores.
Neither was anyone eager to lock horns with a man still likely to be the next Director of Central Intelligence and the chief keeper of information coveted by club members.
Now, however, the Senate Intelligence Committee (a key part of the club) has no choice but to get tough about the Gates nomination.
Its hand has been forced by an alliance between Senator Bill Bradley and C.I.A. analysts who are evening scores with their former boss.
The analysts started feeding the New Jersey Democrat evidence that Mr.
Gates slanted intelligence reports to serve his political masters, a cardinal sin in an agency created to tell Presidents not what they want to hear but what they must know -- like it or not.


Hushing an Engine, Electronically
Automotive researchers, who have long sought to develop a muffler that would suppress engine noise without creating a drag on horsepower and fuel efficiency, think they are finally nearing that goal.
An electronic muffler is under development by a joint venture between the Walker Manufacturing Company, the exhaust-system division of Tenneco Automotive, and Noise Cancellation Technologies Inc., which specializes in noise and vibration reduction.
The joint venture is refining a microprocessor it developed to curb engine noise.
The system is designed to generate a pattern of sound waves that in effect cancel out the engine's sound waves.
In Touch With Car Makers
The joint venture, based in Grass Lake, Mich., has been keeping car makers informed of its progress and is working with a manufacturer of diesel truck engines on electronic mufflers for large trucks.
Although a few other companies are at work on similar technologies, the participation of Walker -- the largest manufacturer of exhaust systems -- is thought to give the joint venture a marketing advantage.
A conventional muffler dampens the sound produced when the engine ignites fuel, using a series of baffles to redirect the sound of these explosions into an enclosed chamber where much of the sound dissipates.
But this conventional muffler system tends to create a buildup of exhaust that causes back pressure on the engine, reducing power and efficiency.
The electronic muffler would have the same purpose as its conventional counterpart -- reducing noice -- but would not create the back pressure.
As a result, the designers say, the electronic muffler would raise horsepower by as much as 7 percent and increase fuel efficiency.
"Tests have proven that the mufflers using this technology improve fuel efficiency by as much as 2 percent on the highway and about 5 percent in city driving," said Ronald J. Martoia, general manager of the joint venture.
Mr.
Martoia also contends that the system would have no adverse effect on air quality, because pollution controls on modern cars are farther up the exhaust stream, at the catalytic converter or in the engine itself.
The acoustical theory behind the electronic muffler is straightforward.
The system is based on the premise that undesirable sound can be neutralized by producing a wave pattern that is an exact opposite of the unwanted wave pattern produced by the engine.
Thus, the crests of the first wave of sound are countered by the valleys of an opposing wave, creating a flattened sound wave.
To the human ear, this translates into a significant reduction in noise -- only about one-third the sound of an unmuffled engine, officials say.
Applying the opposing-wave principle, Noise Cancellation Technologies, based in Stamford, Conn., is working on products to reduce vibration in car engines and devices to make household appliances quieter.
Prototypes Being Tested
Mr.
Martoia said that although the electronic muffler systems were still in the experimental stage, prototypes had been given to the three leading American automobile companies for testing.
"We also have prototypes with just about every automobile maker in Europe," he said.
The venture hopes to make the electronic muffler available on an experimental basis on one or two car models within two years.
"We can't try out new technology on cars until there are model changes," Mr.
Martoia said.
"The costs involved in retooling automobile models are high, and we have to wait until it becomes economically feasible for automobile companies to use this technology."
The system basically consists of a microprocessor-powered controller unit that analyzes the noise being produced by the engine and generates the opposing sound waves, and an amplified speaker that plays these sound waves at the tailpipe to cancel out the undesired sound.
The microprocessor unit, which could be housed behind the dashboard or under a seat, is roughly 6 inches by 4 inches by 2 inches -- a bit smaller than a paperback novel.
The speaker is about six inches in diameter.
A speaker must still be developed that is sufficiently small but also sturdy and powerful enough to keep piping out anti-noise for years through the rigors of daily driving.
"We find that there is some trouble in getting the speaker to a size that will fit in the enclosure to allow it to be packaged to fit in the car," Mr.
Martoia said.
"We're working on developing a new speaker technology that will make it small enough to accommodate fitting under a vehicle." Quick Response Is Required
Another challenge facing the developers: making sure that their audio computer can respond quickly enough to engine changes.
"We want to avoid having a system that does not respond fast enough to the changes in engine speeds," Mr.
Martoia said.
"The computer has to be able to detect changes in speed quickly enough so that it generates the proper frequencies of sound."
A microphone near the speaker at the tailpipe acts as an electronic ear, monitoring the sound.
It sends its signal back to the computerized controller unit, which performs whatever adjustments are necessary to keep the ensemble in tune.
"The whole system produces the opposing wave faster than the ear can possibly detect," Mr.
Martoia said.
"It has to work at phenomenally fast increments of time."
The companies are testing the electronic muffler on several types of cars, but Mr.
Martoia said the product would be "generic in the sense that it doesn't need to be tailored to any specific automobile model."
Walker Manufacturing and Noise Cancellation each started investigating electronic muffler technologies about three years ago.
A year later they decided to collaborate, and the joint venture was formed.
Expanded to Trucks and Buses
Under their agreement, the companies originally intended to test the system on passenger cars and light trucks.
But the experimentation has been expanded to include electronic mufflers for heavy-duty trucks, farm equipment and buses; earlier this year, the joint venture entered into a development agreement with the Detroit Diesel Corporation, a leading maker of diesel engines, to work on systems for heavy-duty applications.
Mr.
Martoia said that the joint venture hoped to price its electronic mufflers competitively with conventional offerings, although he added that the electronic models were likely to be somewhat more expensive.
"We don't have the exact numbers yet, because we are still working on developing the electronics in a cost-effective way," Mr.
Martoia said.
But the expected higher fuel efficiency and improved horsepower from the electronic mufflers "will more than compensate for the disadvantage of higher costs," he said.
Compared with other recent technological advances in automobiles, like air bags and anti-lock braking systems, Mr.
Martoia said, "the electronic muffler won't represent very much of a premium."


Trade Rumors Won't Stop Dwelling on Ranger Minds
Bernie Nicholls has followed the bouncing rumors for a full month, right to his locker.
There, they have stopped and will not budge, like Mark Messier in front of the net.
"The first time you get traded, that's the toughest," Nicholls said today, after a practice session at the Playland rink.
"I'd still be disappointed, because I look around this room and see a very good team."


Hextall Suspended
Philadelphia Flyers goaltender RON HEXTALL was suspended for six games yesterday, and the man he slashed in the preseason game -- Detroit's JIM CUMMINS -- was suspended for three.


McMillan Wants To Start Over
The Jets coaches gave game balls to quarterback Ken O'Brien, defensive end Jeff Lageman and reserve wide receiver Chris Burkett after the victory over Miami on Sunday.
Erik McMillan, once the starting free safety, took his own.
McMillan had the ball he intercepted and ran back for an 83-yard touchdown against Dan Marino of Miami tucked safely in his locker after the game.
It is apparrently headed for a special place in his trophy case.
It was the 20th interception in his four-year National Football League career, putting him in eighth place on the Jets' career list, two away from fourth place.
The ball, however, is a bittersweet prize.


Theater in Review
The Real Live Brady Bunch and the Real Live Game Show
Village Gate 160 Bleecker Street (at Thompson Street) Through Dec. 8
THE REAL LIVE BRADY BUNCH Episodes of "The Brady Bunch" television series created by Sherwood Schwartz; stage direction, Jill and Faith Soloway; music, Faith Soloway; technical director, Jim Jatho; stage manager, Madeline Long; costumes, Ms.
Long; set design, Dan Kipp and Mr.
Jatho.
Ron Delsner presents a Soloway Sisters/Eric W. Waddell Production, in association with Metraform's Annoyance Theater.
WITH: Andy Richter, Jane Lynch, Pat Towne, Becky Thyre, Benjamin Zook, Melanie Hutsell, Tom Booker, Susan Messing and Mari Weis.
THE REAL LIVE GAME SHOW  Musical director, Faith Soloway; floor director, Pat Towne; technical director, Dan Kipp; set design, Mr.
Kipp and Terry Ayers.
With: Wayne Waddell, Dana Cunningham, John Copeland and Andy Richter.


Suit Against Tums Rejected
A judge threw out a lawsuit yesterday that asserted that ads for the antacid Tums contained misleading messages about the safety of its largest competitor, Mylanta.
The lawsuit, filed in February, had contended that two Tums television advertisements misled consumers to think that Tums tablets, which contain calcium, were safer than Mylanta, whose tablets are made with aluminum and magnesium compounds.


Cuomo Is Given Praise in Japan As a Candidate
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who has made a point of denying any interest in running for President, has found that Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan, at least, views him as a "shrewd politician" who would be a "strong candidate" for the White House.
Mr.
Kaifu made the comment to Japanese reporters after meeting with Mr.
Cuomo Tuesday evening.
But the Governor warned in return that Japan could come under rising criticism in the Presidential race unless Tokyo took further steps to improve access for American investments and exports.


Reynold A. Dorris, 23, Subject of Best Seller
Reynold Abel Dorris, a young Sioux Indian who became the subject of a best-selling book on alcohol-related birth defects, died in Lebanon, N.H., on Sept. 22 of injuries suffered earlier when he was struck by an automobile.
He was 23 years old and lived in Lebanon.
The book, "The Broken Cord," was written by his adoptive parents, Michael Dorris and his Louise Erdich, both of whom are professional writers and part American Indian.


Knicks Add Firepower by Acquiring McDaniel
Addressing one of their major needs, the Knicks acquired Xavier McDaniel from the Phoenix Suns yesterday, for Jerrod Mustaf, Trent Tucker and second-round draft choices in both 1992 and 1994.
McDaniel, a 6-foot-7-inch small forward, is one of the National Basketball Association's top scorers at his position.
He has averaged at least 20 points a game in four of the past five seasons.
A physical player who combines strong post-up moves with a soft outside shooting touch and ability to run the floor, McDaniel's versatility fits the uptempo style of play that new coach, Pat Riley, wants to employ.


Dow Climbs 1.57 Points, To 3,018.34
Stocks ended yesterday's session slightly ahead in choppy trading.
Hopes of lower interest rates buoyed the market, but concern about poor third-quarter corporate earnings kept advances in check.
The Dow Jones industrial average, outperformed by the other indexes, was up 1.57 to close at 3,018.34.
Big Board volume was a moderate 165.5 million shares traded, compared with 149.8 million on Monday, with gainers outpacing decliners, 894 to 700.


Treasury Bond Prices Continue Up
Treasury bond prices moved stubbornly higher yesterday despite a monthly survey showing that United States manufacturing expanded in September for the fourth consecutive month.
The price of the Treasury's bellwether 30-year bond, which fell 1/16 of a point in early trading, closed up 4/32, or $1.25 for $1,000 in face amount, to 103 26/32.
Its yield was quoted at 7.79 percent, down from 7.80 percent late Monday.


Bush Gives Praise to Kuwait After Meeting With the Emir
After meeting with the Emir of Kuwait, President Bush today praised "Kuwait's great progress in reconstruction, physical and political," despite charges by human rights groups that abuses are rampant, including torture and arbitrary detention.
After their third meeting since the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq on Aug. 2, 1990, Mr.
Bush and the Emir, Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah, issued a demand that Iraq unconditionally release all Kuwaiti citizens who have been held by the Baghdad Government since the war.


From Villages and Caves, the Glorious Cheeses That Are Greek
WHEN most Americans think of Greek cheese, they think of white, chalky feta, usually in its crumbled state atop the ubiquitous Greek salad.
But there is more to Greek cheese than feta.
Sotiris Kitrilakis, the owner of Peloponnese in Oakland, Calif., started to bring in regional Greek cheeses about five years ago.


Dancing in the Streets, African Style


New York Library Buys The Nabokov Archive
The New York Public Library announced yesterday that it had purchased the Vladimir Nabokov Archive, the collection of manuscripts, diaries, galley proofs, correspondence and translations assembled by the author, his mother, his wife and his son.
The archive, which is to reside in the library's Berg Collection of rare books and manuscripts, includes 31 diaries, beginning in 1943, that Nabokov mined as a source for novels and short stories.
There are also more than 30 albums of Nabokov's poems written from 1918 to 1931, as well as albums in which his mother saved his early work, sometimes pasting in Nabokov's own manuscripts and typescripts.


Judge Says Times Can't Take Pressmen to Arbiter
The New York Times cannot compel its unionized pressmen to go to arbitration over staffing of a new plant, a Federal judge has ruled, declaring that staffing levels are specified in an existing agreement.
"The Times has demanded arbitration of what is not an arbitrable issue," the judge, Lawrence M. McKenna of Federal District Court in Manhattan, wrote in the eight-page decision filed yesterday.


Leading Indicators Unchanged in August
The Government's main economic forecasting index was flat in August after six straight increases dating back to the period immediately after the Persian Gulf war, the Commerce Department reported today.
The unchanged reading for the index of leading indicators, combined with a small decline in a companion index that gauges current business activity, was seen by many analysts as dimming prospects for the economy as the Federal Reserve's policy-setting body met behind closed doors to set monetary policy for the next five weeks.


Excerpts From C.I.A. Documents Released in Gates Hearings
The Senate Intelligence Committee today gave outsiders a rare glimpse into the way the Central Intelligence Agency molds the secrets it gathers into the white papers, known as intelligence estimates, that the White House uses to help shape foreign policy.
A sheaf of declassified documents released as part of committee hearings on Robert M. Gates's nomination to become Director of Central Intelligence reflects the debate between Mr.
Gates and his staff of analysts over some of the most heated intelligence issues of the 1980's.
Following are excerpts of some of those documents, reflecting internal disagreements over Soviet involvement in the attempted assassination of Pope John Paul II, Soviet influence in Iran and elsewhere in the third world and the effect of United States economic sanctions against Libya.
The excerpts reflect debates about the quality of written intelligence analyses that were produced by experts at the C.I.A. or the National Intelligence Council.
The council is a senior body of analysts that represents the consensus view of all United States intelligence agencies on world events.
From 1982 to 1986, Mr.
Gates was both the C.I.A.'s Deputy Director for Intelligence -- the head of its analysis shop -- and chairman of the National Intelligence Council.
Still classified -- and therefore not published here -- are the actual estimates that sparked the debates.
The exception is the situation in Iran in the early and mid-1980's, a subject on which many analyses by the C.I.A. and the intelligence council have been made public.
Several others were released today.
Excerpts from one are printed below.
Soviet Role in Third World
Melvin A. Goodman, a deputy division chief in the C.I.A.'s Soviet analytical division, wrote a draft National Intelligence Estimate in early 1982 concluding that Soviet influence in the third world may be reaching its limit.
Mr.
Gates, then head of the C.I.A.'s intelligence analysis shop, responded with a memorandum on Feb. 14, 1982, sharply criticizing the report.
Per your request, I have read the attached draft and, unhappily, find it to be rather dry and lacking any sense of the dynamics of Soviet involvement in the third world . . .
*. . . one has only a snapshot of Soviet involvement in the third world that tends too much to reflect on present opportunities and power balances and less on the ideological and political motives that have impelled the Soviet Union to an activist role in the third world now for more than 60 years. . . .
This section would then draw the distinction between the policies that the Soviets pursued until the mid-1970's and then the different kind of involvement that the Soviets have sponsored since that time, including a modernization of the Cuban armed forces to encourage Cuba's greater role abroad. . . .
In sum, this estimate misses the whole historical significance of Soviet involvement in the third world and the ways in which their tactics and approach have changed in the postwar period.
The reader cannot understand Soviet activities in the third world without some understanding of these changes.
The importance of the changes is reflected by the fact that the Soviets have allowed their relationship with the United States to founder in many respects over the last eight years over the question of their involvement in the third world. . . .
*On page 10 the estimate draft contends that Moscow believes that the U.S. is now more willing to counter Soviet activities in the third world than during the immediate post-Vietnam years.
I think it is not possible yet to draw that conclusion and I think the Soviets themselves have not drawn that conclusion.
So far, except in El Salvador, the Soviets principally have seen American rhetoric since 1975 and very little action. . . .
The only place they know we are involved to any degree at all is in Afghanistan. . . .
*On page 24, the draft indicates that Soviets will have more difficulty in gaining new clients than after first becoming active in the third world in the 1950's.
Again, this does not reflect the change in Soviet tactics.
It is much easier for the Soviets to let the Cubans or the Libyans or others develop such clients and to support them indirectly than it is to do so directly.
Examples include Grenada and potentially Suriname. . . .
*The estimate seems to conclude that fewer opportunities will present themselves to the Soviets in the 1980's than before for a variety of reasons and that the opportunities the Soviets have exploited will begin to present them with increased problems.
I think this overlooks the creativity of the Soviet approach . . .
I see a lot more trouble for us in the third world in the years ahead because it's easier to make trouble than it is to solve it.
Libya Analysis Assailed
On July 12, 1983, Mr.
Gates sent a memo to the director of the C.I.A.'s Near East and South Asia analysis division, criticizing a report that
concluded
United States economic sanctions against Libya were ineffective.
1.
This seems to me too narrow a cut at this subject and presumes an important lack of sophistication . . . it is fairly well documented that few, if any, expected the sanctions to have a significant economic impact . . .
2.
It seems to me that they went ahead as a political gesture to dramatize Qaddafi's behavior,  [ Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, Libya's leader ]  rivet attention on his activities, and try to ostracize him. . . .
3. I have three additional problems with the paper:
*Most importantly, the paper conveys (unintentionally or not) a strong bias on the part of the author against economic sanctions.
The analysis simply does not sound objective.
*Second, I believe the paper is too generalized for those interested in the topic.
*Finally, the paper has the underlying but unproven assumption that Libya has been pushed further into the Soviet camp by our sanctions.
No attempt is made to prove this . . .
These references add to an aura of slanted analysis.
4.
In sum, the paper reads like the author had reached his conclusions at the beginning and then researched and wrote the paper to substantiate the conclusions.
Analysts' Response
On July 21, 1983, the analysts defended the report.
We disagree that few, if any, policymakers expected the sanctions to have a significant economic impact or to cause Qaddafi to change his stripes. . . .
This is evidenced by:
*A 17 December memo from  [ censored ]  to the D.C.I.  [ William J. Casey, then Director of Central Intelligence ]  . . .
This memo states: "To sum up, the Intelligence Community unanimously feels the proposed sanctions would be counterproductive. If they are applied, their symbolic nature must be clearly understood. I do not believe the policy level task force personnel  [ the Reagan Administration policymakers who decided to impose sanctions ]  are seized with this fact."
We agree that the author and reviewers of the paper pretty well knew the conclusions the paper would reach before it was written and in fact do have a bias against economic sanctions as applied against Libya.
We fail to see any problem with this, however, since this simply reflects the experience, knowledge, and judgment of the individuals involved.
Attempted Assassination of Pope
In early 1985, Director Casey ordered Mr.
Gates to review intelligence on the shooting of Pope John Paul II four years earlier, with the stated aim of making the strongest argument that the Soviet Union had masterminded the assassination attempt.
A review of the evidence in 1983 had concluded that the Soviets were not involved in the shooting by Mehmet Ali Agca, the Turkish gunman.
Mr.
Gates assigned three analysts to prepare the case, entitled "Agca's Attempt to Kill the Pope: The Case for Soviet Involvement."
The report
was not among the documents made public today.
Some five months later, an internal C.I.A. review panel produced a report
that found "serious shortcomings" in both the 1983 and 1985 analyses, as well as other C.I.A. reports on the assassination attempt.
Key Findings
*Our review of the product record on the Papal assassination attempt reveals some serious shortcomings . . .
*Alternative explanations were not adequately examined . . .
*The widespread perception that upper management had strong and in some cases conflicting views on the issue had a pervasive effect on the analytic and production process.
*Senior management may want to take some steps to dispel the perception in some quarters that the issue has become politicized . . .
I. Nature of the Case and the Analytic Environment
The environment with C.I.A. -- particularly the reorganization of the D.I. in late 1981, the mindsets prevailing in various offices, and the "hot potato climate" associated with the  [ Papal shooting ]  case -- also influenced the amount and quality of D.I. production.  [ Mr.
Gates and other senior officials had overhauled the C.I.A.'s analysis division.
They also created new offices, covering such subjects as terrorism, that crossed both geographic and topical lines, sparking turf fights among analysts. ]
Responsibility for the case initially went to the Terrorism Branch. . . . .
As time went on and the Italian judicial investigation increasingly pointed to Bulgarian involvement, the case became the responsibility of one analyst in O.G.I.
This analyst was eventually designated by the D.D.I.  [ Deputy Director for Intelligence ]  as the key person responsible for the case within the D.I. . . .
As a result, incentives for interoffice cooperation began to evaporate.
Even more important appears to be the view expressed by some analysts interviewed that most SOVA  [ Office of Soviet Analysis ]  analysts and managers preferred, at least in the early years, not to consider the "seamy" side of Soviet policy -- wet operations  [ assassinations ]  and the like. . . .
Perhaps the most important factor contributing to this climate was the perception by analysts and managers that the seventh floor  [ the C.I.A.'s executive offices ]  had strong views on the case.
Most thought that the D.C.I.  [ Mr.
Casey ]  had a strong gut feeling that the Soviets were involved; most also were convinced that the D.D.C.I.  [ then John McMahon ]  for a long time was persuaded that the tradecraft exhibited did not bear the marks of a Soviet operation.
II. Setting the Stage: Moscow and the Polish Pope
By early 1981 . . . several D.I. products warned that Moscow might be growing "disillusioned with the utility of its connection" because it had not led to greater calm in Poland and since the Soviets were unhappy with Walesa's  [ Lech Walesa, the Solidarity leader ]  highly publicized meetings with the Pope.
In retrospect, we would have expected that this latter reporting would have set the stage for analysts at least to consider Soviet motives for getting rid of the Pope.
In fact, they continued to see the Pope as a moderating force . . .
III. The Production Record
Looking first at the internal agency documents and responses to specific external questions (30 documents covering September 1982 to June 1985), several patterns emerge:
*As in the current and serial publications, the tendency is to cast doubt on Bulgarian complicity.
*The major recurrent reasons for this position are the agency's inability to obtain specific evidence of a Bulgarian/Soviet link,  [ and ]  the supposedly "sloppy" tradecraft in the operation.
*The nearly complete absence of consideration of alternative scenarios to explain the Papal shooting.
Noteworthy by its uniqueness in mentioning alternative scenarios is a memo on 17 September 1982 from the D.D.I. to the D.C.I. titled Status of the Investigation of the Attempted Assassination of Pope John Paul II.
After discussing in considerable detail what the agency knew about the case, the memo concluded that "hard information . . . supports several scenarios not all of which are mutually exclusive:
*That Agca's plans . . . were known beforehand, perhaps to one or more of several parties including the Bulgarian service and rightist Turkish terrorists.
*That Agca attempted to assassinate the Pope without sponsorship and for his own reasons . . .
*That Agca was a hired assassin."
But the memo then went on to judge that if Agca was a hired assassin, Turkish terrorists were probably his paymasters, because the Soviets would have regarded him as having "too high" a profile and being "too risky an instrument."
Despite the unidimensional thrust of much of the ad hoc production, the D.I., in our judgment, took a balanced, objective -- and agnostic -- view of the case in the three instances in which it addressed a wide or important external audience.
Of the three formal Intelligence Assessments  [ I.A.s ]  the D.I. has produced since the assassination attempt, two address the question of bloc complicity.
These are "The Papal Assassination Attempt: A Review of the Record" (May 1983) and "Agca's Attempt to Kill the Pope: The Case for Soviet Involvement" (April 1985).
Both papers are impressive efforts to bring some order out of the fragmentary and often contradictory data on the case.
Judging from our own review of the two papers and from our interviews with key participants, however, both assessments were troubled by problems in coordination and sourcing.
The 1985 I.A., a joint effort by O.G.I. and SOVA, is the agency's most comprehensive look at the case to date.
By any standard, it is an impressive compilation of the facts and marshalling of the evidence and reasoning for Soviet involvement. . . .
The I.A. breaks new ground by taking the agency's first comprehensive look at the possibility of Soviet complicity.
But many of the people we interviewed thought the paper had an unusual thrust for an intelligence assessment.
They thought that calling the paper "The Case for Soviet Involvement" and marshalling evidence only for the side "stacked the deck" in favor of that argument and ran the risk of appearing biased.
This impression was further reinforced, they thought, by the "unbalanced" treatment of counterarguments in the text.
Many participants in the process thought that without the qualifiers, particularly on source reliability, the Key Judgments give readers the impression that the agency is saying -- more definitively than the paper intends or the evidence warrants -- the Soviets were responsible.
At the very least, the sourcing in the Key Judgments is inconsistent with the D.D.I. guidance in 1982 to "focus on the weakest element in the collection chain in terms of reliability" when referring to D.O.  [ Directorate of Operations ]  sources in D.I. publications.
The sourcing issue was at the heart of complaints about coordination from officers in D.O./S.E.  [ the C.I.A. division that runs clandestine operations in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe ]  and D.O./EUR  [ the Agency's European operaitons division ] .
S.E. officers said their reservations about the sourcing chain on the original raw reports were serious enough that they might not have disseminated the reports had it not been for the high interest in the subject.
In their view, the paper was deliberately skewed to make the case for Soviet complicity look more solid that it is; they thought the author(s) had been "manipulated."
The concerns about "balance" and about readers misinterpreting the paper might have been eased by the inclusion of a Scope Note saying that the paper deliberately does not try to make the counterargument against Soviet complicity.
Absent such a Scope Note, this paper, like its 1983 counterpart, would have been strengthened and made more balanced by consideration of alternative scenarios.
But we would not exclude the possibility that the agency might not, in the final analysis, be able to choose any single theory as the most plausible; in this case, we would serve our readers well by emphasizing the complexity of the case, the contradictory nature of the evidence, and the difficulty of arriving at any firm conclusion.
As the D.I. record stands now, our readers are left to gues what the Agency poistion is on this issue, or, indeed, whether we have a position.
The definitive piece is yet to be written.
IV. Problems in the Analytic Process
. . .
Another external influence was the "perception in the trenches that there was a mindset at the highest levels" in the U.S.
Government and the agency that the Soviets were behind the attempt on the Pope's life.
In one manager's opinion, the effect of this perception on analysts was either to intimidate them or (in our view, more often) to push them into a defensive posture. . . .
In the early phases of the case, however, there appears to have been a conscious effort on the part of upper management -- the D.D.I., at least -- to keep hands off the D.I. product in order to avoid the appearance of manipulating the analytic process. . . .
Largely because of the sensitivity of the issue, however, we found that most ad hoc production was initiated from on-high or in response to outside request rather than from below.
So, despite the D.D.I.'s best efforts, there was a perception among analysts of upper-level direction, which became more pronounced after the new evidence of Soviet complicity was acquired.
In the event, however, our interviews suggested that it was not so much D.C.I. or D.D.I. direction as it was an effort on the part of some D.I. managers at the next one or two layers down to be responsive to perceived D.C.I. and D.D.I. desires.
V. Conclusions
*Throughout the case, greater emphasis should have been placed on analysis of alternative scenarios . . .
*Finally, senior management could have provided clearer and more explicit guidance -- to all of the relevant players -- on how it viewed this problem . . .
The last point may hold the key to where the agency goes from here in dealing with the case. . . .
As things stand now, there is a deeply rooted perception at the working level that senior management:
*Regards this as a politically sensitive case that requires special handling.
*Leans toward the view that the Soviets were involved.
*Takes a special interest in the content and timing of what is published on this issue.
*Has "anointed" one office, and indeed one analyst, with principal responsibility for the problem and has therefore discouraged others from taking initiative on the issue.
Changing U.S.
Policy on Iran
On May 17, 1985, the chief Middle East analyst for the National Intelligence Council, Graham E. Fuller, sent Mr.
Casey and Mr.
McMahon one in a series of memoranda arguing that the United States and the Soviet Union were reaching a crossroads in their competition for influence in Iran.
Critics say that this and other C.I.A. and intelligence council analyses helped create the view of Iran within the Reagan Administration that led to the arms-for-hostages scandal.
In Senate hearings today, they contended that Mr.
Gates suppressed dissenting views of other C.I.A. analysts.
1.
The U.S. faces a grim situation in developing a new policy toward Iran.
Events are moving largely against our interests and we have few palatable alternatives.
In bluntest form, the Khomeini regime is faltering and may be moving toward a moment of truth; we will soon see a struggle for succession.
The U.S. has almost no cards to play; the U.S.S.R. has many. . . .
2.
The Twin Pillars of U.S.
Policy.
U.S. policy at present comes down to two major pillars.
*We will respond with force directly if Iran should undertake another terrorist outrage against the U.S.
*We seek to choke off all arms supplies to Teheran wherever possible.
3.
Terrorist Attack: We can and must have some policy against terrorism.
We must also recognize that this cannot represent the bulk of our policy toward Iran.
Furthermore, radical forces in Teheran may welcome a direct confrontation with the U.S. -- including U.S. military retaliation -- in the hopes of replaying its extraordinarily successful gambit against the U.S. in the 1979 hostage crisis. ..  .
5.
These two pillars of U.S. policy -- both sensible while Iran was in a vacuum and Khomeini was strong -- can no longer serve as the primary vehicle for U.S. policy toward Iran.
Both are entirely negative in nature and may now serve to facilitate Soviet interests more than our own.
6.
Some Broader Policy Considerations.
Nobody has any brilliant ideas about how to get us back into Teheran.
Nearly all tentative proposals require uncomfortable choices and clear-cut downsides.
Nonetheless, we need to review a broad spectrum of ideas.
I submit below a range of thoughts, carrots and sticks -- all of which are flawed -- but which might assist in sparking better and more refined positions to meet our needs.
a.
Work with Iraq to bring Teheran to its knees.
We could consider moving much closer to Iraq to bring the war to a quicker end -- particularly by way of encouraging crippling attacks on Kharg Island and key Iranian economic facilities. . . .
Disadvantage: We have no knowledge about who would emerge victorious from such shambles; it could well be radical elements filled with hatred of the U.S.
b.
Open up Iran to friendly state influence.
We could tell all our European allies, as well as Israel, Turkey, Pakistan, China, Japan, Brazil and Argentina that Western influence must develop a paramount position during this critical period in Iran.
We would remove all restrictions in sales -- including military -- to Iran. . . .
Disadvantage: Possible encouragement for Iranian perpetuation of the war.
c.
Go after Iran's radical allies.
While direct U.S. assault against Iran could bring about the very thing we wish to avoid, i.e.
Soviet domination of Iran, direct attack on Iran's radical allies, Syrian and Libya, would probably sober Iran and weaken its support from those quarters. . . .
This "indirect strategy" would demonstrate U.S. resolve against radicalism without directly pushing Iran in the wrong direction.
Unlike Iran, we have nothing to lose in Libya and everything to gain.
d.
Battening down the hatches in Turkey and Pakistan.
Assuming that we may be heading for a major Soviet gain in Iran, we may need to greatly step up our ties with Turkey and Pakistan. . . .
e.
Getting the Message Through to Teheran.. . .
There is room for such broad, public statement on a regular basis to ensure Iranian moderates -- and opportunists -- that we are not dedicated to the overthrow of the Islamic Republic or the collapse of Iran. . . .
f. Massive reassurance to Iran of U.S. intentions. . . .
g. Bargaining with the U.S.S.R. We have little leverage here.
7.
On reflection I believe that the option most constructively oriented is that of inserting Western allies and friends into Teheran quickly through the arms door.
8.
Our tilt to Iraq was timely when Iraq was against the ropes and the Islamic revolution was on a roll.
The time may now have come to tilt back -- at least via our allies -- to ensure the Soviets lose both attraction and potential access to the clergy.
Chance of Soviet Invervention
After the arms-for-hostages affair became public in late 1986, the C.I.A.'s chief Soviet analyst, Douglas J. MacEachin, reviewed the agency's own studies of Soviet influence in Iran and sent his conclusions to Mr.
Gates.
1. . . .
Attached is a package containing Key Judgments and summaries of various SOVA  [ Office of Soviet Analysis ] , joint NESA-SOVA and NIC or  [ National Intelligence Council ]  products since 1980 dealing with Soviet-Iranian issues. 2.
The record shows that except for a "swerve" in 1985, . . . both the D.I. and community products have followed a pretty consistent line.
*The sharp increase in Soviet planning since 1980 for major military campaigns against Iran has been examined in great detail, . . .
The judgment -- not just ours but the Community's -- has been that, on balance, the U.S.S.R. is unlikely seriously to consider intervening military unless the Soviets believe the U.S. is about to do so, or central power in Iran breaks down, or a leftist faction seizes power and appeals to the Soviet Union for help.


Sports of The Times; Stevens And Family Can Play
Scott Stevens feels better now.
He has discovered that New Jersey actually contains a few backyards and front porches and grassy parks for his children.
Soon they will be cavorting safely and energetically in open space not far from their father's own new playground.
"It gets pretty cramped in a small hotel room," Stevens said.


Jam-Making Today: Fruit Spreads, Yes; Sugar, Largely No
JAM-making has never gone out of style.
Shimmering, colorful jars of preserves are sold in homey New England country stores and line the ultrachic shelves of Fauchon in Paris.
Urban home cooks with efficient cooktops as well as those with spacious farmhouse kitchens still make them to serve, or as gifts.
But the preserving kettle is no longer an economic or seasonal requirement.
While jams and preserves represent a delicious link to the past, jam-making has changed.


BRITISH LABORITES EYE THE CALENDAR
The campaign for the next British general election is well under way, with American-style spots for the three major parties popping up on prime-time television, gavel-to-gavel coverage of the pre-election conventions and image doctors busily buffing the candidates.
The only thing missing is the date.
With his Conservative Party advisers telling him he might have a better chance of winning next spring, Prime Minister John Major's aides told British political reporters on Monday that he would not call a vote in November.


Apple and I.B.M. To Outline Accord
I.B.M. and Apple Computer Inc. will disclose details of their previously announced venture at a news conference today in the Fairmont Hotel in San Francisco.
In July, the companies announced a broad agreement to develop advanced software, powerful personal computers and a common approach to graphics and sound displays.


How to Avoid Another Bank Bailout
To the Editor:
"Don't Deform Bank Reform" (editorial, Sept. 23) cites my core bank proposal as useful, but labels three aspects of it as overreaching:
(1) You criticize the proposal's effort to limit the exposure of the bank insurance fund by limiting coverage to core banks.
Many of the problems plaguing this country's banks have the same root cause as the savings and loan institution crisis -- unlimited access to federally insured "free money." Preventing a repeat of the savings and loan crisis should be the sine qua non of this year's banking bill.
(2) You fault the proposed cap on individual loans because it will not make core banks completely safe.
Of course not.
But is that reason to forgo efforts to make them much safer through loan caps and floating interest-rate ceilings?
Core banks could still affiliate with uninsured institutions that would be less restricted, provided they raised such funds in the markets and did not use insured Federal dollars.
(3) You express concern that core banks would be vulnerable in the event of a market crisis.
In my proposal, regulators would have the authority (and in practice would exercise it) to waive rate ceilings temporarily in the event of interest rate spikes, regional downturns or other economic crises.
The core bank proposal would compel banks to become healthy and strong by forcing them to go to the markets to raise more of their funds.
By contrast, the Administration's insistence on continuing to insure all deposits will only push banks further down the road to another taxpayer bailout.
CHARLES E. SCHUMER Member of Congress, 10th Dist., N.Y.
Washington, Sept. 26, 1991


Union Tries to Block a Long Astro Trip
The major league players union, angered that the Republican Party's national convention next August will force the Houston Astros from the Astrodome for a month, filed a grievance yesterday against the National League seeking to have an arbitrator overturn the league's proposed 1992 schedule.
The union is not seeking to force the G.O.P. out of the Astrodome, but is seeking relief for an Astros team tentatively scheduled to leave Houston from July 26 until Aug. 25 for an eight-city, 26-game road trip.


Sexism Rides a Bicycle Built for Two
To the Editor:
"Bikes for 2: Romantic, Now Rugged" (Business Day, Sept. 7) reports that the bicycle built for two is coming back into style.
Then you state:


Shoemaker to Resume His Career as a Trainer
Six months after he was paralyzed from the neck down in an automobile accident, BILL SHOEMAKER said yesterday that he would resume his career as a trainer today.


Grain Prices Rise on Plan To Speed Up Aid for Soviets
Grain futures prices rose sharply yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade after the Administration stepped up the pace of American food aid to the Soviet Union.
On other commodity markets, precious metals rose, livestock and meat futures were mixed, crude oil was little changed and coffee futures fell again.


CHRONICLE
Red Storm Rising, a 19-month-old bichon frise owned by FRANCIS L. KELLOGG , has never been to a party before, but no matter.
He is expected to be on his best behavior when he goes to Macy's for cocktails this evening.
"He's very gregarious," said Mr.
Kellogg, a former special assistant to Secretaries of State.
The occasion is a benefit for the Bide-a-Wee Home Association.
Guests were invited to come with or without dogs. (Cats were not invited; too skittish, it was said).


Boarding Schools Act To Win Back Students
A sharp decline in the number of students applying for boarding school admissions is forcing many schools, including the most prestigious, to adopt aggressive marketing strategies that would have sent shock waves through their sedate Gothic arches and leaded windows only a decade ago.
But these new techniques seem to be starting to reverse the trend.
Lawrenceville School in New Jersey, one of the more prestigious East Coast boarding schools, whose alumni include Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut and Michael Eisner, chairman and chief executive officer of the Walt Disney Company, has installed a toll-free telephone number to encourage people to call the admissions office.


Dinkins Lashes Out At Unions
The Dinkins administration, frustrated at its months-long stalemate with municipal labor unions, criticized union leaders in uncharacteristically harsh terms yesterday over their failure to agree on wage and benefit concessions to ease New York City's fiscal problems.
The barbs came in an exchange with Barry Feinstein, president of Teamsters Local 237, who announced yesterday that he was withdrawing from further discussions with the city on any concessions.


Bridge
After two days of play in the NEC World Team Championships here, all four American teams were fighting to qualify for playoffs that will start on Saturday.
The United States I team, improving after a bad start, took fourth position in Group W in the Bermuda Bowl series for open teams.
Four teams will qualify from each group.


Test Drug Seen as Promising In Study on Chronic Fatigue
Injections of an experimental drug into the veins of a small group of patients with chronic fatigue syndrome sharply improved their conditions, researchers reported at a meeting in Chicago yesterday.
The study was conducted in four cities on 92 patients who met the Federal Centers for Disease Control's definition of the mysterious syndrome for which there is no definitive treatment.
Before treatment with the drug, Ampligen, many in the study were bedridden, unable to go to the bathroom, to watch television and to carry out other normal daily activities.
Many needed custodial care.


She's Julie Krone, Jockey* (*No Asterisk Needed)
She is 4 feet 10 inches tall, weighs 100 pounds and gets up at 4:30 every morning to go to work in another state, and she has a steel plate and seven metal screws in her left arm as reminders that she makes her living riding 1,000-pound animals.
But Julieanne Louise Krone utters no complaints as she steers her red 1987 Porsche 924S out the circular driveway of her 10-acre farm in New Jersey and aims it up Route 18 from Colts Neck in the black of night.


Theater in Review
Folks Remembers a Missing Page (The Rise and Fall of Harlem)  Nat Horne Thater 440 West 42d Street By J .E.
Gaines; directed by Andre Mtumi; set, Terry Chandler; lighting, Sandra Ross; music, Bob La Pierre; visual design, Eve Burris; sound, Bill Milbrodt; technical director, Erik Stephenson; stage manager, Lynn Franklin.
Presented by B&amp;G Associates; William E. Lathan, associate producer.
Folks . . .
Sonny Jim Gaines Ming . . .
Itself
"Folks Remembers a Missing Page (The Rise and Fall of Harlem)" would seem to provide a most conducive environment for J. E. Gaines's brand of thoughtful reflection, demonstrated in previous plays like "What If It Had Turned Up Heads?" Unfortunately, this time Mr.
Gaines's intention is not matched by his accomplishment.


Microwave Cooking
ORDINARILY, I wouldn't try to make an entire dinner in the microwave oven, but this dinner of chicken livers on crostini, fish with cherry tomato sauce and amaretti apple crisp works out very efficiently with just the microwave, supplemented by the regular oven for toasting and browning.
If you like, add a salad to the menu, and rice or bread.


Bowman to Coach
SCOTTY BOWMAN, who led the Montreal Canadiens to five Stanley Cup championships in the 1970's and was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame last week, was named interim coach of the defending champion Pittsburgh Penguins yesterday, three days before the start of the season.
Bowman, Pittsburgh's head of player personnnel since January, 1990, takes over for BOB JOHNSON, who is in Colorado receiving radiation treatment for a brain tumor discovered after he had surgery to remove another one in August. (AP)


Kidnapped Woman Still Missing As Suspect Is an Apparent Suicide
The perplexing case of the kidnapping of a 25-year-old woman took an abrupt and bloody turn early today when her suspected kidnapper, a local mining company executive, shot and killed himself, officials said.
The authorities also announced the arrest of an a woman they believe was his accomplice and the recovery of most of the $300,000 in ransom money paid for the release of the kidnapping victim, Carrie Lawson, the wife of a local lawyer.


Still Missing: A City Labor Policy
A year after bungling its first labor contract -- an unaffordable settlement with the teachers -- New York's Mayor, David Dinkins, still has no labor policy.
Talks are stalled.
Contracts have expired or gone into arbitration.
Union givebacks don't exist.
A failure to win concessions from the municipal unions will doom the city's efforts to surmount its budget crisis.
Labor costs consume a huge chunk of the budget.
As the Mayor and his team enter a new round of negotiations, they need to reduce payrolls and inefficient work practices.


Japan's Central Bank Loosens Credit Squeeze
Japan's central bank took an important step today to stimulate the nation's sagging economy by changing a rule that will release more than $15 billion of cash into the banking system.
The move could also give a modest lift to other countries, particularly the recession-bound United States, by making it easier for them to cut interest rates.
The move by the Bank of Japan ended a two-year-old policy of squeezing bank lending to stamp out inflation.


Wine Talk
RUN your finger down a list of the Bordeaux chateaus: Mouton-Rothschild, Leoville-Barton, Pichon-Longueville, Kirwan, Malescot-Saint-Exupery, Cantenac-Brown, Palmer, Lynch-Bages, Talbot, Phelan-Segur.
What do the names have in common?
They all represent real people.
There really are Rothschilds and Bartons, and there really were Longuevilles and Browns and Palmers and Lynches and Phelans and all the rest.
Let's be honest; owning a Bordeaux chateau has always been something to be proud of and there have always been chateau owners not averse to letting a bit of that pride show.


Sanderson Can't Find the Word To Describe the Yankees' Season
Scott Sanderson's season is over, ended one start too soon by a line drive off his right pinky Monday night in Cleveland.
Now, finally, he will sit back, allow himself to be asked to evaluate his first year with the Yankees, take a deep breath, think long and hard, and conclude:
"Gee, what is the right adjective? Every adjective I can think of I have a reason for not wanting to use it."


Page S. Procter, 73, Advertising Executive
Page Sunderland Procter, a retired advertising executive, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 73 years old.
He died of esophageal cancer, his son, Benjamin, said.


The Pop Life
Guns 'n' Roses at the Top
With the debut of Guns 'n' Roses' two new albums at No. 1 and 2 on Billboard's 200 Top Albums Chart, there is more drama on the pop charts this week than at any time since April 1964, when the Beatles had all five of the country's top-selling singles simultaneously.


Adulation Turns to Anger as U.S. Haitians Grieve
Less than a week ago, they danced in the streets to welcome their hero.
But yesterday, when New York City's Haitians took out their flags and drums again, it was to express anger and bitterness over the coup in their homeland that deposed a president worshiped by some as a prophet and by most as a Haitian Martin Luther King Jr.
There was little time for food at Le Soleil restaurant at 10th Avenue and 57th Street in Manhattan as Haitians huddled around a small radio, hungry for any news.


Accounts
*
The Mrs.
Butterworth's syrup and pancake line to McCann-Erickson New York, from BBDO New York.
A McCann spokeswoman confirmed the move, which was reported in this week's issue of Adweek, but declined to discuss details.
Billings are estimated at $4 million.
The move is part of a realignment by Unilever's Van den Bergh Foods division; its other brands at McCann include Promise margarine. *
The Kenner Products division of Hasbro Inc. has added Griffin Bacal Inc., New York, to its agency roster, joining Grey Advertising Inc., New York, which will handle the majority of Kenner's advertising.
Griffin Bacal will work on three Kenner projects next year, for which billings were undisclosed.
Griffin Bacal already handles Hasbro Inc. product lines including Hasbro, Milton Bradley and Playskool.


Secrets No Longer: A Remarkable Day
Five current or former Central Intelligence Agency officials presented their views today, and dozens of formerly secret documents were made public in an extraordinary day of testimony before the Senate Intelligence Committee today.
The excerpts on page A16 are drawn from the public testimony of the witnesses before the committee.
The excerpts on pages A18 and A19 are taken from the documents that were declassified and made public today.


Justice's Homer in Ninth Caps Comeback for Braves
The Atlanta Braves tonight staged the kind of comeback that produces championships.
The comeback might even be a sign, if you believe in that sort of thing.
"I don't believe in that stuff," Bobby Cox, the Atlanta manager, said.
"I believe in good players."


Public &amp; Private; No Problem
From time to time I see one of those party animals with an underslung belt and a capacious midsection wearing a shirt that has this slogan:
I don't have a drinking problem.
I drink, I get drunk, I fall down.
No problem.


Industrial Purchasers Index Posted a Gain in September
The rebound at the nation's factories crept forward last month despite signs that the overall economic recovery remains precarious, corporate purchasing managers said yesterday in a widely followed survey.
Production and new orders for goods rose in September while the decline in employment slowed, helping to lift an index based on the activities of the purchasing managers to its highest level in nearly three years.


Albany Denies Rate Increase For Leading Health Insurer
The New York State insurance superintendent yesterday denied a request by Empire Blue Cross-Blue Shield to raise the rates of 730,000 customers as much as 50 percent but said he would reconsider the request if the State Legislature does not reform the industry by April.
The challenge to the state's political leaders comes as Blue Cross tries to confront serious financial problems by sharing its burdens with the state's other insurers.


CHRONICLE
Winners of the 40th annual Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Medals have been announced, and, as usual, they are an illustrious group.
JAMES RESTON , former chief Washington correspondent and former executive editor of The New York Times, will receive the Freedom of Speech Award; Bishop PAUL MOORE JR. , the Freedom of Worship Award; PAUL NEWMAN and JOANNE WOODWARD , the Freedom From Want Award, and former Ambassador MIKE MANSFIELD , the Freedom From Fear Award.
In addition, Justice THURGOOD MARSHALL is to be honored with the Franklin D. Roosevelt Freedom Medal.
The awards from the Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute will be given in Hyde Park, N.Y., on Oct. 11.


Market Place; Mixed News On Dividends
LAST month, for the first time in nearly two years, more companies increased dividends than had done so a year earlier.
That fact, in figures released yesterday by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, was part of a somewhat contradictory report that shows that while there are signs of a revival in the fortunes of corporate America, there are also indications of increasing financial distress.


Quotation of the Day
"We are in shock. If Aristide is out, there is no hope for Haiti. Haiti will be lost." -- Max Senat, a Haitian cab driver in New York.  [ A12:1. ]


Dollar Advances Broadly; Gold Prices Edge Upward
The dollar finished mostly higher in uneventful trading on world currency markets yesterday.
Gold prices were marginally higher after finishing mixed overseas.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold bullion for current delivery settled at $354.20 a troy ounce, up 20 cents from Monday.
The Republic National Bank said gold gained 25 cents an ounce for a late bid price of $354.


Metropolitan Diary
MUSIC to our ears department: the saga of Tamara Pristin's friend from abroad who was accosted by a mugger while visiting New York.
As the mugger grabbed the visitor's gold chain, he pushed her and she grabbed him to steady herself.
During the somewhat convoluted movement, she inadvertently pulled off the gold chain he was wearing.
The mugger ran off, unaware of his own loss.
The next day, after consulting a jeweler, the visitor discovered she now owned an 18-karat gold chain.
Hers was costume jewelry.
Louise Russell's 7-year-old daughter returned home from school in Westfield, N.J., and announced that it was her gym teacher's birthday.
How old was the teacher, Mrs.
Russell asked.
"Oh, 25 or 45 or something like that," was the reply.


Tyson Is Sued
NATALIE FEARS, a 26-year-old real estate agent who says MIKE TYSON is the father of her son, DAMATO TYSON, who was born May 2, filed suit in Los Angeles yesterday seeking $11 million she says Tyson promised her and the child.
Both Tyson and his manager, DON KING, denied the allegations, suggested that Tyson's paternity of the child hadn't been proven, and alleged the suit was motivated by greed.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.37
5.50
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.10
5.11
7.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.13
5.11
7.19
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.21
7.24
8.56
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.79
7.80
8.82
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.91
8.93
9.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.89
6.89
7.77
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellweather bonds, notes and bills


Giants Impoverished Beyond the Red Zone
The Red Zone hasn't changed. But the Giants have.
Numbers alone don't explain why the Super Bowl champions are 2-3.
But while numbers merely mirror performance, they do suggest why the Giants are not only failing to follow in last year's footsteps, they are also positively tripping all over themselves.


From Pitcher to Driver
Former major league pitcher JOHN (THE COUNT) MONTEFUSCO is scheduled to make his debut as a professional driver tonight at Freehold Raceway.
Montefusco, 41 years old, of Colts Neck, N.J., received his provisional license from the United States Trotting Association yesterday and is listed to drive the pacer Blue's Express in the first race.
Montefusco pitched in the majors from 1974 to 1986 with the Giants, Braves, the Padres and the Yankees, posting a 90-83 mark. . . .
Former New York Rangers defenseman ROD SEILING has been selected to be the general manager of standardbred racing at the Meadowlands race track, track officials said yesterday.
Seiling, 46 years old, has been the vice president of government and industry relations at the Ontario Jockey Club in Toronto, which operates three tracks: Woodbine, Greenwood and Mohawk. (AP)


U.S. Suspends Assistance to Haiti And Refuses to Recognize Junta
The United States today suspended economic assistance to Haiti, said it would not recognize the military junta that ousted the democratically elected government there and joined with other Latin American and Caribbean nations in organizing a pressure campaign to restore President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
President Aristide, who was bundled off to Venezuela early today by the coup leaders after the American ambassador negotiated for his life, defiantly declared at a news conference in Caracas that the rebels were "power mad" and that he would do all he could to reinstate his seven-month-old government -- the first to be elected by a democratic vote in Haitian history.


Conagra Poultry Line To Campbell-Mithun
Conagra Inc., the Omaha-based food processor, has moved the advertising account for its Country Pride brand of fresh poultry to Campbell-Mithun-Esty, Minneapolis, from DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago, a Campbell spokeswoman said yesterday.
Billings are estimated at $10 million, she said, adding that no review had occurred before the move.
Campbell is also the agency for Conagra's new Healthy Choice line, one of the food industry's most successful new brands.


Army Strikes Back; Aristide Tried to Put Haitian Military Under Control at Last, So It Rebelled
In his inaugural address in February, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti made it clear that as the country's first democratically elected leader and an outspoken critic of army abuses, he believed that his most urgent task was to bring the military to heel.
But after the fall of six Haitian governments in the last five years, and nearly two centuries of national history strewn with dozens of coups, many wondered whether President Aristide could ever establish control over the country's unruly armed forces.


Haiti, by No Means Lost
The day of the dictator is truly over in the Americas, even if some Haitian military officers have yet to get the message.
Their bloody ouster of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's first democratically elected leader, is an affront not only to the millions of Haitians who chose him, but to all Americans, North, South and Central.
The odds against a new military regime consolidating power in today's Haiti are long, and the strong response of the Bush Administration makes them longer still.
Ambassador Alvin Adams helped negotiate President Aristide's safe evacuation to Venezuela.
Then Washington, in coordination with France and Canada, moved quickly to ostracize the junta and deny it aid.


As Centralized Rule Wanes, Ethnic Tension Rises Anew in Soviet Georgia
At the lone entrance to this blockaded city, women clutching empty shopping bags clustered today under the protective watch of a Soviet armored personnel carrier.
The women, who waited for friends to bring them food, said they dared not stray beyond the barbed wire and sand bags.
Pointing to young men lounging under shade trees 30 yards away, the women said they feared being beaten.


Johnson Needs Help To Reach His 30-30
One stolen base. Three press conferences.
Howard Johnson, with a stolen base that was at once the easiest and toughest of his career, tonight became only the second player in baseball to ever compile as many as three seasons with 30 home runs and 30 stolen bases.
Bobby Bonds did it on five occasions.


The Universal Dumpling (Dough, A Little Filling, A Lot of Ancestry)
THE term multicultural has been deployed with such abandon lately that Joseph Ben-Moha, the owner of the Roxy Deli, began to take a more philosophical view of dumplings.
"I look at my kreplach and I say, 'What makes you different from my pirogi?' " he said.
"And then I must think, 'What makes a wonton not a kreplach, a kreplach not a pirogi, a pirogi not a wonton?' "


Jury Denies Bid to Join Honor Society
Justin Dangler, a high school junior, has a 3.93 grade point average and a dizzying list of extracurricular and volunteer activities.
But when he woos Harvard, Yale, Amherst and the other colleges he has in mind, he will lack one feather for his cap -- membership in the National Honor Society.
A Federal jury today rejected a $2 million lawsuit brought by his parents against Yorktown High School in northern Westchester County, charging that the school administration had denied Justin membership in the honor society to retaliate for the family's past outspokenness and criticism of the school district.
This, the family argued, was a violation of its First Amendment rights of free speech.


HELP FOR JOBLESS CLEARS LAWMAKERS BUT MAY BE VETOED
Both houses of Congress voted today to spend $6.4 billion on extended unemployment benefits for about three million Americans who have been out of work at least half a year, but the margin in the Senate was too narrow to override the veto President Bush has threatened.
Republicans accused the Democrats of fiscal irresponsibility and of pursuing a political issue rather than offering real help for the unemployed.
Democrats said the Senate majority on the bill giving workers up to 20 additional weeks of benefits fell two votes short of being veto-proof because of White House pressure.
The Democrats said the pressure showed that the Administration cared little for Americans in distress.


Reporter's Notebook; Cuomo Gone But the Beat Is Going On
When Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts traveled to Europe on state business last year, Lieut.
Gov.
Evelyn Murphy staged a palace coup by ordering cutbacks in state jobs and salaries.
When Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California left the state in 1979, his Lieutenant Governor, Mike Curb, caused havoc by nominating an appellate judge.
Now comes New York's bold Lieutenant Governor, Stan Lundine.
With Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in Japan, Mr.
Lundine filled the power void today by granting a request that flags be flown at half-staff to mourn the recent death of Assemblyman Roger J. Robach of Rochester.
Something 'You Can See'
Looking out his third-floor window at the half-staff flags fluttering outside the Capitol, he spoke self-mockingly about the intoxication of power.


'Mets of The West' Keep Spot On Top
There it was in bigger-than-life numbers on the scoreboard:
Atlanta 7, Cincinnati 6.


Thomas D. Zumbo Journalist, 62
Thomas Duffy Zumbo, a public relations executive and former city editor for United Press International, was found dead yesterday in his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 62 years old.
Mr.
Zumbo joined the United Press in the early 1950's and left in 1974 to enter public relations.
He was for a time an associate editor of The New York City Tribune.


An American Woman Heads Sumitomo Unit
For several years, Sumitomo Bank Limited of Japan has been increasing its nonbanking activities in the United States.
So it was no big surprise when Sumitomo announced this week that it was starting yet another nonbanking financial subsidiary, this one devoted to the American securities market.
One thing did raise eyebrows, though: Sumitomo, in quite uncharacteristic fashion for a Japanese company, appointed a woman, Norah O. Hughes, as its president.
Ms.
Hughes, an American who will have Japanese men reporting to her, is the first woman to reach anywhere near that level at Sumitomo -- and neither she nor Sumitomo executives can name a woman who has attained this status at any other Japanese bank.


Economic Scene: No-Fault Rises From the Ashes
THE high price of auto insurance got you down?
Join the throng.
Premiums rose at three times the rate of inflation in the 1980's.
And in many states -- most recently, New Jersey -- politicians and voters have declared war on insurers, demanding that they charge less than the market will bear.
Squeezing the insurers might work, argues Jeffrey O'Connell, a University of Virginia law professor and an early champion of "no fault" insurance.
But not for long.
The right point of attack on insurance inflation, Professor O'Connell says, is its bloated underbelly -- the 13 cents of every insurance dollar spent fighting over legal liability in accidents, along with the 23 cents awarded a tiny minority of victims for pain and suffering.


Despite Vandals, Blacks Move Into White L.I. Neighborhood
It took a Federal judge, a fair-housing agency and his own grit, but Giovanni Mack began moving his family into the modest house on Sheffield Avenue here today despite compelling evidence that someone does not want him for a neighbor.
The Macks are black and the neighborhood is white.
Over the summer the family's plans to rent the house have survived vandalism, fire and a trip to Federal Court where the landlord agreed to make repairs and drop efforts to break the family's one-year lease.


Hollywood Dines Out In Support Of Ecology
The invitations said, "In the spirit of the event, we urge you to car pool." But there wasn't a car pool in sight Mondaynight as the film and television stars, studio chiefs, executives, writers and agents climbed out of stretch limousines, Mercedeses, BMW's and other gas guzzlers for the biggest celebration ever of Hollywood's commitment to its favorite cause, the environment.
Nearly 700 of the town's elite, including such performers as Robert Redford, who delivered the keynote speech, Barbra Streisand, Sting, Ted Danson and Jane Fonda, streamed into a glitzy movie set bedecked in recycled paper at Sony (formerly Columbia) Studios in Culver City to eat organically grown chicken and farm-raised salmon and pay tribute to some television shows, movies and music videos that have effectively used environmental themes.
The recorded sound of birds chirped in the backdrop at the event, which stirred criticism, private and even public, from some environmental groups.


Facing Prison Time, Lawyer Vows to Pay His Victims Millions
A prominent Manhattan divorce lawyer who admitted bilking dozens of his friends, family members and fellow lawyers of millions of dollars has pledged to "mortgage the rest of his life" to repay his victims once he completes his prison sentence.
Alvin Ashley, a former partner at the firm of Colton, Hartnick, Yamin &amp; Sheresky and past president of the New York chapter of the American Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers, pleaded guilty on Sept. 24 to five counts of larceny.
He faces a minimum of one to three years in prison, with a maximum term of three to nine years.
No date has been set for the sentencing by Judge Herbert J. Adlerberg of New York Criminal Court.


Successful Stock Sale By Chrysler
The Chrysler Corporation, seeking to shore up its sagging finances, raised approximately $350 million yesterday with a successful sale of new common stock to a syndicate of investment banks.
Demand for the stock was strong enough that Chrysler increased the offering to 35 million new shares from the 33 million originally planned.
The shares were priced after the New York Stock Exchange closed, and were the same as the closing price on Chrysler's outstanding shares, $10.125, up 12.5 cents.


INSIDE
A Flat Economic Outlook
The Government index used for predicting the course of the economy was unchanged in August after six straight increases.
Page D8.
Cutting Teen-Age Pregnancy
A youth organization says an inexpensive program sharply reduced the incidence of teen-age pregnancy in a four-city test.
Page A14.
A Las Vegas Makeover
MGM Grand is betting $1 billion on a resort complex to turn Las Vegas "from a gambling town into the great American vacation spot." Page D1.
Soviet Military Cuts
A Soviet official said the size of the armed forces would be cut by about half, and missile units were reported being taken off alert.
Page A6.


Haitians in New York Protest the Coup


Theater in Review
Invitations to Heaven (Questions of a Jewish Child)  Lepercq Space Brooklyn Academy of Music 30 Lafayette Avenue (at Ashland Place), Fort Greene, Brooklyn Through Oct. 5
Conceived and created by Eric Bass; directed by Richard Edelman; music adapted and composed by Alan Bern; written by Mr.
Bass, with the collaboration of Mr.
Edelman and Mr.
Bern; design and puppets by Mr.
Bass, with the assistance of Bart Roccoberton, Mary Sinclair, Ines Zeller Bass, Marylynn Hancock, Carol Fugelstad, Wendy Sawyer, Iver Johnson, Ezra Caldwell and Andy Voda; consultant for Yiddish language, culture and dance, Michael Alpert.
Eric Bass/Sandglass Theater, presented by the Next Wave Festival of the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Grandson/Angel Elijah . . .
Eric Bass Angel Omeyn (Amen) . . .
Alan Bern


A-PLANT TO CLOSE OVER SAFETY ISSUE
The Yankee Rowe nuclear reactorin Massachusetts, the nation's oldest nuclear power plant, began closing yesterday, a few hours after the staff of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said its confidence in the complex's safety had been reduced.
The regulators very seldom close an operating plant.
The last time it happened was in March 1987, when Federal inspectors found operators asleep in the control room at the Peach Bottom plant in Pennsylvania.


Syrian Calls Bush's Plea on Israel Premature
The Syrian Foreign Minister said today that President Bush's appeal to the General Assembly to repeal its 1975 resolution equating Zionism with racism was premature -- even as more nations joined Mr.
Bush's appeal.
"The call for repealing this resolution requires, a priori, eliminating the substantial causes which prompted the United Nations to adopt this resolution," the Syrian, Farouk al-Sharaa, said in a speech to the General Assembly, "that is, to terminate the Israeli occupation of Arab lands and enable the Palestinian people to enjoy their right to self-determination."


Condom Ruling Sends Students Wrong Signal
To the Editor:
The New York City Board of Education has approved distribution of condoms without parental consent (news article, Sept. 12).
Are we expecting the most from our children, or have we given up the fight?
Is this the answer or a way to avoid the problem?
Unfortunately, the board's decision sends the wrong message to children, who need to be given goals and direction in their lives.


His Talent + Technology = Johnson's 38-and-Counting
The machine is the size of a briefcase, and that seems entirely appropriate.
Howard Johnson, after all, is in the home run business, and at least part of the secret to his extraordinary entrepreneurial success belting them this season is contained in the contraption.
"It's had a direct link," said Johnson, who hit his 38th home run of the season Monday night here at Three Rivers Stadium.
"Hey, it's not a gimmick. It's what I believe in. And I believe it has worked."


No McFarlane Surprise
To the Editor:
The assertion in "Headliners" (The Week in Review, Sept. 15) that my client Robert C. McFarlane changed his testimony and thus caught the prosecutors in the Oliver L. North case by surprise is incorrect.
He testified consistently to two distinct propositions: that his testimony was not factually influenced by Mr.
North's immunized testimony, but that he, like millions of others who followed the testimony, was affected by it.
The prosecutors had been explicitly advised by Mr.
McFarlane that this was his position before he testified.
LEONARD GARMENT Washington, Sept. 16, 1991


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
Time Warner is reportedly close to a deal that would raise $1 billion from Toshiba and C. Itoh.  [ Page D1. ]
Chrysler raised about $350 million with a successful sale of new common stock to a syndicate of investment banks.  [ D1. ]


Ameritech Revamping Its Ad Assignments
The Ameritech Corporation, the Chicago "Baby Bell" holding company, said yesterday that it would restructure its advertising assignments, with billings totaling about $50 million, for its five statewide companies.
The move regroups the assignments by business types rather than geographically.
The consumer advertising for the companies, estimated to exceed $30 million, was awarded to Tatham/ RSCG, Chicago, which had handled Ameritech's Illinois Bell account.
Business advertising was assigned to Lintas Campbell-Ewald, Warren, Mich., which had handled Michigan Bell's account.
And the group's information advertising for crises and public policy will be handled by the former Wisconsin Bell agency, Cramer-Krasselt, Milwaukee.


Father and Son Are Indicted in Capital National Loan Case
A former bank chairman and his father were indicted in Brooklyn yesterday on Federal charges of defrauding the bank, Capital National, of at least $11 million in a number of loans.
The minority-owned commercial bank, founded in 1975, operated five branches in Hispanic comunities in New York City.
It was found insolvent and closed in 1990, the authorities said, and was under receivership of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation as New York Capital Bank until it was acquired in August by Banco Popular de Puerto Rico.


NORIEGA'S LAWYER PRESSES EX-PILOT
The lawyer defending Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega hammered away at the prosecution's star witness for the second consecutive day today, accusing him of "shaking down" the cocaine-trafficking ring based in Medellin, Colombia, for $500,000 in bribes by "trading on the general's name."
The chief defense counsel, Frank Rubino, also coaxed from Floyd Carlton Caceres, General Noriega's former personal pilot, an admission that the general "did not know the details" of four drug flights from Colombia to Panama that Mr.
Carlton had previously testified to having flown.
In fact, Mr.
Carlton said, General Noriega took no action to protect the cocaine shipments, limiting his role to giving his permission for them to take place.


Food Notes
Cheap Eats
Fanzines are gossipy newsletters created by fan clubs of rock groups.
Robert Sietsema, who plays with a band called Mofungo, has started a bimonthly food fanzine.
A foodzine?


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept. 27
Sept. 20
Sept. 28
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.1
3.0
Gasoline stocks
213.6
213.3
223.9
Distillate stocks
138.3
135.7
134.8
Crude imports, daily
6.8
6.2
5.5
Product imports, daily
1.5
2.5
2.4
Crude stocks
339.5
334.3
354.6
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
87.3
89.0
90.7
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Low-Tech Technique In Telephone Repair
A House subcommittee investigating the disruption of A.T.&amp; T.'s long-distance service last month said today that the failure lasted nearly seven hours because A.T.&amp; T. workers trying to restart a downed telephone-switching station had to use long pieces of wood to make a critical piece of power equipment work.
The Sept. 17 accident at one of the two American Telephone and Telegraph Company's stations in Manhattan snarled half the company's long-distance calls in New York.


Guns in School Janitor's Locker
A school custodian was arrested yesterday in a Brooklyn high school after the police found two loaded sawed-off shotguns in his locker.
The search followed an anonymous call to 911.
The suspect, Paul Reparto, 42 years old, of 199 Bay 35th Street in Bath Beach, Brooklyn, works at Lafayette High School in Bath Beach.
He was charged with third- and fourth-degree criminal possession of a weapon.


Documents Show C.I.A. Feud on Papal Shooting
Classified documents made public today show that analysts at the Central Intelligence Agency engaged in a long-running feud over whether the Soviet Union was behind the attempt to assassinate Pope John Paul II, despite the lack of any clear supporting evidence.
The documents indicated that in assessing the possibility of Soviet complicity in the 1981 shooting, the analysts engaged in self-censorship as they tried to anticipate the conclusions they assumed that senior officials desired.
In this case, there was a presumption that the K.G.B., the Soviet intelligence agency, was behind the plot.


Review/Theater; Saroyan's 'Time of Your Life,' at Arena Stage
In these rough economic times, one might expect Arena Stage, the premier resident theater in the nation's capital, to use its art to prod politicians into action.
But Arena is instead opening its new season with William Saroyan's San Francisco barroom reverie of 1939, "The Time of Your Life," surely the most comforting American play to emerge from the Depression, and will soon follow it with a musical adaptation of Frank Capra's "It's a Wonderful Life," another work that champions the power of fundamentally decent Americans to vanquish any misfortune single-handedly.
Far from challenging Washington's conventional wisdom, Arena's 41st season -- the first under the artistic direction of Douglas C. Wager, Zelda Fichandler's successor -- seems eager to chime in with its own program for a thousand points of light.
The wattage will have to be a lot higher than it is in Liviu Ciulei's staging of "The Time of Your Life" if Arena is to convince anyone that the country is as full of good Samaritans as its chosen scripts would have audiences believe.
Mr.
Ciulei, a Romanian-born director and designer capable of startling visions of classics, would seem to have a special fondness for Saroyan's play; though he has now been working in the United States for nearly two decades, it is the first American play he has chosen to direct here.


A Mediocre Deal on the Exxon Valdez
The latest agreement between Exxon, the Federal Government and Alaska to settle claims arising from the Exxon Valdez oil spill in 1989 is depressingly similar to an earlier bargain rejected by a Federal judge last spring.
The judge, H. Russel Holland, described the first agreement as so inadequate that it sent "the wrong message, suggesting that spills are a cost of business that can be absorbed." He invited the Bush Administration to strike a much tougher deal.
It hasn't, though there are improvements.
As before, Exxon will pay $1 billion in civil penalities over 10 years.
It will also pay $125 million in criminal fines -- $25 million more than the sum Judge Holland found so meager last April.


Margaret MacVicar, M.I.T. Dean And School Innovator, Dies at 47
Margaret L. A. MacVicar, dean of undergraduate education at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and an innovator in shaping policies for undergraduate education and science education in public schools, died Monday at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute in Boston.
She was 47 years old and lived in Cambridge, Mass., and Lebanon, Me.
She had been ill with cancer for a year, an M.I.T. spokesman said.


Car Fuses Shrink as They Multiply
One blown fuse can create many annoyances for car owners.
With the decades-old system of wiring several controls through a single fuse, a problem with the horn may, for instance, also knock out the interior lights.
But auto makers are increasingly changing their cars' wiring by devoting one fuse to each electrical component to reduce driver frustration, make troubleshooting easier and protect the delicate wiring of increasingly electronic automobiles.
Cadillac is among the latest to switch; its 1992 Seville and Eldorado models each have 50 fuses, up from 26 in 1991 models.
It has also moved them out from under the dashboard to the engine compartment and trunk, following the lead of some other car makers.


U.S. Bars Testimony For B.C.C.I. Hearing
The Justice Department has blocked the testimony of two key witnesses scheduled to appear at a Senate hearing on the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, causing Senator John F. Kerry, chairman of the panel, to cancel the hearing.
The cancellation is the latest turn in a dispute between Senate investigators and the Justice Department.
The Senate says the department has tried to hamper the Senate inquiry; the department said it feared the Congressional inquiry could undermine its own investigation.


Review/Dance; Mixed Media for Rock-Music Lovers
They take off their clothes, they fly through the air with greater speed than other dancers, they fall through space in slow motion on film, smeared with blood (or rather red paint), and their swords on the same screen are phallic symbols.
They all dance exceptionally well to a very loud beat.
"Infante-Destroy" is just the right piece for rock fans who hate dance concerts and for dance fans who hate rock concerts.
The mixed-media work's North American premiere on Friday night on an opera-house scale at the sold-out Wilfrid-Pelletier Theater placed a Montreal choreographer at the center of the international festival of new dance here.


The Bouncing Bank Cleanup Lags
"This is now a matter that is over," Speaker Thomas Foley said in the House of Representatives last week.
It's easy to understand why he hoped so; the sordid little scandal about the House's own bank reflects badly on almost everyone.
But the matter will not end so easily, in part because of Mr.
Foley's misplaced desire to protect those who took advantage of the bank's remarkably generous check-bouncing privileges.
From July 1989 to June 1990, a new General Accounting Office audit reveals, House members bounced an amazing 8,331 checks at the House bank.
Things actually got worse after an earlier G.A.O. study that caused Mr.
Foley to order a crackdown on abuses.
What's wrong with the bank covering such checks?
It did so without imposing any penalties, granting members a no-interest privilege that no ordinary citizens enjoy.


With Deficits Looming, Syracuse University Considers Major Cuts
In a dramatic proposal to cope with looming budget deficits, officials of Syracuse University have presented the broad outline of plans to cut the school's faculty and staff up to 20 percent by 1995, eliminating some programs and consolidating others.
The reorganization, whose specifics will not be announced by the university's chancellor until the end of January, comes in response to forecasts of a drop in enrollment and budget deficits over the next few years.


MacLean to Get Therapy, Not Surgery
Just when it looked as if everything had fallen into place for the start of the season for the Devils, a big question mark suddenly arose involving John MacLean, their leading goal scorer the last three years.
MacLean, who scored 42, 41 and 45 goals, respectively, in the last three seasons, suffered a torn ligament in his right knee in Monday night's 9-1 preseason victory here over the Islanders.
No one knows when he can come back.


Limit on Performers' Visas Likely to Be Delayed 2 Years
Democratic and Republican leaders in Congress said today that they had agreed to delay an immigration law that would have sharply restricted the number of foreign artists who may enter the United States for performances.
A measure introduced on Monday night by Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, with Republican support, calls for a two-year suspension of a limit of 25,000 visas a year for foreign artists.
In the meantime, a study is to determine just how many people actually enter the United States to perform and whether they have an adverse impact on American performing artists and entertainers.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Easy Victory for Agassi Andre Agassi needed only 57 minutes to beat Jason Stoltenberg, 6-2, 6-2, last night in the second round of the $1 million Australian Indoor championships in Sydney.
Agassi, seeded fourth, served with power and hit blazing forehands that bewildered Stoltenberg.
Two other seeded Americans -- No. 7 Derrick Rostagno and No. 12 Aaron Krickstein -- were eliminated.
Grant Connell of Canada slammed down 12 aces to upset Krickstein for the second straight year, winning, 6-4, 7-6 (7-4).
Danilo Marcelino of Brazil beat Rostagno, 6-4, 6-4.
Three other seeded Americans advanced: eighth-seeded Michael Chang was a 6-3, 6-4 winner over Niclas Kroon of Sweden; 11th-seeded Richey Reneberg beat Sandon Stolle of Australia, 4-6, 7-5, 7-6 (7-5), and 14th-seeded MaliVai Washington defeated Jeff Tarango, 7-6 (7-4), 6-2.
Sixth-seeded Goran Ivanisevic also advanced to the round of 16 with a 6-4, 6-3 victory over Simon Youl of Australia.
After the match, Ivanisevic again said he no longer wanted to be called a Yugoslav and dedicated his victory to the supporters of the state of Croatia. (AP)
Patrick McEnroe Advances: Patrick McEnroe won his opening-round match at the Association of Tennis Professionals tournament in Toulouse, France, beating Christiano Caretti of Italy, 3-6, 7-5, 6-2.
McEnroe's brother, John, who is seeded sixth, will play Arnaud Boetsch of France in a first-round match today.
Second-seeded Magnus Gustafsson of Sweden was upset by Amos Mansdorf of Israel, 6-4, 6-1. (AP) Huber Wins in an Hour: Anke Huber of Germany, a 16-year-old rising star, and Isabelle Demongeot of France won first-round matches yesterday in the International tournament in Leipzig, Germany.
Huber defeated Kataryna Nowak of Poland in just 60 minutes, 6-2, 6-1.
Demongeot beat Mercedes Paz of Argentina, 7-6 (8-6), 6-4.
Eva Sviglerova of Czechoslovakia beat Andrea Strnadova, Czechoslovakia, 6-4, 4-6, 6-2, and another Czechoslovak, Petra Langrova, defeated Kristie Boogert of the Netherlands, 6-2, 6-4.
The defending champion, Steffi Graf, will take on Langrova today. (AP) Gigi Fernandez Gains in Milan: Seventh-seeded Gigi Fernandez of the United States defeated another American, Sandy Collins, 6-4, 6-3, yesterday to move into the second round of the Milan Ladies Indoor tournament.
Collins was a qualifier.
Sixth-seeded Helena Sukova of Czechoslovakia made short work of another American qualifier, Heather Ludloff, 6-2, 6-3. (AP)


Optimism for McMahon
JIM McMAHON will be out for at least three weeks with sprained ligaments in his right knee, but the Philadelphia Eagles quarterback won't be placed on injured reserve.
"We look for him to be back in three to four weeks," Eagles Coach RICH KOTITE said yesterday.


Memphis Campaign is Racially Divisive
Here in his hometown, Willie W. Herenton is a powerful symbol: a product of a broken home who was raised in poverty in the city's public housing projects, emerged from its segregated schools to earn a doctorate in education and became Memphis's first black Superintendent of Schools.
This year the 51-year-old Mr.
Herenton seemed ready to add another chapter to that rags-to-riches story.
He is running for mayor of this city of 610,000 people, one of the few large American cities with a black majority that has never had a black mayor.
In the past, blacks never managed to unite behind a single candidate, but this spring several black organizations got together at what they called a People's Convention, excluding whites, to chose Mr.
Herenton as their consensus candidate.


Helping Teen-Agers Avoid Pregnancy
A leading youth organization has shown that teen-age pregnancies can be greatly reduced by a simple but comprehensive program that arms teen-age girls with communication skills, information about sexuality and hope for a productive future, along with reproductive health services.
Participation in the program reduced by half the proportion of girls ages 12 to 14 who began having sexual intercourse and also cut in half the number of pregnancies among girls ages 15 to 17.


Bernard McDonald, A Poverty Expert, 49
Bernard McDonald, Senior Fellow at the Pratt Institute Center for Community and Environmental Development and a former official of the Ford Foundation, died on Sunday at Brooklyn Jewish Hospital.
He was 49 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of a heart attack, officials at the Pratt Institute said.


King Richard Declares a Finish to His Reign
The sport of stock-car racing, which in five decades has left behind most of its Southeastern folklore of quarter-mile dirt tracks, moonshine runners and bloodied knuckles on the road to corporate respectability, experienced its last great break from its past yesterday when Richard Petty, its biggest and most successful star, announced plans for his retirement.
Petty's career, which included more victories and championships than any other stock-car racer, began against such legends as the hard-partying Curtis Turner, who once landed his private plane on a town's main thoroughfare.


Trying to Give Las Vegas a G Rating
Can this sleazy town that never sleeps transform itself into a Disneyland with slot machines, a family place where the kids ride bumper cars while Mom and Dad work the blackjack tables?
It is an unlikely notion, and one that would no doubt dismay the pioneering gangsters of Las Vegas like Benjamin (Bugsy) Siegel.
It was he who built the first major hotel and casino here in 1947 and invited guests to "come as you are to America's Monte Carlo" -- before being summarily gunned down that year.


60-Minute Gourmet
BRAISING is an excellent and little-used method for cooking mild white-fleshed fish like snapper.
Sauteing, the common technique, can work fine if you do not dry out the flesh by overcookng.
Poaching cooks the fillet but adds little flavor.
This method for snapper Provencal style is not only simple and relatively risk free, but also abundant with flavor.
I have chosen red snapper fillets for this recipe because they were the best-looking fish at my local market.
You could also use gray sole, lemon sole, swordfish, grouper, pompano and other white-fleshed species.
Red snapper, a particularly delicate and delicious fish, is the most popular of the hundreds of species of snapper found in the oceans.
It is fished in the Atlantic from Brazil as far north as North Carolina.
But the National Marine Fisheries Service, an agency of the United States Commerce Department, has banned commercial fishing of red snapper in American waters through the end of the year as a conservation measure.


When Ugliness Is Only in Patient's Eye, Body Image Can Reflect Mental Disorder
A WOMAN in her 30's, convinced she had excessive facial hair, was so intent on not being seen in public that she sped from place to place on a motorcycle.
She would even run red lights, for fear someone would see her as she waited for the light to change.
A man in his 20's felt people stared at what he imagined were his "pointed ears" and "large nostrils." He eventually quit his job and stayed home rather than face the humiliation he was sure awaited him outside.


Chile Awakening From Pinochet Nightmare; Force of Plebiscite
To the Editor:
You are wrong to state that President Patricio Aylwin of Chile accepted the 1978 amnesty law as a condition for Gen.
Agusto Pinochet's relinquishing power (news article, Sept. 19).
Chileans repudiated General Pinochet's bid to extend his 16-year rule in the 1988 yes-no plebiscite.


Time Warner Deal Seen
Time Warner Inc. is close to an agreement that would raise $1 billion from the Toshiba Corporation and C. Itoh &amp; Company, several executives with direct knowledge of the negotiations said yesterday.
The two Japanese companies together would acquire stock in a Time Warner subsidiary that would specifically be created for the deal.
The subsidiary would have interests in Time Warner's cable, film and pay television businesses, one of the executives said.
A Time Warner spokesman said the company would not comment on rumor or speculation.
The company's chairman, Steven J. Ross, is scheduled to be in Tokyo within the next 10 days.
Possibly Next Week
In Tokyo today, neither Toshiba nor C. Itoh had any comment..


Personal Health
PAGET'S DISEASE of the bone?
Chances are you never heard of it.
Yet it is the second most common bone disease in the country, and it affects about three million Americans.
As with osteoporosis, the No. 1 bone disease, many who have Paget's disease do not know it.
They may have no symptoms, or their symptoms may be confused with those of other chronic ailments, like arthritis.
Others may experience tell-tale skeletal symptoms, like bowing of the legs or spinal deformities, that are painful and disabling.


Correction
An editorial yesterday incorrectly recalled the Senate vote to confirm Supreme Court Justice David Souter one year ago.
The vote was 90 to 9.


Of Solitary Dining, Casual to Splendid
ONE day Shirley Herz, a theatrical publicist, decided to follow the advice handed out by the theoretical experts on living alone.
She figured that maybe there was something to the idea of "gracious" solo living, and that it was entirely possible that she was missing something.
So, before she left for her office that morning, Ms.
Herz took a steak from the freezer.
When she got home that evening, she arranged one perfect place setting on her dining room table, made a shrimp cocktail, broiled the steak, prepared some vegetables, poured a glass of wine, lit a candle and sat down.
Her solitary splendor was reflected in a mirrored wall.


BRIEFS
*
Ashton-Tate Corp., Torrance, Calif., a software company, said it was reducing its work force by about 100 employees, bringing it to 1,200. *
Audi of America, Palm Desert, Calif., the United States unit of Volkswagon A.G.'s Audi division, is introducing a new series of luxury sedans at a suggested base retail price of $27,700.


Theater in Review
Invitations to Heaven (Questions of a Jewish Child)
Lepercq Space Brooklyn Academy of Music 30 Lafayette Avenue (at Ashland Place), Fort Greene, Brooklyn Through Oct. 5


Mental Hospital Escapee Is Held in Stabbing Death of Father
A man with a violent history who had twice escaped from a Bronx mental hospital, and whose family said they had reported his whereabouts to the hospital, stabbed his father to death early yesterday at the family's Brooklyn home, the police said.
They said that the man, Ghana Frazier, 32 years old, stabbed Lemuel Frazier, 68, several times in the chest and neck with a 12-inch butcher knife while the victim's daughter, Naomi Frazier, 25, watched in horror.
The police said that the men had begun arguing about Ghana Frazier's medication while watching television.
The son fled, but hours later turned himself in to the transit police.


Business Week Wins Lawsuit
A Federal judge has dismissed a suit against Business Week, saying the magazine's 1986 profile of Allegheny International did not defame the son of the company's chief executive.
Judge Gustave Diamond, in granting a motion made by Business Week and its parent company, McGraw-Hill Inc., said there was no merit to the suit brought by Christopher Buckley, the son of Allegheny's former chief executive, Robert J. Buckley.


Starkly Different Gates Portraits Emerge as Secrets are Laid Bare
As the Central Intelligence Agency's top analyst, Robert M. Gates operated as both a skeptical taskmaster who demanded tightly reasoned appraisals of world events and an arrogant supervisor who bluntly rejected judgments contrary to his personal views, according to documents and testimony presented during his confirmation hearings today .
The different faces of Mr.
Gates were portrayed in more than two dozen previously classified documents that the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence made public as it addressed whether Mr.
Gates distorted intelligence reports so they would conform to the political beliefs of his superiors.


Doctor at Kings County Earned $259,679 for Year
A doctor in charge of scheduling in the troubled emergency room at Kings County Hospital was, officials say, the highest-paid employee in New York City government last year, earning $259,679 in regular and overtime pay.
That news was the latest in a series of disclosures at the hospital since health officials recounted a series of mistakes in the emergency room that they said contributed to the death last month of Yankel Rosenbaum, a Hasidic Jew who was stabbed during a racial disturbance in Crown Heights.


Suffolk County Rating Is Raised
The rating on a $270 million general-obligation bond issue of Suffolk County, L.I., was raised yesterday by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation to BBB, from BB, and the bonds were removed from credit watch.
S.&amp; P. said that "the upgrade reflects full approval of the county's fiscal stability program and the expectation that the county executive and the State Legislature will agree to, and adhere to, a credibly balanced budget for fiscal 1992."


Thomas J. Bradley, 47, a Teacher; Fought Blue Cross for Transplant
Thomas J. Bradley, a Bayport, L.I., teacher who won a court battle to get medical coverage for a bone-marrow transplant to fight AIDS, died on Sunday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 47 years old and lived in Rego Park, Queens.
He died of an AIDS-related illness, said his twin brother, Bob.


Forget the Dress, the Flowers, Mendelssohn. Just Run Away!
SHORTLY after her engagement last year, Letechia Shevik was overwhelmed by a feeling familiar to many brides-to-be.
Terror.
"I just couldn't handle it," said Mrs.
Shevik, who is 29 years old, lives near Chicago in Buffalo Grove, Ill., and works as an administrative assistant at Clairol Inc.
"All that stress, the planning, the walking up the aisle, turning around and seeing everyone looking at me.


Thomas Vote Delayed Until Tuesday
Senate Democratic leaders agreed tonight to delay until next Tuesday a floor vote on the confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.
Because there had been the possibility of an even longer delay, the move was seen as accommodating Judge Thomas's backers who pressed for a vote this week, as well as opponents who wanted to put off immediate action so they could mobilize opposition.
But several senators on both sides said in interviews that they did not think Judge Thomas's prospects would be diminished by the delay.


Kaifu's Foes Block Plan for Political Reform
Evidence of corruption in the highest levels of government two years ago brought the resignation of one Prime Minister, a crushing electoral defeat by the governing Liberal Democratic Party and pledges by a new Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu, to cleanse politics of scandal.
But today, after a dramatic series of reversals, Mr.
Kaifu's plan to overhaul the Japanese political system was in tatters, killed by legislative maneuvering on Monday among rivals in his party.
His pledge to curb the influence of money in politics was sidelined for the foreseeable future.


United Gaming Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SENATE PASSES BILL SETTING UP LEAVES FOR FAMILY NEEDS
The Senate voted overwhelmingly today to require many employers to grant up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for workers to attend to family emergencies like the sickness of an elderly parent or the care of a newborn or newly adopted child.
The 65-to-32 margin indicated that the Senate could apparently vote to override the veto that President Bush has threatened.


Reebok Sets the Stage For New Global Effort
Reebok International Ltd. is stepping up the global marketing battle against its rivals in the multibillion-dollar market for athletic shoes with the appointment of Ford Ennals as its first vice president for worldwide marketing.
Once the No. 1 seller of athletic shoes worldwide, Reebok lost its lead to Nike Inc. two years ago.
The company hopes in part to snatch the title back by concentrating on internaional expansion in countries like Germany, Japan and Britain, company executives said.


Philippines Settle on 3-Year U.S. Pullout
A majority of senators agreed today to a three-year withdrawal of United States forces from the Philippines, breaking an impasse on an issue that has deeply divided this country.
Fifteen members of the 23-member Senate signed a draft resolution authorizing President Corazon C. Aquino to negotiate with the United States for the pullout of American troops by 1994.
The resolution is a compromise between the pro-base faction led by Mrs.
Aquino and the 12 anti-base senators who last month rejected a 10-year renewal of the American lease on Subic Bay Naval Station and on Monday insisted on a one-year withdrawal.


Stuart Hall Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Reviving Worn Quilts
Madison Quilt Shop  2307 Grand Concourse (near 183d Street), Bronx, N.Y. 10468; (212) 733-2100.


Talking Deals; Buying Days Inns, One More Time
WHEN word broke on Monday that Hospitality Franchise Systems, a Blackstone Capital Partners subsidiary, had agreed to acquire Days Inns of America Inc. for $250 million, no one was much surprised.
The hotel trade press had been buzzing with rumors that Henry R. Silverman, who runs Hospitality, was deep in talks with Tollman/Hundley Hotels, owner of the financially troubled chain, for at least nine months.
After all, for Mr.
Silverman, a 51-year-old tax lawyer turned hotel wheeler-dealer par excellence, it is extremely familiar territory.
As chief executive of the Reliance Capital Group, he first bought the Days Inn chain from Cecil B. Day's estate in 1984.
He has since taken it through public offerings, buybacks, privatization, outright sale and every financial permutation and combination imaginable, save one: bankruptcy.
Tollman/Hundley, the unfortunate franchisees who bought the chain in 1989, took care of that.


Japan's Finance Minister Announces Resignation
Ryutaro Hashimoto, who has presided as Finance Minister during two of the most turbulent years in Japan's recent economic history, announced today that he was resigning to take responsibility for a series of financial scandals.
As expected, however, Mr.
Hashimoto will not step down until after meeting with world financial leaders in Bangkok, Thailand, later this month.


International Breeders reports earnings for Year to June 30


Damon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Man Called Cartel's Assassin Is Denied Bail by U.S. Judge
A muscular young man who the authorities say is the most dangerous and feared assassin in Colombia listened intently through an interpreter yesterday, his head cocked, as a Federal magistrate in Brooklyn ordered that he remain in jail without bail.
The arrest of the man, Dandeny Munoz Mosquera, a week ago as he received a call at a curbside pay phone in Queens in a driving rain has frustrated the Federal authorities and posed novel questions in international relations.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's switching- station failure on Sept. 17 misstated the reason the repair took seven hours.
It was mainly because the batteries that had run down needed time to recharge; it was not because A.T.&amp; T. workers needed to use long pieces of wood to help in the recharging.


Ultra-Marathoners Limp to An Inner Peace
Just like her fellow ultra-marathoners, Sandy Barwick, a New Zealand housewife whose one peculiar avocation has turned her into a world- record holder, is living out of a tent in the midst of a multinational nomad camp along the boat basin at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
It is a place where almost everyone moves at a limp, where the tent that contains the MASH unit administers continual treatment to runners suffering ailments ranging from simple blisters to the dementia that comes from running the same one-mile circle, like a gerbil on an exercise wheel, over and over again for two weeks with only a few hours of sleep each day.


Conagra Offers Low-Fat Beef Item
Conagra Inc. introduced a low-fat ground beef product it said contained about 4 percent fat, about one-fifth the amount of fat contained in the typical hamburger.
The ground beef, which is made from lean beef and contains oat flour, will be sold in the meat section of supermarkets under the company's Healthy Choice label.
The company said it would soon introduce prepared foods that use the low-fat ground beef.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-11
A campaign to isolate Haiti's junta began, aimed at putting economic pressure on the nation and restoring the democratically elected government.
The Organization of Amerian States initiated the effort.
Page A1
Vietnamese refugees could go home from camps throughout Southeast Asia under a tentative decision by Hanoi.
But the United States, which opposed similar decisions before, may try to derail the proposal.
A1


Executive Life Suitor
A group led by Hellman &amp; Friedman, a San Francisco investment firm, said today that it would submit a bid for the Executive Life Insurance Company, which was seized by California regulators in April following a sharp decline in the value of the insurer's huge junk bond portfolio.
The bid from Hellman &amp; Friedman and its partners is the fourth on the table or in the works for Executive Life and suggests that there is growing interest from investors willing to bet that the company's junk bonds will rebound.


Designs That Bridge Two Cultures
THE architect Tadao Ando's work, whether it's a house, a museum or a church, is austere, powerful and mysterious, a blend of Eastern and Western sensibilities.
His stark, modern buildings are concrete, a Western material, but his focus on nature is Japanese.
For example, in his design for a church, the congregation looks through a movable glass wall at a concrete cross set in a pond.


New Rochelle Official Resigns
Citing health reasons, the New Rochelle School Superintendent, James Gaddy, unexpectedly announced that he would resign on Oct. 31.
Mr.
Gaddy, 57 years old, has spent 23 years in the district, the last six as superintendent.
He announced his decision after a school board meeting Tuesday night, saying that he had suffered a heart attack in September 1989.
He said he felt his health had not improved as much as it should have since then.


Review/Film Festival; At Home Everywhere But Home
Anyone can devote an hour to the subject of his or her family's history.
But few do it as entertainingly as Alan Berliner has in "Intimate Stranger," a documentary as compellingly eccentric as the man it is chiefly about.
Joseph Cassuto, the film maker's grandfather, lived a restless life that made him warm friendships in some parts of the globe but left a residue of bad feeling in his Brooklyn home.
"His business was having people like him -- and I never met anyone who didn't like him, outside of his immediate family," one of his children is heard saying in voice-over.
Mr.
Berliner eagerly incorporates such critical voices and allows them to be heard all through the film, even when it comes to discussing whether this very project is worthwhile.
"It's not going to be a 'Rain Man,' it's not going to be a 'One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest,' " one relative warns him at the outset.


National Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Donaldson Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Kabul Journal; Afghan Schools Rip Out a Painful Page in History
At the Lycee Malalai here, history ends in 1978.
Gone are the Communist Party's seizure of power that year and the Soviet Army sweep into Afghanistan and the killing of the President by Soviet troops in 1979.
Gone is President Najibullah's rise to power in the 1980's.
Gone, too, is the rise of the fundamentalist guerrillas and the war they, and their American and Pakistani sponsors, brought to the mountains and valleys, villages and cities of Afghanistan.


Dimitrios I, Eastern Orthodox Patriarch, 77, Dies
The Ecumenical Patriarch Dimitrios I of Constantinople, the spiritual leader of more than 250 million Eastern Orthodox Christians, died yesterday in Istanbul.
He was 77 years old.
He died in the intensive care unit of the American Admiral Bristol hospital, where he had been a patient since suffering a heart attack on Monday, The Associated Press said.
Frank Turnaoglu, the doctor attending Patriarch Dimitrios, was quoted as saying that the primate suffered a second heart attack yesterday, went into shock and died of cardiac arrest.
Successor to St.
Andrew
Considered a mildly liberal theologian in a church noted for its conservatism, Patriarch Dimitrios was elected in 1972 as the 269th successor to St.
Andrew, the apostle to whom Orthodox Christianity traces its roots.


Shelter Deadline Causes Angry Clash Between Dinkins and Vallone
Two days after missing the legal deadline for moving more than 100 homeless families from two barracks-style shelters into apartment-style units, Mayor David N. Dinkins failed to agree with the New York City Council on a new deadline and said it was impossible to know when one could be met.
The stalemate prompted a bitter exchange between the Mayor and the Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, over the city's homeless policy and Mr.
Dinkins's management of it, even as his administration is preparing to issue a separate plan for housing single homeless people around the city in midsized neighborhood shelters, many of which the Council will have to approve.


Fedoras Off to Hockey
The world's fastest team sport was much different when the National Hockey League began operations in 1917.
Montreal had two teams, the Canadiens and the Wanderers.
The Wanderers wandered out after six games because their arena burned down.
It had no luxury boxes.
Back then, there was no instant replay for disputed goals.
There was no national television contract in the United States.
There weren't any teams in the United States, either.
There were no Zambonis and no glass atop the boards and no guys from Europe named Jaromir and Jari and Aleksei.
Nobody wore helmets.


Corrections
An article on the Education page yesterday about national education goals omitted the identity of a sponsor of a poll about the gap between employers' and students' perceptions of how well students are educated.
It is the Committee on Economic Development.


Review/Theater; For Four Young Playwrights, a World of Denial
The four plays in the 1991 Young Playwrights Festival have a diversity of styles and purposes but they are unified by the theme of denial and by a high caliber of performance.
In each work, people refuse to accept an image of themselves that is either earned or imposed on them by outsiders.
In several cases, the reaction is vociferous.
Denial is most dramatically encountered in David E. Rodriguez's "I'm Not Stupid," in which a recently widowed mother is unable to cope with her son's mental disability.
Though the play has its contrivances, the playwright has created three sharply focused characters: a vengeful mother (S. Epatha Merkerson); her childlike son (Curtis McClarin), and a psychiatrist (Peter Francis James) whose concern is limited by his self-containment.


Braves Keep Rolling Along as Glavine Wins No. 20
Scott Scudder will not be remembered in Los Angeles Dodger lore as the man who stood in front of the rampaging tank that was camouflaged as the Atlanta Braves and forced it to a halt.
The Braves' machine kept rumbling relentlessly tonight, battering Scudder for six runs in the first inning, defeating Cincinnati, 6-3, and moving into a tie for first place in the National League West with three games to play.


A Front-Line Warrior in the Battle Against Trash


Quotation of the Day
"It is hard to tell the children they have to live modestly. They are used to a different life style. I can't bring myself to do it." -- Nazal Hamdan, a Palestinian businessman who fled Kuwait.  [ A10:6. ]


All She Touches Turns to Gold
WHEN Miriam Ellner paints, her canvas is glass, and her palette holds only gold leaf.


Pop/Jazz in Review
Procul Harum Town Hall
In 1967, the English band Procol Harum earned a footnote in pop history for "A Whiter Shade of Pale," a funereal rock ballad with an organ theme borrowed from J. S. Bach's cantata "Sleepers Awake" and a phantasmagoric lyric by Keith Reid, the band's nonperforming lyricist.


Allegheny &amp; Western Energy Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Senators Hear of Indifference to Medicare Abuse
The Senate today heard a Medicare patient describe how a Wyoming hospital had charged the Government $417 for giving him a shot of gamma globulin to prevent hepatitis, and how the Government had ignored his persistent attempts to complain about the overcharges.
The Senate Special Committee on Aging also heard about a telemarketer's charge of $1,100 for a $28 a foam rubber pad and an optician who charged a Medicare patient $433 for services that were never rendered.


Big Merger Raises Issue Of Conflicts


Elected Judges Lead the Way in Misconduct
To the Editor:
In "Let's Not Stop Electing Civil Court Judges," (letter, Sept. 23), Lloyd McAulay states that "the typical caliber of judges appointed is not better than the typical caliber of judges elected."


Bridge
All four American teams seem likely to qualify for the playoff stage of the NEC World Championships, played here under the auspices of the World Bridge Federation, but none of them is securely placed.
Play-offs will begin Saturday.


Hillhaven Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Flooding in Jacksonville
Storms dumped six inches of water on rain-soaked northeastern Florida today, flooding streets and closing schools for more than 100,000 students.


ISRAEL URGES HALT IN MIDEAST SPIRAL
Foreign Minister David Levy of Israel appealed to Arab leaders today to halt the arms race in the Middle East, in light of a proposed regional peace conference.
Addressing the General Assembly, Mr.
Levy expressed the hope that face-to-face Arab-Israeli negotiations would take place "in a few weeks."


Triborough Bonds
The Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority priced $561,865,000 in general purpose revenue bonds through Dillon, Read yesterday.
The negotiated issue consists of two series: 6 3/4 percent bonds with a 2022 maturity that were priced to yield 6.808 percent, and 6 percent bonds with a 2001 maturity that were priced to yield 6.15 percent.
The bonds have received an Aa rating from Moody's and A+ from Standard &amp; Poor's.


Hillenbrand Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Northbay Financial reports earnings for Year to June 30


Harlyn Products Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


CHRONICLE
Let's hear it for charitable pedestrians: thousands of them are expected to converge on Central Park and Battery Park this weekend and next.
Their purpose: to raise money to help combat breast cancer and diabetes.
Deputy Mayor BILL LYNCH is among those who plan to go through their paces Sunday in the 12-kilometer (7 1/2-mile) Walk for the Cure through lower Manhattan and Brooklyn Heights, to foster research in diabetes.


Washington Talk; Legislative Tactics on Alcohol Tests
Suppose a piece of legislation was endorsed by the Senate without controversy, and then 413 members of the House said they favored it.
Is it a sure thing?
Maybe not, it turns out.
Take a measure requiring operators of airplanes, trucks, buses, subways and trains to be tested for alcohol, just as nearly four million of them are already must undergo tests under existing Federal regulations for illegal drugs, including by random tests.
The measure would expand drug tests to the mass transit industry, but would also broaden the tests of all workers to include alcohol.


CML Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


A Rev. Moon Group Offers to Take Over Ailing Bridgeport U.
Senior officials of the University of Bridgeport are considering a proposal that would cede control of the university, in exchange for $50 million, to a group that gets most of its money from the Unification Church and its leader, the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon.
Critics say such an arrangement would compromise the university's academic independence.
But the president of the private nonsectarian university and the head of its board of trustees say they must take seriously the offer from the Professors World Peace Academy because of the financial plight of the university.
The university has been weakened by a decades-long slide in enrollment and the longest faculty strike at any American university.


MICC Investments reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cedar Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Beware the Judicial Override
As the Senate begins debate today on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas, it should ponder the likelihood that his elevation to the Supreme Court would severely curtail Congress's power to authorize affirmative action preferences for minorities or women.
The nominee's record suggests that, if confirmed in the vote set for Tuesday, he might hold that most racial preferences authorized by Congress -- and by state and local governments -- violate the Constitution.


Spectrum Control Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Breeden Backs Investors on Fraud Suits
The chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, Richard C. Breeden, testified today in favor of legislation to give victims of securities fraud more time to file lawsuits and denied that he had been pressured by Vice President Dan Quayle to soften his support.
Mr.
Breeden's testimony came after he responded to a last-minute request by Mr.
Quayle Tuesday night to review his presentation on behalf of a business group.
The measure is being opposed by a powerful coalition of accountants, lawyers and Wall Street firms, and Mr.
Quayle's request elicited concern among members of a Senate subcommittee that the Bush Administration might seek to influence an independent regulatory agency.


Dow Declines 5.82 With Investors Divided
Stocks were lower yesterday after early gains in moderate trading.
Investors mostly discounted a larger-than-expected rise in August new-home sales reported yesterday, as the Dow Jones industrial average slipped 5.82, to 3,012.52.


U.S.O.C. Seeks Funds Using State Lotteries
Ever eager to find new ways to support athletes, the United States Olympic Committee is turning to an unlikely source for revenue: state lotteries.
In effect, the committee is using the five Olympic rings, once a symbol of amateur idealism, to help sell a game of chance.
A test program in at least 15 states, scheduled next year around the Winter Olympics in Albertville, France, and the Summer Games in Barcelona, Spain, could raise as much as $2 million, Olympic Committee officials say.
And that could lead to subsequent programs that officials expect could generate as much as $25 million by the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.


Precision Drilling reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Honors
*
Pagano Schenk &amp; Kay, Providence, R.I., won the most awards, 37, including Best of Show, at the 31st annual Hatch Awards for creative excellence in New England advertising, sponsored by the Advertising Club of Boston.
Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass., was second with 36.


As Solid as a Rock
SOME houses have walls of stone, but the Doolittle house in the desert north of Palm Springs, Calif., will have walls of boulders.


Zell Group Wins Bid for Carter Debt
The Zell/Chilmark Fund has sweetened its bid to acquire the debt and bonds of the Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., winning the support of a group of creditors who had been opposing the offer.
The Zell group thus paved the way for a successful completion of its tender offer, since having a single party control the company's debt may shorten the time it takes Carter Hawley to emerge from bankruptcy.
By seeking to acquire all outstanding claims against Carter Hawley, the Zell/Chilmark investment group is positioning itself to take a controlling interest in the California retailer when it emerges from bankruptcy.
Carter Hawley operates 89 stores on the West Coast under the names of the Broadway, the Broadway Southwest, Emporium and Weinstocks.


Viewing the Ivy League, at a Price
Ivy League football is going pay-per-view.
For $9.95 per game, cable subscribers in the Northeast and mid-Atlantic regions can buy into a five-game schedule that starts with Brown-Penn on Saturday and concludes with Harvard-Yale on Nov. 23.
The games will be produced by TvOne, an Atlanta company.
But does Ivy League football on pay-per-view make financial sense when TVKO is losing money on its monthly pay-per-view fights and pay-per-view opera was recently a resounding flop?


Village Super Market reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Now That's Deco: 1930's Movie Houses
THE streamlined New York movie theaters of old, complete with muscled murals, sleek stainless steel and marquees in the shape of prows, are the subject of "Deco-Deco: New York Theaters From the 30's," the first exhibition at the new architecture gallery at the City College School of Architecture in Manhattan.


A.T.&amp; T. Offering New Pay Phone
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company introduced a new pay phone that has a video monitor to display text and graphics, a keyboard to dial computer data bases and would allow travelers to plug in laptop computers or portable fax machines.
The phone, called A.T.&amp; T. Public Phone 2000, would also provide information services, like weather forecasts.
Users would pay $2.50 for the first 10 minutes and $1 for each additional 10 minutes.


Market Place; Bleak Sales Outlook Clouds Fran Tarkenton's Company
Fran Tarkenton was known for scrambling in his days as a pro football quarterback.
Now, with the computer software company he runs having lost two of its top officials and suddenly losing money, he may have to do more scrambling than ever.
Knowledgeware, a software company whose shares peaked at $43.25 in the spring, stunned analysts by saying that revenues for the quarter just ended would be as low as $20 million, half the level of the previous three months.
The company added that it would report a loss, although it did not estimate how steep the deficit would be.
The company's shares, already under pressure because of the management shake-up, fell $6.875, to $12.25, in Nasdaq trading yesterday.


Famous Eye Speaks In a House Of Memory
Clement Greenberg returned to Jackson Pollock's house in the Springs section of East Hampton, L.I., last weekend, for the first time in more than 30 years.
He sat in a high-backed armchair in the living room of the modest clapboard farmhouse, smoked a number of cigarettes and reminisced about the mythical leader of Abstract Expressionism, in ways that were by turns sad, respectful and a little possessive.
At the age of 82, Mr.
Greenberg is something of a myth in his own right, and one of the last survivors of the legendary Abstract Expressionist moment when American art came of age in the early 1950's.
His advocacy of Pollock's work and of Abstract Expressionism in general were crucial to that coming of age and have been written into the art histories of the period.
So to a certain extent have his formidable eye, his power as a tastemaker and his adamantly formal approach to looking at art, a stance so closely linked to his name that it is often called Greenbergian formalism.


Pop/Jazz in Review
Gilberto Santa Rosa S.O.B's
Gilberto Santa Rosa's show on Monday night started out sluggishly.
Then, about halfway through the set, Mr.
Santa Rosa, one of Puerto Rico's best young salsa singers, opened a few buttons of his shirt, and suddenly things got better.
He started improvising, the band found its groove and the music began to work.


Doctor Acts to Heal Romania's Wound Of Baby Trafficking
Dr.
Alexandra Zugravescu has spent most of her life in Bucharest hospitals, tending to the health of Romanian children.
Now, this 66-year-old pediatrician is tending to the well-being of her country, trying to cure one of its most publicized scandals: the selling of babies for adoption.
Her task, as she explains it, is to wipe out "the dirty business of baby trafficking."
Efforts by Dr.
Zugravescu and the new Government agency that she heads, the Romanian Committee for Adoptions, will affect a great many families in the United States.
In the last year, Romania, which has a large population of abandoned and orphaned children as a legacy of the Communist dictatorship that was deposed in 1989, has overtaken South Korea as the leading source for foreign adoptions by Americans.


Pop/Jazz in Review
Willie Kent and the Gents Chicago B.L.U.E.S. 73 Eighth Avenue, at 14th Street Through Friday
A blues club with a difference opened on Tuesday night.
Chicago B.L.U.E.S., a local offshoot of a club in Chicago, intends to bring the blues to New York as they are heard at home.
The club that used to be called Abilene now has Chicago team pennants on one wall and waitresses who call customers "Honey." More important, instead of hiring a name musician to be backed by a New York band, as most local clubs do, Chicago B.L.U.E.S. plans to import whole bands, groups that hone their ensemble work nightly on the Midwestern blues circuit.
There, the blues is a casual, everyday, dependable style, lived-in and subtle rather than flashy.


American Healthcorp Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Padres Erupt for Six Runs and Drop Dodgers Into Tie
Four days from the end of the regular season, the Los Angeles Dodgers lost their tenuous lead in the National League West.
They also lost their advantage on the Atlanta Braves.
The San Diego Padres scored six runs in the eighth inning, getting five hits that never left the infield, and toppled the Dodgers tonight, 9-4, sending the division into a tie between L.A. and Atlanta after 158 games.


Metropolitan, MONY in Talks
The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, the nation's second-largest life insurer, is considering merging with the Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York, the companies said yesterday.
Metropolitan Life said in a statement that it was discussing "the potential for some form of strategic alliance" after a report appeared yesterday in The Wall Street Journal.
The company said, however, that no commitments or decisions had been made.


Harding Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


U.N. Suspects Iraq Has a 4th A-Plant
The United Nations commission charged with destroying President Saddam Hussein's weapons of mass destruction suspects Iraq may be hiding a fourth uranium enrichment plant, United Nations officials say.
They say they believe the plant is designed to produce nuclear explosives by the "nozzle" technique.
This technology for enriching uranium was developed by two German companies, Siemens and Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm, known as MBB, and is currently used by South Africa in the two uranium enrichment plants it operates.


Cuomo Ends Visit to Japan With No Major Deals


Failure Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


Torborg? A Possibility. A Circus? Definitely.
There were emphatic denials from the Chicago White Sox concerning Jeff Torborg's status.
There was silence from the Mets, and the promise of more of the same in the future.
There was speculation -- idle perhaps, but interesting all the same -- in the clubhouse.
Welcome to the circus of hiring a manager for the Mets.
The spectacle could well be long, and it sure won't be neat; choked with rumors, applications, interviews, scarce official information and non-stop official obfuscations.


Boys Kidnapped in California Are Found Safe
Standing calmly and holding hands, two little brothers who were kidnapped in Los Angeles six weeks ago were discovered unharmed in a bus shelter on a desolate service road at Kennedy International Airport in New York City shortly after midnight yesterday.
The children, a 3-year-old and a 4-year-old, were found hungry and dirty but in good health.
An F.B.I. official said they were shy and reluctant to talk at first but began to open up after an agent gave them models of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.


BASEBALL: Notebook; Reds Weigh Trading Davis in Off Season
Just as Darryl Strawberry and the Mets parted company last winter, Stawberry's friend Eric Davis and the Cincinnati Reds will most likely terminate their relationship this winter.
Except in this instance, the impetus would come from the club, not the player.
The Reds aren't saying, but their mood indicates that they have grown tired of paying Davis lots of money for relatively few games, and will try to trade him during the off season.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M INFORMATION FAIR -- in the public lobby from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., Oct. 15-31.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Corrections
An obituary on July 22 about Dave Swid, a trucking executive, misstated some details of his career.
He was associated for a time with the Yale Express System, but was never its president.
The company went out of business in the middle 1970's, not 1953.
The errors were reported to The Times in late July; this correction was delayed by a check of old company records.


Familiar Ranger Outlook: Hopeful Despite Problems
At their very best this preseason, the Rangers have seen rookie Tony Amonte, spiked hair tucked into shiny helmet, scooting down the right wing to gather in a well-timed pass from Bernie Nicholls.
At their worst, they have seen Nicholls and Steven Rice in the dressing room, heads burrowed into newspapers, reading the latest trade or compensation rumors.


Good Reports From Most Stock Funds
For investors in stock mutual funds last quarter, health was beautiful and gold was a disaster.
But mostly it was a good quarter.
The average stock mutual fund showed a gain of 6.7 percent, Lipper Analytical Services reported yesterday.
That result was substantially better than the gains for the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index, which rose 4.5 percent before dividends, and about 5.3 percent including dividends.
The performance reflected the fact that small stocks, generally not in the S.&amp; P. 500, did substantially better than large ones.


Wedding Information Network reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Shares of Time Warner Rise on Reports of Deal
Stock in Time Warner Inc. rose $2.125 yesterday, to $85, on reports that two Japanese companies would invest $1 billion in a venture consisting of Time Warner's film, cable and pay television businesses.
There appeared to be some confusion among Wall Street analysts about whether the Japanese concerns, the Toshiba Corporation and C. Itoh &amp; Company, would acquire stock in the parent company or the subsidiary.
But an executive with direct knowledge of the negotiations pointed out that in a recent prospectus for Time Warner's rights offering, the company said it was considering a strategic alliance for its entertainment group.


Andersen Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 1


Safeway Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 7


American Express Sets Reserve for Card Losses
With many of its once-affluent customers driven into bankruptcy by the recession, the American Express Company yesterday took its most striking action to date to protect its business from a ballooning number of defaults on its credit cards.
The company said it was setting aside $265 million for the expected defaults and to pay for a reorganization of its flagship charge-card business, including the loss of 1,700 jobs.


Corrections
Because of a production error, two picture captions in The Living Section yesterday with an article about eloping were reversed in some copies.
The man with a mustache and the woman with a hat were Perry Ramsingh and Marva Victoria Duke; the couple kissing were Espen Fjermeros and Denise Shaw.


Calendar: Chairs, Plants, House Tours and Silver
Singular Samples
Parsons Exhibition Center at Parsons School of Design, 2 West 13th Street; (212) 229-8987.
An exhibition of prototype chairs, beds, tables, lamps and housewares from "Design Explorations: 2001," runs through Nov. 1.
Hours: 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Monday through Saturday (open Wednesday until 9 P.M.).
Free.
Plants Plus
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.
The fall plant sale will be from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Saturday and 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Sunday.
Free admission.
Reflections of Designers
Fortunoff, 681 Fifth Avenue (54th Street); (212) 758-6660.
A show of contemporary works from the store's 1991 silver design competition runs through Oct. 21.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Monday through Saturday (until 7 P.M. Monday and Thursday).
Free.
On Saturday there will be two free seminars.
The first, from 11 A.M. to 12:30 P.M., is on tablesettings; the second, from 3 to 4:30 P.M., is on silver and Victorian teatime.
Reservations are required: call (800) 937-4376.
A Welcome in Bay Ridge
Lutheran Church of the Good Shepherd, 7420 Fourth Avenue (Bay Ridge Parkway); (718) 836-2087.
A tour of eight houses, including a 1912 Greek Revival house, will take place Sunday from 1 to 5 P.M.
Tickets, $15.
Greenwich Village Churches
The Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, 47 Fifth Avenue (12th Street); (212) 924-3895.
A walking tour of old churches will start at 12:45 P.M.
Sunday in front of St.
Luke's in the Fields (487 Hudson Street, at Grove Street).
Fee, including reception, $12 ($8, members).
Registration is required.


Readicare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
Salomon Brothers has uncovered evidence of an additional violation of trading rules in the Treasuries market.  [ D1. ]


Sun Television &amp; Appliances Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Knicks Send Cheeks to Hawks for McCormick
In the team's second trade in two days, the Knicks sent guard Maurice Cheeks to the Atlanta Hawks last night for center Tim McCormick, a seven-season veteran who will serve as a much-needed backup to Patrick Ewing.
The trade, just a day after the Knicks obtained the high-scoring forward Xavier McDaniel of the Phoenix Suns for forward Jerrod Mustaf, guard Trent Tucker and two second-round draft choices, adds to what will be a distinctly new look for the Knicks this season.


Transit and Housing Officers Sue on Transfer Law
The unions representing police officers of the New York City Transit and Housing Authorities filed suit yesterday to force Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown to comply with a new state law that allows some officers to transfer from one city police force to another.
"Just because the Police Commissioner opposed the legislation, he does not have the right to thwart the law of the state," the president of the Transit Police Benevolent Association, Ron Reale, said at a news conference outside City Hall yesterday.


Upper West Side Journal; Litter! Here! She Won't Stand for It!
As long as the Upper West Side has one dirty street, there will be no rest for Pat Hetkin.
"Why has there been an abandoned recycling dumpster at 100th and Riverside for a month?" she barked into the telephone, the most important weapon in her war on litter. 'Wouldn't you think someone at Sanitation would have noticed it in their wanderings?
It's outrageous!
Things like this drive me wild!"


HOME IMPROVEMENT
BUILDING a window seat for an alcove in front of a bay window begins with constructing a framework of 2-by-4 lumber, as described in last week's column.
After fastening the front wall of the framework to the floor, the next step is to install cross braces across the top to support the seat.
For a window seat up to about 36 inches long at the rear, only two cross braces are needed.
Installed where the rear and side walls meet, they divide the seat frame into a central rectangular space with a triangular area at each side.


Donald Lubin; Executive, 68
Donald Lubin, a former deputy secretary general of the International Planned Parenthood Federation, died on Saturday at his home in Cliffside Park, N.J.
He was 68 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


INSIDE
Philippine Compromise
A majority of senators in the Philippines agreed to support a deadline of 1994 for a pullout of American troops rather than 1992.
Page A3.
Soviets Plan Small Troop Cut
Contradicting a deputy, Moscow's Defense Minister said he planned to cut military ranks by about 700,000, not by up to 2 million.
Page A8.
Eastern Patriarch Dies
Patriarch Dimitrios I, the leader of Eastern Orthodox Christians, died of a heart attack in Istanbul.
He was 77 years old.
Page D21.
American Express Losses
Faced with problems in credit and charge cards, American Express said it was setting aside $265 million for expected losses from a tide of consumer defaults.
Page D1.


Skyline Gold reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Special Devices reports earnings for Qtr to July 29


McCartney Premiere in U.S.
Paul McCartney's "Liverpool Oratorio," a 97-minute choral work, is to have its first North American performance at Carnegie Hall on Nov. 18 at 8 P.M.
The work, which had its world premiere at the Liverpool Anglican Cathedral in June, is the former Beatle's first classical score.
It is to be performed by the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra with the Collegiate Chorale and the Boys Choir of Harlem.
Carl Davis, who collaborated with Mr.
McCartney on the composition, is to conduct.
The soloists are Barbara Bonney, soprano; Sally Burgess, mezzo-soprano; Jerry Hadley, tenor, and Willard White, bass.
Tickets are $15 to $100.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Topics of The Times; Elbow Room
Although she would not wish her ailment on her worst enemy, a woman suffering from tennis elbow cannot speak highly enough about its accouterments -- an elbow brace and a wrist splint.
There's nothing like being a monument to Velcro for breaking the ice at cocktail parties, bus stops and cafeteria lines.
Injuries like hers, it seems, are as common as the cold and far more fun to discuss since their causes are manifold and the conversation is sneezeless.
Furthermore, because the causes are often somewhat mysterious, they offer far more impetus to the imagination than, for instance, an appendectomy.


Income Figures Show No Gains by Blacks
To the Editor:
The affirmative action debate associated with Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination hearings confuses person with population.
Both conservative and liberal presentations of personal portrayals miss picturing the condition of populations.
The position of African-Americans relative to whites has eroded since 1975.


Washington Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Additional Salomon Violation
Salomon Brothers Inc., plagued since August by the scandal in the Treasuries market, has uncovered evidence of an additional violation of trading rules in that market, the firm announced yesterday.
The additional violation, which occurred in a December auction, involved another instance in which the firm's government bond trading desk submitted a bid in a customer's name without authorization, people working with the firm said.


Clean Harbors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.00
5.37
9.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.09
5.10
7.17
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.15
5.13
7.18
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.24
7.21
8.58
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.82
7.79
8.85
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.93
8.91
9.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.89
6.89
7.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellweather bonds, notes and bills


People
*
Marianne Moore has been appointed senior vice president and management supervisor at Cadwell Davis Partners, New York, from vice president and management supervisor at DDB Needham Worldwide, New York. *
Tom Gabriel, president and creative director at Milice Valenti Gabriel DDB Needham, Honolulu, said yesterday that he was resigning his position to "return to the mainland."


At Syracuse, a Missile Guided by Perspective
We knew Qadry Ismail's nickname before we knew him.
His older brother Raghib is the Rocket and Qadry (pronounced KAH-dree) is the Missile.
We learned that several years ago from Fatma Ismail, their mother and the self-described Launching Pad.


Judge Finds Bias Against Minority Inmates
Black and Hispanic inmates at a state prison in Elmira, N.Y., have been regularly discriminated against in discipline, job assignments and housing, a Federal judge has ruled.
In a decision issued Tuesday in Rochester, Judge David G. Larimer of Federal District Court said that prison officials had violated the constitutional rights of minority inmates.
He ordered the officials to meet with an inmates' advocacy group within 30 days to begin planning ways to remedy the discrimination.


Accounts
*
Springer-Verlag, New York, a publisher of scientific and medical magazines, to Griffin Bacal, New York.
Billings were not disclosed. *
The Callard &amp; Bowser candy maker, York, England, to Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, New York, for a special project to create national broadcast advertising.
Commercials, to appear next month, star the British comedian John Cleese, who has written and performed in the company's radio spots.


In Country Soil, a Bonding With Imprints of Gardeners Past
THE first time I saw the little cottage that faced west over the marsh, and the old red barn that came with it, I felt as if it belonged to me -- and I to it.
The sun was setting over the Nissequogue River, which flows up and down with the tide of Long Island Sound, and two great blue herons were feeding in the shallows.
A huge black walnut tree framed my view from the porch.
As the light changed from rose to red, its tall straight trunk and the single branch that gestured like a great arm towards the sky became a black silhouette.
I had come from the noisy city.
My first night there, an owl kept me awake.


In the Nation; Courage and Vision
Watching President Bush announce those sweeping nuclear weapons reductions and restraints last week -- some of which seemed beyond hope a year ago -- I had mixed but largely jubilant feelings.
To one of my generation -- whose memories of the Cuban missile and Berlin crises are clear and traumatic -- these changes seemed at least as remarkable as those that have engulfed the Soviet Union.
My generation had, after all, lived our adult lives in the constant awareness not only of the cold war but of the mushroom cloud.
Now the one seems as remote as Guadalcanal, the other a lesser threat than global warming.


Staar Surgical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ventura Motion Picture Group reports earnings for Year to June 30


Water-Meter Program Could Save Millions in Purchases, Report Says
New York City's ambitious and troubled program to install water meters could have saved $8.4 million if the equipment had been bought directly from suppliers rather than the contractors, says a city Comptroller's report to be released today.
More than a quarter of a million meters have already been installed, and the Department of Environmental Protection, which is overseeing the program, may still be able to save as much as $10.6 million if it buys the remaining 421,269 units directly.


Hadron Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Tara, the Myth, Lives On in America's Suburbs
It is one of the most famous houses in the world.
The sheer vision of it -- the wisteria tumbling over the verandas, the fluttering curtains, the cool dark shade, the long red road -- was enough to convince one of America's greatest literary heroines that life was worth living for, worth fighting for.
Unlike Graceland or Southfork Ranch, you cannot find an address for Tara.
There isn't one.
But the mythical Tara -- the architectural sequel to "Gone With the Wind" -- can be found in suburban neighborhoods across the nation.


William Parsons, 79, Treasury Aide in 50's
William W. Parsons, an educator who was an Assistant Secretary of the Treasury under Presidents Harry S. Truman and Dwight D. Eisenhower, died Saturday at St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 79 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
Mr. Parsons died of a stroke, his wife said.


Battle Over World View
The internal intelligence feuds over Nicaragua, Iran and papal assassination laid bare in Congress this week were but skirmishes in a struggle during the 1980's to shape the lens through which American intelligence viewed the Soviet Union: as an implacably evil force or an empire in retreat and flux.
For the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, the central question is whether Robert M. Gates, the hard-line Soviet expert who now seeks to become Director of Central Intelligence, played an intellectually honest role in that struggle, or was driven purely by ambition and political loyalty.
How to Promote C.I.A.
The battleground was the Central Intelligence Agency's analytical division, the Directorate of Intelligence, which Mr.
Gates and his boss, William J. Casey, thoroughly shook up from the first days of their arrival in 1981.
The two men were the avowed leaders in a crusade to restore American intelligence, and especially the C.I.A., to a front-line post in the cold war and a first-tier seat in the councils of the White House.


Tucson Electric Seeks Lower Rate
The Tucson Electric Power Company, one of Arizona's primary utilities, has hired Bear, Stearns &amp; Company to advise it on ways to lower the high interest rate on $117.5 million of Pima County industrial-development revenue bonds.
Called periodic auction reset securities, the bonds are repriced through Dutch auctions every 28 to 35 days.
The bonds now carry an interest rate of 12.58 percent.


Injuries Plague Giant Defense
Four days after Erik Howard underwent surgery on a herniated disk in the back, Mike Fox, who played next to him on the Giants' defensive line, was hospitalized Tuesday night with perhaps the same ailment.
Fox, a second-year defensive end, played in the Giants' 21-16 loss to the Dallas Cowboys Sunday.
On Tuesday, he showed symptoms of sciatica, a condition in which a disk presses against the sciatic nerve.
He was sent to the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York for evaluation.


A House Panel Battles Cheney Over Document
A House subcommittee is heading for a showdown with Defense Secretary Dick Cheney over his refusal to release a document that Congressional investigators say could help determine whether the Pentagon secretly bolstered the McDonnell Douglas Corporation's finances.
Representative John Conyers Jr., a Michigan Democrat who is chairman of the Legislation and National Security Subcommittee, urged the panel's other 10 members in a memorandum this week to vote for a contempt citation against Mr.
Cheney at a meeting scheduled for next Wednesday.


With Cogs Laid Off, Wheels of Justice Jam Even More
On the day the trial was to begin in Civil Court in Manhattan last month, the plaintiff was ready.
She had been beaten and raped in a housing-project stairwell in 1982, when she was 11 years old.
Now she was suing the New York City Housing Authority for damages, and wanted to get the trial over with.
Her lawyer was ready. The Housing Authority's lawyer was ready.


Sports of The Times; New York's Nine Jobs Of Torment
FOR every fired baseball manager, every tired football coach, every hired basketball coach, every mired hockey coach, the torment of New York's big-city syndrome is always there.
Like bus-exhaust fumes in the streets or somebody's trash on the sidewalks.
For the nine managers and coaches in the New York area, the torment is divided into three commandments.
Thou must win, because New York won't tolerate a loser.
Thou must command the respect of your players, because New York is weary of cry-baby millionaires.
Thou must co-exist with the news media, because New York notebooks and microphones have the nerve to ask questions that knowledgeable fans would ask if they had the opportunity.


CROATIAN APPEALS FOR A CEASE-FIRE
Croatia's president appealed to the federal army today for a new cease-fire in the Yugoslav civil war, offering to lift the blockade of federal army barracks in Croatia if the army will call off an offensive against the breakaway republic that began Tuesday.
The appeal by Franjo Tudjman came as Yugoslav army and Serbian irregulars kept up a steady artillery barrage from positions extending from Vukovar, on the eastern panhandle near the border between Croatia and Serbia, down to the medieval city of Dubrovnik on the southern Adriatic.


Cocooning With the Chief Trend Bender
On a quiet street behind the local movie theater here, Faith Popcorn stood by her freshly-painted white picket fence in front of her nice, ordinary house.
She said with a sigh: "I have a mailbox and a microwave. A massage table and a high chair. I love all these symbols of normalcy. They're icons."


Softkey Software reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Topics of The Times; A Guide to Good Works
Many New York lawyers say they're eager to contribute their talent for free to worthy causes.
But somehow they never find a way.
A valuable new publication -- "Pro Bono Opportunities: A Guide for Lawyers in New York City" -- now leaves them with one less excuse.
Prepared by the Association of the Bar of the City of New York and Volunteers of Legal Service, which recruits legal help for the poor, the booklet lists an amazing array of groups needing help and tells how to reach them.
Their concerns range from consumer rights to the problems of the homeless and mentally ill.


Review/Dance; An Evening Of Dramas In the Mind
Ann Moradian commanded attention at all times in "Looking In/ Reaching Out" on Friday night at the Dia Center for the Arts in SoHo.
Because this evening of her choreography was devoted almost entirely to solos, that was a genuine accomplishment.
She did little more than light candles and hold them reverently in "Undance (A Prayer)." And in "Autumn Grave" she took care that her melancholy never turned hysterical.


The High-Tech Club Battle, Continued
Three pro golfers have joined with the PGA Tour in the latest legal round against the maker of a high-tech club some say gives players an unfair advantage.
MILLER BARBER and TERRY DILL , members of the PGA Senior Tour, and regular tour player HUBERT GREEN are seeking damages "which may exceed $100 million" from Karsten Manufacturing Company of Phoenix.


RalphS Grocery Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 21


Another Day, Lots of Dollars As Scarlett Returns to Tara
Frankly, it appears readers
do
give a damn.
Again.
Hundreds of thousands of people have been stampeding bookstores around the country to buy "Scarlett," the sequel to "Gone With the Wind" that has soared so quickly to the top of the best-seller list that even its publisher is astonished.
A million copies of the book have been printed, though the book has been in the stores barely a week, and orders are coming in so furiously, the publisher says he is printing 50,000 copies a day and shipping directly from the bindery to bookstores.


City to Halt Sidewalk Repair Jobs
New York City plans to suspend its sidewalk-repair program, amid accusations of corruption and complaints from property owners, city officials said yesterday.
The office of Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman said last night that it was looking into charges that contractors hired by the city to inspect and repair sidewalks were overcharging property owners for the work, recommending more work than was needed and taking kickbacks.


For Mr. Gates: Chapter and Verse
It is easy to mistake what is happening in the hearings on the fitness of Robert Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence.
To the casual observer, it sounds like standard political contention.
A Republican President nominates, Democratic Senators grumble and quibble, and character witnesses alternately affirm that the nominee is a rare patriot or a mediocrity.
Suddenly, these hearings are different.
The testimony against Mr.
Gates so far this week is not mere contention or generality.
His critics, former colleagues, offer documented particulars that transform serious questions into grave doubts.
These cannot be balanced against fraternal platitudes from friendly witnesses.
All now depends on how Mr.
Gates responds to these particulars.


Books of The Times; Turning Favors Into Catastrophe
Needful Things By Stephen King 690 pages. Viking. $24.95
A new shop has opened in the town of Castle Rock, Me., the fictional setting of such previous thrillers by Stephen King as "The Dead Zone" (1979) "Cujo" (1981), "The Tommy knockers" (1987), "The Dark Half" (1989) and two novellas, "The Body" (which became the movie "Stand by Me") and "The Sun Dog."


Southmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


R-Tek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Home Run That Kelly Built
If nothing else, Roberto Kelly will take home to Panama next week the feel of Fenway Park as he touched first base on Sept. 22, his high drive off Jeff Reardon having just settled into the left-field screen.
The Red Sox had been one strike away from a share of first place, the noise in the old park was deafening.
Who with the slightest historian's perspective could resist the notion that Kelly had just pulled the plug on a pennant race?
"I could feel the place go quiet," Kelly said yesterday about the two-out, ninth-inning home run that tied the game the Yankees eventually won.
"It's strange, I know, but I really could. It felt so good."


Knowlton Fills Posts in U.S.
In the wake of the departure last week of Robert Dilenschneider, who was president and chief executive of Hill &amp; Knowlton Inc., New York, the public relations firm has named Craig L. Fuller president and chief executive of its national operation, Hill &amp; Knowlton U.S.A.
Mr.
Fuller has also been named to Hill &amp; Knowlton Inc.'s executive committee.
Mr.
Fuller, 40 years old, succeeds Thomas E. Eidson, who has assumed Mr.
Dilenschneider's previous posts.
Since August, Mr.
Fuller had been president and chief operating officer of Hill &amp; Knowlton Public Affairs Worldwide, Washington.


Columbia Pictures Shift Expected
Sony Pictures Entertainment plans to announce on Thursday that Mark Canton, a former Warner Brothers executive, will replace Frank Price as head of Columbia Pictures.
The planned announcement comes after a turbulent and confused day at Columbia, a Sony Pictures subsidiary, in which Mr.
Price's office sent newspapers copies of his biography and his planned projects, while executives at Sony Pictures said they were not announcing any changes today.


Victoria Creations reports earnings for Year to June 30


Photon Technology International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Young Designer Hears the Beat And Wins Acclaim
AS fashion goes global, new designers are finding encouragement from retailers all over the world.
"The beat is similar everywhere," said Atil Kutoglu, a designer in Vienna who has already presented his spring collection in Munich, Germany, where he picked up an award for designer of the year.
He has also shown his clothes in Dusseldorf, where he meets his best customers, German retailers, and in Milan, Italy, which draws a more eclectic group of retailers.


Magnetech Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Review/Television; P.D. James Unleashes Detective In 6 Parts
Roy Marsden returns to "Mystery" tonight, at 9 o'clock on Channels 13, 21 and 49, playing Comdr.
Adam Dalgliesh in still another adaptation of a P. D. James novel.
With "Devices and Desires," a six-episode production, Mr.
Marsden has played the Scotland Yard detective six times in the last eight years.
The actor now says never again, and Miss James seemingly agrees, saying this is probably the last of her Dalgliesh books tailored for television.
But successful formulas can be tenacious.
Just look at the on-again, off-again affair the writer John Mortimer and the actor Leo McKern have had over the years with "Rumpole of the Bailey."


Upper West Side Journal; Litter! Here! She Won't Stand for It!
As long as the Upper West Side has one dirty street, there will be no rest for Pat Hetkin.
"Why has there been an abandoned recycling dumpster at 100th and Riverside for a month?" she barked into the telephone, the most important weapon in her war on litter. 'Wouldn't you think someone at Sanitation would have noticed it in their wanderings?
It's outrageous!
Things like this drive me wild!"


Scientists Devise Math Tool To Break a Protective Code
Two Israeli scientists have developed a powerful mathematical technique that for the first time makes it possible under certain circumstances to break the code used by many businesses for encrypting highly sensitive information.
The code, which depends on a government system, the Data Encryption Standard, now appears to have a significant chink in its armor, even though experts say it is not immediately threatened by the new mathematical attack.


Healthcare International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


O'Brien Energy Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hartmarx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Mob Boss Said to Have Fled Over Botched Assassination
The man identified as the acting boss of the Lucchese organized-crime family is missing, and Federal officials said yesterday that he is on the run to escape execution by other mobsters.
The officials said the boss, Alphonse D'Arco, fled because because he botched the assassination of a mobster who survived to become a key Government witness in a racketeering trial.
Law-enforcement officials called his disappearance the latest evidence of turmoil, dissension and disloyalty roiling the hierarchies of New York's five major Mafia groups.


Effects of the Philippine Volcano Continue to Be Felt


E.P.A. Announces New Steps To Prod Cleanup of Wastes
Seeking to lower the cost and quicken the pace of cleaning up the nation's abandoned hazardous waste dumps, the Environmental Protection Agency said today that it would replace companies that have performed ineffectively andwould establish an office to monitor contractors more closely.
William K. Reilly, the Federal agency's administrator, said the steps were intended to improve the management of the Superfund program, a Government- and industry-financed effort begun in 1980 to respond to poisons leaking from abandoned chemical waste sites across the country.


Essay; The Kurds Come to Washington
We act as if the world has scored a great victory over Saddam Hussein in the Battle of the Baghdad Parking Lot.
All we gained was possession of files that show our C.I.A. and media underestimated Iraq's nuclear buildup.
That will enable some of us to issue I-told-you-so whoops, but will do little to curb the comeback of Saddam Hussein.
Only the ouster of his regime will do that, and file-cabinet triumphs oust no dictators.


Pablo Giussani, 63, An Argentine Writer
Pablo Giussani, an Argentine newspaper columnist and author of political books, died Tuesday at his home in Buenos Aires.
He was 63 years old.
He died of cancer of the esophagus, his family said.


Tilted Chairs and Desks Protect the Back
To the Editor:
Having written my master's thesis on the mechanics of sitting on stools and posture chairs (Touro College, 1988), I must respond to Jane E. Brody's advice in her Personal Health column ("A New View of a Common Job Ailment: Back Injuries," Sept. 18) that keeping the knees higher than the hips while sitting will reduce the risk of back injury in the workplace.


Kremlin Clarifies Plans to Cut Troops
The Defense Ministry toned down earlier reports of plans for deep cuts in the Soviet armed forces today, saying the reductions would be much smaller and would be within the framework of disarmament negotiations.
Defense Minister Yevgeny I. Shaposhnikov, contradicting his chief deputy, issued a statement reiterating that General Shaposhnikov's estimate of a cut of about 700,000 military personnel remained the Soviet policy and that that could occur in the "foreseeable future" within the framework of the disarmament talks.


'This Old House' Made New Again
WHEN "This Old House" begins its 13th season on public television on Saturday, Norm Abrams, the show's master carpenter, will be juggling the old and the new at Kirkside, left, a 19th-century house in Wayland Mass.
Working with a $200,000 budget, Chris Hagger, the owner, wants the facade restored and a brand-new kitchen installed.


Pop/Jazz in Review
Gordon Lightfoot Carnegie Hall
In the three decades since he began performing in Canadian folk clubs, the Ontario-born singer and songwriter Gordon Lightfoot has changed remarkably little.
The 52-year-old singer, who appeared at Carnegie Hall on Friday evening, remains the master of a low-key pop style that is two parts folk to one part country while incorporating light brushstrokes of rock.


Beene's New Frontier: Tabletops and Dressers
IN a year or two, devotees of the fashion designer Geoffrey Beene will not only be able to dress in clothes designed by Mr.
Beene, but also eat off Beene china, light candles in Beene candlesticks and store their tchotchkes in Beene boxes.
On Tuesday, the designer signed a three-year contract with Swid Powell, a Manhattan manufacturer of tableware and gift accessories, to design products for the home.


40 Years Later, Here's the Pitch
Bobby Thomson and Ralph Branca will celebrate the 40th anniversary of their historic showdown at the Polo Grounds by spending today together and earning more money than if they had won the World Series.
They will have an early wake-up call, Thomson at his home in Watchung, N.J., and Branca in Rye, N.Y., and a limousine will whisk them to the start of their appointed rounds: TV appearances, a Madison Square Garden screening of Thomson's pennant-winning homer against Branca, a dinner, and finally -- a 1991 ending -- a two-hour appearance in Philadelphia on the Home Shopping Network.
Each player will earn $10,000 for this last stint, on which they will sell autographed baseballs and pictures.


Senators Yield to Bush on the Israeli Aid Request
In an expected yet unusual setback for Israel and its advocates on Capitol Hill, Senators today formally acceded to President Bush's request for a 120-day postponement in considering Israeli loan guarantees.
While an overwhelming majority of 70 Senators sponsored the proposal to offer the $10 billion in guarantees to help resettle Soviet Jews, Senators Bob Kasten and Daniel K. Inouye declared that they would not force an embarrassing showdown with the White House.
The number of sponsors would have been enough to override a veto threatened by President Bush.


Actidev Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Quick &amp; Reilly Searches For a New Ad Agency
Quick &amp; Reilly Inc., New York, the discount brokerage, has begun a search for a new advertising agency, a spokesman said, confirming a report in this week's issue of Adweek.
Berenter Greenhouse &amp; Webster, Doremus &amp; Company, Grace &amp; Rothschild and Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, all of New York, have made presentations to the firm, the spokesman said, adding that billings were estimated at $3 million to $4 million.


Dynamic Classics Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Connecticut to Begin Layoffs


As Calm Returns, Zairian Leaders Bicker
A week after violence and looting broke out across Zaire, the guns have fallen silent and a fragile normality has returned.
But many Zairian officials and diplomats here say the new coalition Government of Etienne Tshisekedi seems confused and uncertain about how to deal with the crisis it has inherited.
Overriding much of the debate here is the question of how much power Mr.
Tshisekedi, the new Prime Minister, will actually wield.
And on the other hand, Kinshasa is rife with rumors about President Mobutu Sese Seko's future, much of it centering on whether he will indeed fulfill his committment to accept a power-sharing arrangement after 26 years of nearly absolute rule.


TV News Show Broadcasts Tapes
Excerpts of recorded conversations between Oliver L. North and Iranian government officials during key meetings over the secret arms sales to Iran in 1986 were broadcast tonight by ABC News.
The broadcast of the tapes on the program "Nightline" were the first time that the surreptitiously recorded conversations have ever been publicly played, but cast little new light on the arms-for-hostages deals.


Ameron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


CHRONICLE
The fathers of the jet engine, engineers who worked independently to develop the power plants that speed thousands of aircraft around the globe, will receive the world's single largest award for engineering, it was announced yesterday in Washington.
Officials of the National Academy of Engineering said at their annual meeting that the 1991 Charles Stark Draper Prize would go to SIR FRANK WHITTLE and DR.
HANS J. P. VON OHAIN for their invention and development of the jet engine 50 years ago.


TRANSACTIONS
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Signed Carl Herrera, forward.
INDIANA PACERS -- Signed Randy Wittman and Greg Grant, guards; Greg Dreiling, center; Doug Roth and Clifford Martin, forwards; and Sean Green, guard-forward.
NEW JERSEY NETS -- Waived Stanley Brundy, forward.
SACRAMENTO KINGS -- Signed Randy Brown, guard, to a 2-year contract.
WASHINGTON BULLETS -- Signed David Wingate, guard. Continental Basketball Association
ALBANY PATROONS -- Signed Marc Brown, guard.
GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Signed Andre Pate, guard, and Keven Davis, forward.
Obtained Anthony Jones, guard, from the Fort Wayne Fury for Doug Lee, guard, and future considerations.
HOCKEY National Hockey League
EDMONTON OILERS -- Traded Steve Smith, defenseman, to the Chicago Blackhawks for Dave Manson, defenseman, and a draft choice.
Traded Kenny Linseman, center, to the Toronto Maple Leafs for future considerations.
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Traded Dean Evason, center, to the San Jose Sharks for Dan Keczmer, defenseman.
MINNESOTA NORTH STARS -- Assigned Steve Maltais, left wing, to Kalamazoo of the International Hockey League.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Assigned Jeff Finley, defenseman, Hubie McDonough, center, and Brad Dalgarno, right wing, to Capital District of the American Hockey League; Brad Turner, defenseman, and Jeff Jablonski, left wing, to New Haven of the AHL; and Rob Vanderydt, left wing, and Paul Rutherford, center, to Richmond of the East Coast Hockey League.
Released Larry Melnyk, defenseman.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Sent Ric Bennett and Louie DeBrusk, left wings, to Binghamton of the American Hockey League.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Signed Bruce Shoebottom, defenseman, and assigned him to Preoria of the International Hockey League.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Returned John Slaney, defenseman, to Cornwall of the Ontario League.
Assigned Brent Hughes, left wing, to Baltimore of the American Hockey League.
East Coast Hockey League
JOHNSTOWN CHIEFS -- Signed Stan Reddick, goaltender.


Voting Irregularities Force a Rerun of a Primary in Crown Heights
Citing hundreds of irregularities in the original voting, a Brooklyn judge has ordered a rare rerun of a primary election between two Democratic candidates for the City Council in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
Election officials said they could not recall another such ruling in New York City history, but they added that reruns were also likely in two other extremely close races.


Panel in Bid to Revamp S.&amp; L. Bailout Funding
Frustrated by the Administration's repeated requests to continue financing the highly unpopular savings and loan bailout program, a Congressional panel narrowly approved a major financing change today that would require the Government to either raise taxes or cut other Federal programs to continue the rescue effort.
While the amendment, sponsored by Representative Joseph P. Kennedy 2d, Democrat of Massachusetts, still faces significant hurdles in both the House and Senate, today's 18-to-17 vote by a House banking subcommittee surprised many lawmakers and could mark the beginning of a Congressional revolt against the Bush Administration's approach to financing the bailout.


Corrections
A calendar listing on Saturday on the Sports Leisure page, about My First Tennis Tournament Series, a novice program for adults on Oct. 5-6, omitted the telephone number.
It is (718) 786-7602.


Macy Is Planning Store in Denver
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company said it planned to build a store in downtown Denver, its 148th Macy's department store.
The store, which is one of 12 new stores that Macy expects to open in the next five years, would be Macy's first in Denver.
It will anchor a new retail center being developed by the Taubman Company with the Denver Urban Renewal Authority.


Nets, Anderson Still Talking
Only a last-minute breakthrough in negotiations will prevent Kenny Anderson from missing the opening of the Nets' training camp tomorrow.
Willis Reed, the Nets' general manager, has tentatively scheduled a negotiating session with Anderson's attorney, Richard Howell, for today, either over the telephone or in Atlanta.


Corrections
An article yesterday about chronic fatigue syndrome included some erroneous references to a researcher from Hahnemann University in Philadelphia.
As the article said initially, he is Dr.
William A. Carter.


Orange Juice Prices Surge On Speculation About Crop
Orange juice futures prices rose sharply yesterday on the New York Cotton Exchange, amid speculation that next week's Government estimate for the new Florida orange crop may fall below expectations.
Frozen concentrated orange juice for November delivery leaped 2.70 cents a pound, to $1.2475.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Lendl Wins in Sydney  Three-time champion Ivan Lendl rallied yesterday to beat Scott Davis of the United States, 6-4, 6-7, 7-5, in the second round of the Australian Indoor championship in Sydney.
Davis served for the match at 5-4 of the final set, but Lendl reeled off three straight games to win the match.
Stefan Edberg, the United States Open champion, had no such problems, cruising to a 6-3, 6-4 victory over fellow Swede Peter Lundgren.
Edberg next faces Australia's Mark Woodforde, a 6-2, 4-6, 7-6 victor over 15th-seeded Wally Masur.
Pete Sampras and David Wheaton also advanced, but took contrasting routes to the third round.
Sampras, seeded third, had to struggle after a sluggish start before beating American Todd Nelson, 4-6, 6-1, 6-4, while the fifth-seeded Wheaton took only 59 minutes to defeat Australian Neil Borwick, 6-2, 6-3. (AP)


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 18


Pop/Jazz in Review
Gloria Estefan and Miami Sound Machine Madison Square Garden
While academics fight over multi-culturalism, Gloria Estefan and Miami Sound Machine are living it.
The group's first albums played down its Cuban background to make assimilated, American-style pop.
With "Conga" in 1985, the band added an extra dollop of salsa percussion and piano to its dance music, and its career skyrocketed.
Ever since, the group has affirmed its roots while aiming for the pop Top 10.


Jackpot Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Richardson Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Big Men Up Front Are Bolstering Jets
Mike Haight, the Jet left guard put on injured reserve with a knee injury Aug. 27, was eligible to come back last Sunday but was not activated.
He was moved up to the practice squad today and offensive tackle Mark Hayes was waived to make room.
But Coach Bruce Coslet was still in no great hurry to activate Haight for the Browns' game in Cleveland on Sunday.
"Check with me later in the week," was about the closest Coslet came to saying that Haight, the Jets' No. 1 draft choice out of Iowa in 1986, was part of the Jets' current picture.


Upper West Side Journal; Litter! Here! She Won't Stand for It!
As long as the Upper West Side has one dirty street, there will be no rest for Pat Hetkin.
"Why has there been an abandoned recycling dumpster at 100th and Riverside for a month?" she barked into the telephone, the most important weapon in her war on litter. 'Wouldn't you think someone at Sanitation would have noticed it in their wanderings?
It's outrageous!
Things like this drive me wild!"


Rotech Medical Corp. reports earnings for Year to July 31


Jordan a Grim Refuge for Kuwait Palestinians
Wafiya Mohammed al-Khatib rested her hand gently on the faded sofa she was sitting on, one of the few possessions she brought back from Kuwait.
"I guess I'll have to sell it too," she said.
"It's been with me since I married. Still, we have to eat."
Mrs.
Khatib, a Palestinian woman in her middle 50's, watched with sorrowful eyes as her elderly husband roamed around the tiny two-bedroom apartment they share with seven children, ignoring her guests.
"He has not been well, you know, after the events."


Super Rite Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Burton Berinsky, 60, Writer, Photographer and Hat Designer
Burton Berinsky, a freelance photographer who dabbled successfully in union organizing, writing and designing hats, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old.
He died of heart disease, his wife, Helene, said.


Home Video
Goldwyn Via HBO
Next week HBO the cable television operator will take another step as HBO the film and video company.
Having recently bought the rights to the 100-title library of the Samuel Goldwyn Company, HBO, which has long released videos from other film makers, will release its first seven Goldwyn titles, among them reissues of "The Secret Life of Walter Mitty" and "The Kid From Brooklyn," both with Danny Kaye.
Future releases will include Goldwyn's "Best Years of Our Lives" and an expanded director's cut of Tony Richardson's "Tom Jones," which is currently out of circulation.


Getting Youngsters to Question Television
To a lot of parents, television is the enemy.
They try to fight its influence on their children by restricting it, or even banning it altogether.
To Linda Ellerbee, that's censorship.
"I've heard a lot of proud, very well-intentioned parents saying things at parties like, 'I don't let my kids watch TV,' or 'I only let my kids watch PBS,' " the former network newswoman said.
"But you can't ignore TV. It's not going to go away. Most 5-year-olds start kindergarten with more than 1,500 hours of TV under their belts. They'll spend more time in front of the TV than in the classroom in all their 12 years in school."


Why Not Buy Into Mir Space Station?
To the Editor:
"Smaller Is Better in Space" (editorial, Sept. 20) points out the greater versatility of smaller projects, as is illustrated by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's proposed program changes.


U.S. Has No Plan to Ask for Direct Aid for Soviets
The Administration has no plans to ask Congress for any direct assistance to the Soviet Union other than humanitarian aid and technical advice over the next year, a State Department official said today.
Remarks by Robert B. Zoellick, the Under Secretary of State for Economic and Agricultural Affairs, before the House subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East appeared to indicate that the United States would not support such ventures as a special fund to make the ruble freely convertible into other currencies.
Echoing President Bush, Mr.
Zoellick added, "On the humanitarian side, we will be there as necessary."


Study Finds a Decline in Breast-Feeding
Breast-feeding has declined significantly in the United States over the last few years, reversing a trend that began in the 1950's, a new study has found.
"This is a very dangerous trend," said Dr.
David Rush, a nutrition specialist at Tufts University, a co-author of the study.
"Breast-feeding is very advantageous to the child even in Western, affluent societies."


Prices of Treasury Issues Drop
Treasury bond prices fell in a quiet session yesterday, weighed down by a Government report showing a surprising jump in home sales in August, an indication that the real estate sector is picking up.
But the downward move was tempered by anxiety about the key unemployment report due tomorrow, which will provide the first official look at the economy's performance in September.
Economists have said that if the jobs report is especially weak, the Federal Reserve could be prompted to cut interest rates to spur the recovery.
The August unemployment rate was 6.8 percent.
Waiting for Numbers
"Everybody is waiting for the jobs numbers Friday, which may or may not give the Fed an excuse to ease," said Jay Goldinger, a fixed-income specialist at Capital Insight, a Beverly Hills, Calif., investment firm.


Vietnam Agrees to Forced Return Of Its Citizens From Asian Camps
Vietnam has tentatively agreed to accept the forced return of tens of thousands of Vietnamese refugees now held in camps throughout Southeast Asia, diplomats and refugee workers said today.
The decision, a major policy reversal for Vietnam, would allow nations housing Vietnamese refugees to send them home by force if they are determined to have fled their country for economic reasons, rather than out of a well-founded fear of persecution.


Better Playing Through Chemistry?
The Giants held a potentially explosive team meeting today, and no one screamed.
Outsiders say there is a problem in the team chemistry, but coach and players say there is not.


A Woman Held In Child Abuse Faults Officials
A lawyer for a woman charged with torturing her 8-year-old daughter in the Bronx accused the city yesterday of failing to adequately supervise the family -- even though the woman had a prior criminal conviction for assaulting a 5-year-old boy.
After the woman, Marilyn Carter, was released from prison in 1987 on the assault charge, she repeatedly asked the child welfare authorities for help in handling her daughter, but her requests went unanswered, Ms.
Carter's lawyer, Harvey Slovis, said after a hearing in the abuse case at Criminal Court in the Bronx.


CHC Helicopter reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CMS/Data Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Standoff Won't Help the Jobless
The distress of America's long-term unemployed offers a strong argument for reworking last year's Federal budget pact.
But unless the Democrats are prepared to brace the overall budget issue head on, their $6.4 billion bill to extend unemployment benefits won't fly.
President Bush and Congress agreed in good faith to abide by specific caps on defense and non-defense spending, and not to increase either category without offsetting cuts or new revenues.
Nor may they rob one category to fatten the other.


Cabletron Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Times to Appeal Judge's Barring Of Arbitration
The New York Times will appeal a Federal judge's ruling that it cannot compel its unionized pressmen to go to arbitration over staffing of a new plant, a spokeswoman for the newspaper said yesterday.
The judge, Lawrence M. McKenna of Federal District Court in Manhattan, ruled Tuesday that staffing levels at the newspaper's $450 million plant in Edison, N.J., are already specified in an existing agreement.
"The Times has demanded arbitration of what is not an arbitrable issue," Judge McKenna wrote.


For 8 'Classic' Crayons, An Active Retirement
This week Binney &amp; Smith Inc., the manufacturer of Crayola crayons, brought back eight colors from retirement, albeit temporarily.
Last year, with much hoopla, the company stopped using maize, violet blue, raw umber, orange yellow, blue gray, green blue, orange red and lemon yellow and replaced them with neon colors.
The crayons, now called "classics," will be packaged separately from a box of 64 in a special commemorative tin with notes about the crayons and their retirement, said Mark J. O'Brien, a company spokesman.
The tin will retail for $6.99 and be available until January.


Dollar Off in Quiet Trading; Gold Advances Worldwide
The dollar declined in quiet dealings on world currency markets yesterday.
Gold prices advanced worldwide.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold bullion for current delivery settled at $355.60 a troy ounce, up $1.40.
The Republic National Bank said gold rose $1 an ounce, to a late bid price of $355.


Eastern's Finance Chief Elected to Pan Am Post
For most of the year, Rolf S. Andresen has been doing the exacting job of unwinding the finances and disposing of the assets of Eastern Airlines, which is in bankruptcy liquidation.
But now, Mr.
Andresen is stepping into a new job where he is looking forward to adding up profits.
Yesterday, he was elected vice president and chief financial officer of Pan American World Airways.


ROMANIA'S LEADER VOWS FREER REINS
In an attempt to rescue Romania's reputation from the damage caused by riots in the capital last week, Romanian leaders pledged today to keep the country on the path toward a market-style economy under a caretaker Government drawn from several political parties.
Theodor Stolojan, a 48-year-old former Finance Minister named Tuesday to replace Petre Roman as Prime Minister, said at a news conference today that he would pursue the policies of Mr.
Roman's Government, while making adjustments "to quiet social content." He said he would propose a new multiparty cabinet to Parliament as soon as possible to run the country until the next elections, which are expected either this fall or next spring.


Senate Panel's Democrats Voice Skepticism on Choice for C.I.A.
After two straight days of testimony critical of Robert M. Gates, support for his nomination as Director of Central Intelligence began to weaken today among Democratic members of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence.
Even as the committee's Republican members sharply cross-examined witnesses critical of Mr.
Gates and attempted to discredit their testimony, the first clear indication of trouble came from a Democratic member, Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina, who said that he had intended to vote for the nomination but that now Mr.
Gates would have to persuade him all over again.  [ Excerpts from the hearing appear on page A22. ] Gates Must 'Pass the Test'
"Unless he changes my mind, after hearing him, I wouldn't vote for him, because I don't think it's in the best interests of the Central Intelligence Agency," said the South Carolina Democrat.


Eastern Environmental Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Congressmen Said to Be Dining on the House
Two veteran members of Congress today charged that many of their colleagues owed thousands of dollars in long overdue bills in the House restaurant, and said that if they did not pay up the debts should go to a collection agency and the names of the delinquent members be posted.
Representatives Pat Roberts, Republican of Kansas, and Mary Rose Oakar, Democrat of Ohio, made the proposal in a letter to the House Administration Committee, charging that $667,416 had been owed on June 6 to Service America, a company that ran the restaurants until August.
Mr.
Roberts said in a later interview that only $255,000 remained unpaid now, and Ms.
Oakar said that the bills had not been audited and that she did not know just how much was really owed now.


THE O.A.S. AGREES TO ISOLATE CHIEFS OF HAITIAN JUNTA
The Organization of American States agreed late tonight on a campaign of diplomatic pressure to isolate the new military junta in Haiti and restore the elected Government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
O.A.S. officials said they had agreed on a resolution calling for a suspension of all economic, commercial, diplomatic and military assistance to the coup leaders.
They also agreed that if these steps did not lead to a restoration of democracy, they would consider other measures, which they declined to specify at this time.


U.S. Not Planning to Ban Sleeping Pill
The most popular prescription sleeping pill in the world was banned yesterday in Britain because of safety concerns, but the United States Food and Drug Administration said it had no immediate intention to follow suit.
Although the drug, Halcion, has been the focus of a growing debate regarding its side effects over the last two years, health officials in this country were surprised by the British prohibition.
They said they knew of no new studies that would shed light on the medication, which has been linked at times with memory loss and violent behavior.


BUSH VOWS TO VETO NEW JOBLESS BILL
Vowing to veto a new bill extending jobless benefits, President Bush said today that he was "a little annoyed at the constant political pressure" about unemployment, civil rights and other issues, telling everyone that he still had not formally announced for re-election.
As he left the White House today on a three-state day trip mixing political fund raising with official events intended to promote his domestic policies in preparation for the 1992 campaign, Mr.
Bush seemed irritated that he was being increasingly treated as a candidate by the Democrats and in news reports, even though he has not declared himself in the race.


Becker Milk reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


DMR Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Wise Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Neogen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Music; Looking for Mozart in His Requiem
What were Mozart's feelings about death?
We have his testimony in the Requiem, which, according to the familiar account, he was actually composing on his deathbed.
But it was difficult to discern much from the performance given by Riccardo Muti and the Philadelphia Orchestra in Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night.
Nothing about the Requiem is obvious, and the conductor rarely let us get close enough to find out even that.
Though the Requiem is often referred to with great reverence as a musical last will and testament, it was left unfinished and was completed by Mozart's student Franz Xaver Sussmayer.
It is extraordinarily formal, archaic and distant, full of Baroque mannerisms, fugal imitations, choral declarations.
It is as if the Classical musical language had seemed to the composer too conversational and ordinary for its subject.


Lloyd K. Garrison, Lawyer, Dies; Leader in Social Causes Was 92
Lloyd K. Garrison, a lawyer from a distinguished family who built an extraordinary record of individual achievement and public service, died at his home in Manhattan.
He was 92 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Builders Express Inc., San Antonio, a warehouse-type retail home center, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.  *
Chipwich Inc., New York, a frozen foods company, agreed to acquire about 50 percent of the outstanding shares and 80 percent voting control of Best of the Best Inc., a frozen meals company, and Dinner Express Inc., a catering company.


Pay Safeguards In Bank Merger
Twenty-nine top executives of the Chemical Banking Corporation would be protected against pay cuts for three years if shareholders approved the company's merger with the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation, a Securities and Exchange Commission filing said.
In addition, 18 executives of Manufacturers are virtually assured of lucrative farewell packages if they lose their jobs in the deal, according to the filing, which the American Banker reported Tuesday.


LoJack Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Analogic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


How C.I.A. Invented Soviet Military Monster; Record of Failure
To the Editor:
The search for a smoking gun in the Robert M. Gates confirmation hearings for Director of Central Intelligence is pointless.
It is clear that, if Mr.
Gates did not know about the Iran-contra affair, the reason was he deliberately kept himself ignorant.


Woman Files Age-Bias Suit Against Agency for the Aging
A 21-year employee of the New York City Department for the Aging filed suit yesterday charging that she was dismissed because of her age and accusing the department of "a systematic pattern and practice of firing and forcing out the older employees."
The former employee, Joyce Stratton, headed an information and referral bureau, where elderly people could learn how to apply for food stamps or get other benefits.


Files Show Bronx Baby Died From Child Abuse
An 8-month-old Bronx infant died of suspected child abuse Tuesday night, 10 hours after a man had called a state hot line with a tip that the child was being mistreated.
According to documents obtained by The New York Times, an operator with the state's child abuse and maltreatment hot line, who was following Social Services Department procedures, took only cursory information about the abuse allegation when a caller made contact at 1:02 P.M..


I.B.M. Now Apple's Main Ally
Apple Computer and I.B.M. today signed the contract to create the much-heralded alliance that executives promised would "change the landscape of computing in the 90's."
But don't look for mountains to rise and rivers to change course just yet.
In announcing details of their agreement at a news conference here, the one-time archrivals indicated that the fruits of their joint labors would not appear for two to four years in most cases, and that the biggest impact would not come until the second half of the decade, later than had been anticipated when the alliance was announced this summer.


Micro Bio-Medics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Taylor Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Wolf Financial Group reports earnings for Year to June 30


Excerpts From Senate Hearing on Nomination of C.I.A. Chief
Following are excerpts from the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence's hearing on the nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence, as transcribed by the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a private transcription service.
Among the Senators on the panel were David L. Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma; Warren B. Rudman, Republican of New Hampshire; John H. Chafee, Republican of Rhode Island; John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia, Ernest F. Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina, and Dennis DeConcini, Democrat of Arizona.
Among the witnesses were Jennifer L. Glaudemans, former Central Intelligence Agency analyst,
and Douglas MacEachin, Chief of the Arms Control Intelligence Staff for the C.I.A., who both gave opening statements today, and
Harold P. Ford, a former member of National Intelligence Council who is now a C.I.A. contract employee, and Melvin A. Goodman, a former C.I.A analyst, who both gave opening statements on Tuesday.
COMMENTS BY SENATOR BOREN
The American people, in many ways, are getting their first real glimpse into the intelligence community through these hearings.
They're seeing, perhaps in a more detailed way, how the intelligence community really operates than they've ever seen before.
They've learned about the fact that, in many ways, the C.I.A. is not one agency, but two -- that there's a very distinct difference between the operations side of the agency and the intelligence analysis side of the agency.


Review/Music; The Amato Opera's 'Figaro'
Like many bigger opera companies, the Amato Opera is commemorating the bicentennial of Mozart's death this year, and to do so it is framing its 44th year with Mozart operas.
Its first offering of the season is a new production of "The Marriage of Figaro," which runs through Oct. 13.
It plans to close its season with "The Magic Flute" in May.
Between those Mozartean bookends, the company is offering Bizet's "Carmen," Puccini's "Boheme" and Verdi's "Forza del Destino," in their original languages.
This "Figaro" is sung in English, and like all Amato productions, it is performed with revolving casts.
The singers who performed on Sunday afternoon were variably endowed but generally talented.
And the production itself has many endearing qualities.
Its sets and costumes, by Richard Cerullo, are attractive and economical, and convey a sense of an 18th-century Spanish palace.
And because the theater (319 Bowery, at Second Street) is so compact, Anthony Amato's stage direction sometimes has the action spilling into the aisles.


How C.I.A. Invented Soviet Military Monster
To the Editor:
A Sept. 26 front-page article reports the accusation before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence by Melvin Goodman, former Central Intelligence Agency analyst, that Robert M. Gates, the nominee for Director of Central Intelligence, suppressed dissent within the agency and slanted intelligence conclusions to support Administration policies.


Lakers Get Threatt From Seattle
The Los Angeles Lakers acquired guard SEDALE THREATT from the Seattle SuperSonics yesterday in exchange for second-round draft choices in 1994, 1995 and 1996.
They also waived center MYCHAL THOMPSON and guard LARRY DREW .


Sherry and Fahey Are Out
In a shakeup focusing on one of the team's major failings this year -- the pitching corps -- the San Francisco Giants fired pitching coach NORM SHERRY and third-base coach BILL FAHEY yesterday.


BRIEFS
Debt *
New Jersey Economic Development Authority series A $46.2 million 6 3/4 percent issue was won by Dillon, Read, competitively, and priced to yield 6.9 percent with a maturity of 30 years.
Ratings are A3 by Moody's and BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Helian Health Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


SUNY's Gay Rights Dilemma
The military's policy of barring gays and lesbians from active service puts college administrators in a tough spot.
If they permit military recruiters on campus, as most do, they appear to encourage discrimination that has no evident benefit for national security.
But if they bar military recruiters, they risk violating state and Federal laws.
They could also lose scholarships and research funds if the Pentagon chose to sever ties.
The issue was raised sharply when New York State's Division of Human Rights ruled, in a case filed by a lesbian law student, that the State University's Buffalo campus must refrain from providing space or other help to military recruiters.
Aiding the recruiters, the division said, violates Gov.
Mario Cuomo's executive order that bars state agencies from discriminating against homosexuals in hiring or use of state resources.


Foreman Settles Suit With Holyfield
Heavyweight GEORGE FOREMAN has settled a $100 million lawsuit he filed against champion EVANDER HOLYFIELD and Holyfield's promoter.
The suit contended that Holyfield and his promoter breached a contract worth more than $20 million and forced Foreman to drop negotiations for a $20 million fight against MIKE TYSON .
Terms of the settlement were reached Tuesday and were not released, The Houston Chronicle reported yesterday.


Davis Cup Final Set for Lyon
Yannick Noah, captain of France's Davis Cup team, informed the United States Tennis Association yesterday that next month's cup final between France and the defending champion United States would be played in Lyon on a fast Supreme court surface.
The matches will be held at an 8,300-seat arena, from Nov. 29 through Dec. 1.
The American team has not been selected.


Triple Threat Enterprises reports earnings for Year to June 30


Interco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 8


Horizon Healthcare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Concurrent Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Minority-Group Hirings: A Poor Record Gets Worse
As is all too typical in major league baseball's circles of authority, when a crisis arises, a lot of heat and all too little light is ultimately the result of what should otherwise be healthy debate.
It happens constantly in matters of labor relations, umpire-player disputes, league vs. league imbroglios.
So is it any wonder that baseball executives from the new franchises in Miami and Denver have taken to the barricades in defense of hiring practices that are shockingly similar to the "old boy" network used by most of the 26 established clubs?


S.O.I. Industries Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Kerkorian Invests More In Chrysler
Kirk Kerkorian, the Los Angeles financier, increased his bet on the Chrysler Corporation's future by buying six million shares of the struggling auto maker's new stock offering this week.
Mr.
Kerkorian's holding company, the Tracinda Corporation, said the purchase was made to maintain his stake in Chrysler stock at 9.8 percent, a stake he acquired last year.
Mr.
Kerkorian plans to remain a passive investor, a spokesman said.
"Tracinda likes Chrysler as an investment, particularly the way Lee Iacocca is managing Chrysler," he added.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
AT 24 years of age, the young man is still fighting a battle for independence that most children finish in adolescence.
When he left for college six years ago, his mother insisted he call home every day.
He refused, so she called him.
Even though he is now out of school, employed and living on his own, he still hears her daily critiques of his social life and job performance.
"This is a mother who literally leads her life through her children," said Dr.
Matti Gershenfeld, a psychologist and an adjunct professor at Temple University in Philadelphia, who treated the family.
The young man has decided that enough is enough.
He's taking a sabbatical from his mother.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Atlantic Records Co., Los Angeles, a Time Warner unit, named Sylvia Rhone chairman and chief executive of its new division, ATCO/East West Records.
The subsidiary combines ATCO Records and East West Records America. *
First Savings Bank, Greenville, S.C., said H. Ray Davis, the chief executive, would retire July 1.
His successor will be Luther C. Boliek, the president and chief operating officer.


Cosmopolitan Planning To Publish Special Issue
Is there life after college?
Cosmopolitan magazine hopes so, as it prepares to publish a special issue by that name.
Due out in February, Cosmopolitan's Guide to Life After College has the potential to become a regular twice-a-year publication, said Seth Hoyt, vice president and publisher of the Hearst Magazines monthly.
Hearst often publishes single issues of magazines to test their feasibility as regular offerings.


Brothers Kidnapped Six Weeks Ago Are Found on Airport Service Road


Tax-Free Fund Yields Up; Taxables Down
Yields of tax-free and taxable money market funds continued to move in opposite directions for the week ended yesterday, with tax-free yields moving up and the yields on taxables heading down.
Walter S. Frank, chief economist for IBC/Donoghue's, which monitors the funds and issues the Money Fund Report, said that "the prices of tax exempts are coming down and yields are going up."


Review/Dance; A Fresh Approach to Classicism From the San Francisco Ballet
The rebirth of the San Francisco Ballet under Helgi Tomasson's leadership is one of the spectacular success stories of the arts in America.
To reveal a not-so-well-kept secret, the company arrived in total triumph at the City Center on Tuesday night for a weeklong run.
It is not so much what this troupe dances, but how it dances, that matters.
New Yorkers will see for the first time the grand style and freshness that make this virtually new crop of dancers from California the most exciting ballet visitors to New York in decades.


Traffic Alert
Nigerian Parade: Madison Avenue will be closed tomorrow between 46th and 56th Streets from noon to 3 P.M.
Corporate Challange Finals: Park Avenue will be closed tomorrow between 29th and 56th Streets from 9 A.M. to 10 P.M.


Sounds Around Town
Masters of the Ud
Cinucen Tanrikorur and Simon Shaheen, Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street, Manhattan, (212) 545-7536.
A benefit concert for the World Music Institute will feature two well-known masters of the ud, a short-necked lute that is the most widely used insturment in Turkish and Arab classical music.
Cinucen Tanrikorur, a composer and teacher who was born in Istanbul, will perform instrumental and vocal Turkish music from the Ottoman Court and Sufi repertories.
Simon Shaheen is familiar to New York audiences for his performances as a soloist with the Near Eastern Music Ensemble.
Showtime is tomorrow at 8 P.M., and tickets are $15.
Karen Akers's Cabaret
Karen Akers, Cafe Carlyle, 35 East 76th Street, Manhattan, (212) 744-1600.
One of the most regal of cabaret singers, Karen Akers has grown dramatically as an expressive interpreter in the last two years.
She has returned to the Cafe Carlyle with a partly new act.
The fresh material includes "Unchained Melody," "Here I'll Stay" (from the Kurt Weill-Alan J. Lerner show "Love Life") and "Back on Base" (from the Richard Maltby Jr.-David Shire revue "Closer Than Ever").
Shows are at 9:30 and 11:30 tonight and tomorrow.
There is a $35 cover charge and a $10 minimum.
Sylvia Syms Sings Life
Sylvia Syms, Eighty Eight's, 228 West 10th Street, Manhattan, (212) 924-0088.
Like her friend and mentor Frank Sinatra, Sylvia Syms makes singing and life almost indivisible in whatever she chooses to interpret.
Her new show, "Endangered Species," concentrates on little-known songwriting gems and includes a segment featuring the lyrics of Marilyn and Alan Bergman.
Fred Hersch accompanies on piano and Loren Schoenberg on tenor saxophone.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 8:30 and on Sunday at 4 P.M.
There is a $20 cover charge and a two-drink minimum.


Abroad at Home; Corrupting The Process
The Senate hearings on Robert Gates's nomination to be Director of Central Intelligence have served history in a particular and important way.
They have opened a new window on the Reagan Administration's corruption of our governmental process.
The issue is of course not financial corruption.
It is something more internal and more menacing.
That is the deliberate distortion, by those sworn to tell the truth, of the facts on which the President of the United States must make fundamental foreign-policy decisions.


Vallone Offers New Plan To Tighten Ethics Rules
Two months after dropping a proposal for far-reaching background checks of the heads of New York City Council committees, Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone tried again yesterday, introducing a less-stringent measure aimed at certifying the integrity of his choices for leadership posts.
Mr.
Vallone has been under pressure from good-government groups to strengthen the Council's ethics rules after articles in The New York Times earlier this year raised questions about the propriety of the finances and fund raising of two committee chairman, Robert J. Dryfoos of Manhattan and Noach Dear of Brooklyn.


Review/Film; Unrepentant, Despite Tenants' Revenge
Drugs and danger would render "The Super" instantly unfunny, but they happen to be absent, because this is a fairy tale.
It concerns Louie Kritski (Joe Pesci), a proud second-generation slumlord who subscribes to the teachings of his father, Big Lou (Vincent Gardenia).
What are the three things that help a Kritski find new holdings at a good price, according to Big Lou?
"Death, divorce and destitution." And what does a Kritski do with a building once he buys one?
Big Lou's enthusiastic answer: "Nothing!"
Raised in this great tradition, Louie is understandably surprised when his failure to maintain decent standards at his own tenement lands him in a courtroom, and then under house arrest.
To the cheers of his tenants, who are black and Hispanic, the suburban-bred white Louie is sentenced to spend 120 days in his own building, in an apartment that has been advertised as a "furnished fifth-floor charmer with a view."


On My Mind; If Not Now, When?
Please consider the following two sets of facts.
Then answer a few questions about them.
First Set. 1.
Peacetime inspections by the United Nations atomic agency failed to spot Saddam Hussein's widespread nuclear weapons program.


Researchers Tie New Gene Defects To Cause of Alzheimer's Disease
Just eight months after researchers found the first genetic defect that causes Alzheimer's disease, another research group has found, in precisely the same spot, a second defect that causes the disease.
The new finding, which is being reported today in Science magazine, will soon be joined by a report of yet a third genetic defect at the same spot on the same gene that also causes Alzheimer's disease.
Dr.
John Hardy of St.
Mary's College in London, who found the first gene defect, will report the third one in a few weeks, according to his collaborator, Dr.
Allen Roses of Duke University.


O'Brien Is Looking Beyond His Statistics
It has not been a banner season thus far for Jets quarterback Ken O'Brien.
His 946 yards passing and two touchdowns are his lowest total in the first five games since he became a starter in 1985.
In the first five games of that year, O'Brien threw for 962 yards and five touchdowns.
To O'Brien's way of thinking, success is not measured in statistics.


U.N. Starts Helicopter Flights To Find Missile Sites in Iraq
United Nations inspectors flew helicopter missions to search for Scud missile sites in Iraq for the first time today, United Nations officials here said.
"The helicopters lifted off this morning on their first operational mission in the country," said Alastair Livingston, chief of field operations for the United Nations special commission that is overseeing the scrapping of Iraqi weapons of mass destruction.


Suit Says a Swim Club Is Biased Against Blacks
The New York State Attorney General today filed a civil suit against a private swimming club accusing it of excluding black applicants for membership.
The investigation began after a white woman said club officials told her that a black baby sitter would have to wear a uniform to enter the club.


N.H.L. Again Signs Contract With SportsChannel America
Just hours before the first face-off of the new season yesterday, the National Hockey League announced a national television contract with a cable network that will pay less than one-third of the money involved in the previous deal.
This season's games will again appear on SportsChannel America, which had held the rights for the previous three seasons.
The previous deal was for $51 million, an average of $17 million per season.
The new contract, for one year only, is worth $5.5 million.


Art in Review
Robert Yarber Lieberman &amp; Saul Gallery 155 Spring Street SoHo Through Oct. 12
The California artist Robert Yarber is best known for his paintings of people, usually couples, falling out of windows at night.
Rendered in broad strokes of bright color, these images have a high-key, cartoony lyricism, with his lumpy figures floating languidly above the glowing cityscapes below.
With this show, Mr.
Yarber joins the swelling ranks of painters, notably David Salle and Eric Fischl, who have begun to exhibit the photographs on which they base their pictures.


Dow Plummets 27.73 to Finish at 2,984.79
Investors' fears over corporate profits sent stocks down sharply yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average falling below 3,000 for the first time in three weeks.
Lower earnings forecasts by analysts caused a few individual stocks to tumble.
The Dow, under pressure from a selloff in technology issues and sharp drops in a number of Dow stocks because of the forecasts of worse-than-expected earnings, fell 27.73 points, to 2,984.79, its lowest level since Sept. 10, when it closed at 2,982.56.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a judge's decision to rerun a Democratic primary election in the 40th City Council District in Brooklyn misstated the date of the new election.
It will be Oct. 22.


Auctions
Avedon's Dovima
One of Richard Avedon's 1955 Paris photographs of the model Dovima with elephants -- among the most widely known fashion images -- is to be auctioned in a sale at 10:15 A.M. and 2 P.M. on Wednesday at Sotheby's in New York.
The photograph shows the aristocratic Dovima in a strapless white gown and long black gloves, posed between two elephants whose trunks are lifted at exactly the same angle as her upraised arms.


Some Suburban Renewal for Devils After the Foundation Disappears
The Devils have undergone a great deal of renovation as they enter their 10th season in New Jersey, a season that will start without four players who as recently as last season were considered part of the foundation of the franchise.
With Sean Burke out of the picture, the departures of Kirk Muller and Brendan Shanahan, and the injury to John MacLean, who is expected to be out anywhere from six weeks to a year, the Devils are left with only one solid goaltender and without their three leading scorers from last season.


CHRONICLE
Think of BOB HOPE , and the image of servicemen at holiday time comes to mind.
So it is probably no surprise that the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis, Md., has named a new arts center for him.
Tomorrow afternoon, Mr.
Hope and his wife, DOLORES HOPE , and two of their four children are to be on hand for the dedication of the Bob Hope Performing Arts Center in the new Alumni Hall.
The 88-year-old comedian seemed nonplused yesterday as he talked about the occasion.


New York Shifts on Welfare: Education Stressed Over Jobs
In a little-noticed but pivotal shift in New York City's welfare-to-work program, the Dinkins administration has changed a strategy of quickly placing welfare mothers in mostly low-paying jobs in favor of a more expensive -- and as yet unproven -- investment in education and training.
The city's Human Resources Administrator, Barbara J. Sabol, is betting that teaching thousands of women on welfare reading and a variety of skills will eventually lead them out of poverty into higher-paying jobs, improving their chances of staying off the welfare rolls and thus saving taxpayers money in the long run.


Review/Film; Ken Russell On a Day In 'the Life'
Though the casting is not perfect, Theresa Russell, an actress with a good deal of class about her, gives a credible performance as Liz, a Los Angeles streetwalker, in "Whore," the surprisingly plain new movie by Ken Russell (who is not related to his star).
Adapted by Mr.
Russell and Deborah Dalton from an English play, "Whore" is about one day in the life of the title character.
Intercut with Liz's testimony, spoken directly to the camera, are flashbacks that show how she got into "the life" and how a pimp named Blake took control of her earnings.


Sophia Loren Recalls a Beloved Paisan
Sophia Loren made more than a dozen films with Vittorio De Sica, and her memory of him on the set suggests that his performances behind the camera were just as vivid as those on film.
"De Sica was an actor, and his way of directing other actors was to show them what he wanted," Miss Loren said in a phone conversation the other day.
"Instead of telling the scene, he was acting it for you. He did that for everybody, from the old lady to the sexy woman to the little kid. It was really a sight to see."
Miss Loren was in New York to introduce a special screening of "Two Women" at the Museum of Modern Art, part of a six-week retrospective of De Sica's films.
Made in 1960, "Two Women" was one of De Sica's few artistic accomplishments during that decade, and it changed Miss Loren's career.
She won an Academy Award for her performance as a mother who tries to escape the bombings of World War II with her 13-year-old daughter; both women are raped by soldiers on the road.
Like the film, Miss Loren's performance is strong, deeply pained and harrowing.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Lloyd K. Garrison, a New York civic leader and lawyer, misstated his age.
He was 93.


Salomon Will Sell Berkshire Notes
Salomon Brothers Inc. plans to sell $163.5 million in zero-coupon notes it owns in Berkshire Hathaway Inc., according to a registration statement filed by Berkshire Hathaway with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The shelf filing covers convertible subordinate notes of the company due in 2004.
No date for the sale has been set, a spokesman at Salomon said yesterday.


American Education Gets a C
A new Federal report says American students are doing as well as but no better than students did 20 years ago.
That may not be good enough for the demands of the next century, but it's not as bad as some might think.
There's been a broadening of educational opportunity, and blacks and Hispanics have made gains, if slowly.
The overall quality of education, however, certainly needs improvement.
That poses a challenge for President Bush and the state governors, who are committed to reaching a number of educational goals by the year 2000.
Unless they make it possible for all schools to achieve the standards and be held accountable, their rhetoric is meaningless.


Nadine Gordimer Is Winner Of Nobel Prize in Literature
Nadine Gordimer, whose novels of South Africa portray the conflicts and contradictions of a racist society, was named winner of the 1991 Nobel Prize in Literature today as her country finally begins to dismantle the system her works have poignantly explored for more than 40 years.
In a brief citation, the Swedish Academy, which confers the awards, referred to her as "Nadine Gordimer, who through her magnificent epic writing has -- in the words of Alfred Nobel -- been of very great benefit to humanity."


Nadine Gordimer Is Winner Of Nobel Prize in Literature
Nadine Gordimer, whose novels of South Africa portray the conflicts and contradictions of a racist society, was named winner of the 1991 Nobel Prize in Literature today as her country finally begins to dismantle the system her works have poignantly explored for more than 40 years.
In a brief citation, the Swedish Academy, which confers the awards, referred to her as "Nadine Gordimer, who through her magnificent epic writing has -- in the words of Alfred Nobel -- been of very great benefit to humanity."


B.S.B. Picks: No Visine. Nix.
Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, has decided it needs lice medicine more than eye drops.
The agency announced yesterday that it had decided to accept an integrated marketing assignment for Nix, a pediculicide made by the Burroughs Wellcome Company, though it would cost Backer another account: Pfizer's Visine eye drops.
Visine was at the agency 22 years, dating to the days of Ted Bates Advertising.


Clinton Enters Race for President


Excerpts From Questions and Answers at the Gates Hearing
Following are excerpts from questions and answers at a hearing by the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence into the nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence, as transcribed by the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a private transcription service.
Questions From Senator John Glenn Democrat of Ohio
Q. What was Casey's view of the papal assassination?


Yankees' Sophomore Sphinx May Have Answer to Riddle
Kevin Maas has had the type of season that made the Yankees worry and wonder.
They worried when the left-handed hitting Maas slumped terribly this summer and they wondered recently if he had finally snapped out of it.
Maas insists his problems have been solved.
He says it took him five months to realize that he was dropping his right shoulder and not keeping any weight on his back foot.
They sound like simple mistakes, and Maas concedes they are, but they bogged him down week after week until his average had dribbled to .209.
His failure to adjust to a steady stream of inside pitches added to his woeful numbers.


ABC Gives Up on Filling Time Slot After 'Nightline'
Citing a "bad economic environment," ABC said yesterday that it would abandon efforts to provide television shows to its affiliated stations in the late-night time period four nights during the week.
Phil Beuth, president of early-morning and late-night entertainment for ABC, said he had stopped trying to find a format to work in the time period beginning at midnight Monday through Thursday.
That slot comes after the ABC News program "Nightline."


Jumpy Troops Patrol a Frightened Haitian Capital
The streets of this city were largely abandoned today except for soldiers manning checkpoints near the smoldering ashes of the barricades mounted during the brief civilian resistance offered to Monday's army coup.
With the army's takeover of Haiti, diplomats today depicted the military leader Brig.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras as being largely captive of the ordinary soldiers who were patrolling streets, commandeering cars and threatening citizens.


Broten's Had Enough
Minnesota North Stars center NEAL BROTEN , who left to play in Germany when negotiations with his hometown team stalled, dropped his request for a no-trade contract yesterday and agreed to terms with the National Hockey League club.
"I just wanted to get on with it," he said.
"I felt we'd done all we could do to get the best contract possible. I figured enough's enough."


U.N. Stops Short of Haiti Resolution
The deposed President of Haiti, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, asked the United Nations Security Council tonight for help in restoring democracy to Haiti, but the Council stopped short of enacting a resolution condemning the military coup there.
Warning that similar takeovers could "murder democracy" elsewhere, President Aristide said "the threat to democracy in Haiti constitutes a threat to democracy throughout the world."


Padres Cast Their Fate to the Wind
The best advice Brett Butler ever received about playing center field in the fickle winds of Candlestick Park probably came from Willie Mays.
It was this: Study the trash.


Navy Blockade of Croatia Is Renewed
Yugoslavia's navy renewed a blockade of Croatia's ports today and tightened its hold on Dubrovnik.
Heavy fighting between Croatia's national guard and Serbian and federal army units raged for a third day.
In Belgrade, the four pro-Serbian members of the eight-person Yugoslav federal collective presidency announced that they had taken over powers belonging to the practically defunct federal Parliament.


Restaurants
Tatou
The era of smoke-fogged Manhattan supper clubs where uptown blues musicians sang their woes is all but a memory, gone down that same lonesome road as top hats, sazeracs and wooden dashboards.
Such mementos are usually impossible to revive, but four partners -- Alan and Mark Fleischman, Oren Stevens and Dezso Szonntagh -- set about doing just that, with impressive results.


Japanese Finance Chief Announces Resignation
Ryutaro Hashimoto, an ambitious politician who served as Finance Minister during two exceptionally turbulent years, announced today that he would resign to take responsibility for Japan's series of damaging financial scandals.
Mr.
Hashimoto offered his resignation to Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu but, as expected, was asked to remain in his post until after an important meeting of world financial leaders that begins next week in Bangkok, Thailand.
His experience over the last two years was considered important at this critical meeting, even though he would be a lame duck.


Rebels Begin Leaving Georgian Capital


U.S. Studying Philippines' Base Plan
Bush Administration officials said today that they were still seeking details of a Philippine Government plan to require American forces to withdraw from the Philippines by 1994.
The plan, a compromise agreement reached by the administration of President Corazon C. Aquino and opponents of the American military presence in the Philippines, puts the United States in an awkward position.
Privately, the Administration would prefer to maintain the Subic Bay Naval Station, the shipyard and supply depot on Luzon Island that serves the Navy's Seventh Fleet.
But a State Department official said today that Washington must avoid looking "like we're trying to muscle these guys."


Review/Art; Seurat and His Disciples
In the early 1880's, a young painter named Georges Seurat compressed the innovations of Impressionism into a more systematic organization of light, color and paint, and almost immediately found himself the leader of an art movement.
In 1886, when Seurat exhibited his first mature masterpiece, "Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte," the movement was christened Neo-Impressionism by the critic Felix Feneon.
Although highly original, Seurat was never completely alone in his endeavors; the basic tenets of Neo-Impressionism (or Pointillism as it was also called) were developed in tandem with his close friend Paul Signac.
After 1886, other artists joined their ranks, one of the first converts being the older Impressionist painter Camille Pissarro.
For many artists dissatisfied with the strategies of Impressionism and ready to put painting on a more scientific footing, Seurat's use of color theory and the delicate dotting technique by which he put his theories into artistic action were ideas whose time had come.


TRANSACTIONS
National Basketball Association  BOSTON CELTICS -- Signed Steve Scheffler, forward.


U.S. Bridge Teams Still in Japan Tourney
The NEC World Team Championships continued here Thursday with the four American teams holding their own in the battle to qualify for playoffs beginning Saturday.
But none of them can feel secure.
In the Bermuda Bowl for Open Teams, the United States 1 team lost two matches and won one narrowly Thursday, but is expected to cling to the fourth and last qualifying position in Group W. The standings: first, Iceland, 218.25 victory points; second, Britain, 199; third, Argentina, 194.25; fourth, United States 1, 179.5; fifth, Venezuela, 166; sixth, Australia, 158.25; seventh, Egypt, 154.75; eighth, Japan, 146.


Repairing Sidewalks: 2 Cries of Outrage
Complaints about New York City's sidewalk-repair program are legion.
Some property owners are dismayed by what they think are overcharges.
Others say they feel like the victims of a scam.
Here are two cases:
Gordon M. Imrie, a magazine executive who lives in a brownstone on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, was puzzled last month when he received a notice from an engineering company stating that a crack in his sidewalk was a "trip hazard" and that he had 30 days to replace 65 square feet of sidewalk or a company would do it and bill him about $300.


HOUSE WILL CLOSE ITS MEMBERS' BANK AND OPEN INQUIRY
Responding to a torrent of criticism, Speaker Thomas S. Foley announced today that the bank for members of the House of Representatives would be closed by the end of the year.
He also said the records of members' bad checks would be sent to the House ethics committee, which will determine if there were "significant, substantial, repeated abuses."
Mr.
Foley's announcement, ratified later by a vote in the House, was the second move in a week by the House leadership to still an issue that has embarrassed and angered representatives and infuriated constituents.


Review/Film Festival; How a Zombie Became One With Alcohol and Self-Pity
Zombie (Silu Seppala), the central figure in Mika Kaurismaki's "Zombie and the Ghost Train," really looks the part.
With his pasty skin, dark-ringed eyes and matted black hair, he seems to have joined the ranks of the living dead, and so Mr.
Kaurismaki does what he can to explain how Zombie got that way.
This Finnish film, most of which is structured as a flashback, divides itself between observing Zombie with a cool, bemused eye and seriously contemplating the alcoholism that has contributed to his decline.


Editor at Life Magazine Named Publisher, Also
Departing from its tradition of keeping the editorial and publishing sides of its magazines separate, the Time Inc.
Magazine Company announced yesterday that James R. Gaines, the managing editor of Life magazine, would also become its publisher.
Mr.
Gaines, a former managing editor of People magazine and the managing editor of Life since September 1988, succeeds Katherine M. Bonniwell.
She will become vice president for magazines, a new position, for the company's New York Magazine division on Nov. 1.


Lindros Remains A Junior Sensation
It looks as if ERIC LINDROS , the 18-year-old junior hockey sensation, is going to be a 19-year-old junior hockey sensation and then a 20-year-old junior hockey sensation before he gets a chance to become a National Hockey League sensation.
Lindros, the year's top draft choice, has said all along that he would rather continue at the junior level than sign with the Quebec Nordiques, the team that drafted him.
The Nordiques have said all along that they would let him stay in the juniors rather than give him what he wants, a trade to a contending team in a larger, more commercially compatible city.


Corrections
A report on Monday in the Magazine Notes column of Business Day, about a new Japanese-language magazine called Japanese Lifestyle/ USA, referred incorrectly to an advisory board.
It will not include representatives from the Japanese Consulate.


INSIDE
Salvador Attacks Rebels
A week after reaching a peace accord with rebels, the Salvadoran armed forces began bombarding a volcano that the guerrillas have held for nearly 12 years.
Page A9.
Backing for Thomas Grows
As Senate debate on his Supreme Court nomination began, support for Judge Clarence Thomas edged beyond a bare majority.
Page A16.
Gorbachev's Capitalist Deal
HarperCollins scored a publishing coup.
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev sold his account of the August putsch for a reported $500,000.
Page D1.
William Shea Dies at 84
William A. Shea, the stadium's namesake and the lawyer who brought National League baseball back to New York City, is dead.
Page D16.


EXECUTIVES
*
J.
I.
Case Co., Racine, Wis., an agricultural and industrial equipment-making subsidiary of Tenneco Inc., named Peter Menikoff executive vice president, effective Nov. 1.
He had previously been a corporate vice president and treasurer at Tenneco. *
Hoyts Cinema Corp., Boston, named Morris Englander president.
He will also remain chief operating officer.


BRIEFS
*
Asea Brown Boveri Inc., Stamford, Conn., a power-generator company and unit of Asea Brown Boveri A.B. of Sweden, received a contract for more than $14 million from New England Power Co. to upgrade the oil-powered Salem Harbor power plant in Massachusetts. *
Banta Corp., Menasha, Wis., a video services concern, agreed in principle to sell a substantial portion of its Editel post-production division to Unitel Video Inc., New York, for $19 million in cash, notes and securities and the assumption of liabilities.


Is Strike the Gold Tired? Don't Ask Zito About It
They call him Boyfriend around Barn 9 at Belmont Park, probably because he is the star of the show, the dude, the horse who won the Kentucky Derby five months ago tomorrow.
But he is more like the club pro.
Also, the chief survivor of the battles of 1991 among the country's classy 3-year-old colts.
Every time they run one of those big races, he's out there giving it a shot.
He is Strike the Gold, the chestnut son of Alydar, the horse with three feuding owners and three jockeys in his last three races.
And he'll be out there again tomorrow running against four older horses in the $850,000 Jockey Club Gold Cup.


No Go for Connors vs. Seles
With a million dollars at stake and Jimmy Connors supposedly lying in wait, Monica Seles is expected to announce today from Milan that she is no longer an active contender in a winner-takes-most battle of the sexes tentatively scheduled for March 7 in Las Vegas, Nev.
And Connors wouldn't have been there to trade rallies with her, anyway.
According to his agent, Ray Benton, Connors lost interest in the extravaganza once his stunning run to the United States Open semifinal proved that he was on the cusp of a legitimate comeback.


CHRONICLE
BROOKE ASTOR will receive the Hadrian Award, given by the World Monuments Fund for the preservation and appreciation of art and architecture, on Oct. 25 at the Pierre.
Mrs.
Astor was selected because of her efforts to restore the New York Public Library and to create the Astor Court at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Many Overcharged for Sidewalk Repairs
Many New York City property owners have been overcharged hundreds or thousands of dollars each for shoddy and unnecessary sidewalk repairs under a decades-old system that gives sweeping authority to private contractors to cite violations and has led to widespread complaints of confusion and possible corruption, city officials said yesterday.
"This is an area we identified over a year ago as having high corruption potential," the city's Transportation Commissioner, Lucius J. Riccio, said at a news conference as he declared a moratorium on all sidewalk repair contracts pending revisions in a program that has allowed contractors wide latitude with no incentives to hold down costs and left property owners angry and frustrated.


S.E.C. Report Attacks Big Drexel Bonuses
Even as Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. was hurtling toward bankruptcy, it raised its top officers' pay, a report released yesterday by the Securities and Exchange Commission found.
The report, the result of a study the commission began last year to examine Drexel's payment of $208 million in cash bonuses shortly before its collapse, sharply criticized the payments.
But the report concluded that Drexel had done nothing illegal in making them.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the highest-paid New York City employees included an erroneous report supplied by the Comptroller concerning the second-highest-paid.
He was a Health Department doctor who worked in clinics in city jails, not a Correction Department employee.


Child-Abuse Line Called So Busy Action Is Delayed
The statewide hot line meant to prevent child abuse is so overtaxed that dozens of callers on any given day may be told that their reports cannot be acted on instantly unless they involve a child in immediate danger, state social services officials said.
The process is known as call screening, and state officials defend it as an efficient, if not flawless, means of handling a surging volume of child-abuse reports.
But the death of an 8-month-old Bronx infant on Tuesday, some 10 hours after hot line workers gave low priority to a call about the baby, has raised questions about whether call screening is better characterized as effective triage or risky roulette.


Advertising; Commercial Clutter Up On Big Three Networks
If you think you have been seeing more commercials on television lately, a report issued yesterday confirms that impression.
The report, released by two leading organizations representing advertising agencies and advertisers, concludes that once again the nation's television networks have increased the amount of time devoted to things other than programs.


At the Movies
Wondering what Eddie Murphy's going to do next, now that he's signed that zillion-dollar deal with Paramount Pictures?
Ask the producer who knows, Brian Grazer, the co-chairman, with Ron Howard, of Imagine Films Entertainment, and a producer in his own right.
It's "Boomerang," which goes before the cameras in New York City beginning Nov. 6.
"It's a role-reversal comedy in the spirit of, say, 'Tootsie,' Mr. Grazer said. "It is completely based on an Eddie Murphy story and idea, and it's being directed by Reggie Hudlin, who directed 'House Party,' and I'm producing with the two Hudlin brothers," he added, referring to Reginald and Warrington Hudlin.


Conservative Swedish Parties Taking Over From Socialists
A conservative coalition Government headed by Prime Minister Carl Bildt took office today, after his strong election showing Sept. 15 on a platform of weaning Sweden from the Socialist welfare state.
Mr.
Bildt's Moderate Party won 21.9 percent of the vote, enabling him to put together a four-party coalition with 170 seats in Parliament, against 154 for former Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson's Social Democrats, who had dominated Swedish politics since World War II.
The coalition does not have a majority in Parliament, and took office today only after the New Democracy Party, with 25 seats, abstained.


DeOssie Facing Charges In Texas
Steve DeOssie, the Giants' inside linebacker, was arrested Monday in a parking lot of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport and charged with possession of drug paraphernalia.
Today, DeOssie said he was a victim of his bad judgment.
He attributed that to having been an alcoholic for 10 or 11 years.
"At times," he said, "alcohol has led me to do some stupid things."


Haiti's Coup: Test Case for Bush's New World Order
The coup in Haiti has put the Bush Administration and its talk of a new world order on the spot: can it do any less to restore a democratically elected Government next door in the Caribbean than it did to put a feudal monarch back on the throne in Kuwait?
Administration officials insist that ultimately the answer is no, and they have begun using the same sorts of warnings vis-a-vis Haiti that they used before the intervention to liberate Kuwait.
But Haiti is not Kuwait, and the Caribbean is not the Persian Gulf.


Educators to Study Utilization (Use) of Plain English
With more than 10,000 letters a year sent out over his signature and countless memos crossing his desk, Thomas Sobol is the Commissioner of a State Education Department of many words.
Far too many words, he believes.
Words like this: "Careful operationalization of this policy is needed in order to avoid the pitfall of goal displacement." And, "Existing variance procedures should be examined with regard to their potential for extension to circumstances not currently within their scope."


Jaquelin Hume, 86, Dried Food Producer And Philanthropist
Jaquelin Holliday Hume, a pioneer in the dehydrated food business, a philanthropist and a major political donor to Ronald Reagan, died Tuesday in San Francisco.
Mr.
Hume, known as Jack, was 86 years old and a resident of San Francisco.
He died of complications of cancer and a stroke, his family said.


Ewing Talks: No Regrets, and Now, No Problems
Breaking months of silence, Patrick Ewing addressed the news media today and did his best to put his tumultuous summer to rest.
He insisted that he never demanded to be traded, said that he harbored no ill feelings toward Knick management and vowed to play with the same fire and determination that has made him a perennial All-Star.
All of that was good news for the Knicks, who open training camp here Friday, their first under the regime of Coach Pat Riley.
But how will Ewing be received by Knick fans?
Will the recent personnel moves, plus Riley's leadership, move Ewing and the Knicks any closer to a championship?


The Transformation of a Klansman
"Surprising best sellers often provide publishing's sweetest stories," began a story that appeared in USA Today on Tuesday about the nonfiction paperback hit of the summer, "The Education of Little Tree."
First published in 1976 by Delacorte Press and reprinted in 1986 by the University of New Mexico Press, the late Forrest Carter's gentle memoir of his Native American childhood has remained in first or second place on The New York Times paperback best-seller list for 14 weeks.


Money Shortage Seen as Hindering Indian Justice
Most state supreme court judges work in grand buildings with marble floors and spacious courtrooms.
They have law degrees, law clerks to help research any knotty questions, and easy access to books on the previous rulings their courts have issued.
But Chief Justice Tom Tso of the Navajo Nation Supreme Court in Window Rock, Ariz., works every day in a wooden trailer.
He has no law degree, although he is well versed in Navajo Indian laws.
He shares a law clerk, known as a solicitor, with two other justices.
And legal research on precedents is difficult because, due to lack of money, the volume reporting the past three years of judgments in the Indian tribal court system never went to press.


Excerpts From Gates's Testimony on His Record at the C.I.A.
Following are excerpts from remarks made today by Robert M. Gates, the President's nominee to head the Central Intelligence Agency, as transcribed by the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a private transcription sevice.
Mr.
Gates was responding to
accusations that as a senior C.I.A. official in the mid-1980s he sought to tailor intelligence analyses of global events to support the Reagan Administration's foreign-policy agenda.
I think one of the lessons that the committee has already learned is that one thing all analysts have in common is some difficulty with brevity.
And I will say that today I appear before you in substantial measure as an analyst, and I'm afraid I will be guilty of the same crime.
. . .
The committee's experience this last week with this subject of politicization in many ways reflects my own.
This issue, as I indicated two weeks ago, has dogged American intelligence for decades.
Indeed, I included in my answers to your interrogatories a long message to all analysts that I wrote on politicization back in 1985. . . .


More Punishment Doesn't Decrease Crime; The Leo Frank Bill
To the Editor:
In urging Congress to adopt the Administration's crime bill (Op-Ed, Sept. 24), Acting Attorney General William P. Barr offers quick-fix solutions to the country's crime problem.
Unfortunately, these simple responses will only exacerbate the problem of court delay while undermining the constitutional rights of all citizens.


A Brooklyn Hospital Draws New Inquiry After Inmate's Death
A mentally ill prison inmate was found dead last month after being restrained by eight unsupervised nurses' aides in a locked ward at Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn, hospital officials say.
The city's Medical Examiner has ruled the death a homicide.
After receiving an autopsy report saying that the inmate had been choked to death, the hospital began an investigation and suspended the nurses' aides as well as the nurse who was responsible for supervising them.
The Brooklyn District Attorney's office said it was also investigating.


Economic Scene; How Much to Cut Arms Spending?
WHAT will be the economic consequences of President Bush's unilateral decision to eliminate all tactical nuclear weapons on land and at sea in Europe and Asia?
The near-term effect on military spending and the Federal budget will be slight.
Mr.
Bush, announcing his initiative last Friday, immediately sought to spike expectations of a "peace dividend" -- dollars saved from the military budget that could be used to meet domestic needs.
"Some will say these initiatives call for a budget windfall for domestic programs," he said.
"But the peace dividend I seek is not measured in dollars but in greater security."


More Punishment Doesn't Decrease Crime; Keep Habeas Corpus
To the Editor:
Acting Attorney General William Barr neglects to mention that the President's crime bill is opposed by the United States Judicial Conference, the American Bar Association, current and former justices of state Supreme Courts, state and local prosecutors, and legal scholars and practitioners all over the country.


Bruins' Rapid-Fire Attack Leaves Rangers Defenseless
For any prospective Ranger goaltender, this was a good opening night to be far away from the crease, preferably without a contract.
That's where free agent Mike Richter was, and where poor John Vanbiesbrouck wasn't, while the Rangers were beaten tonight by the Bruins, 5-3, in a breakaway derby at Boston Garden.


Review/Film; Turning Klutzes Into Tap Dancers
Liza Minnelli's radiant kewpie doll grin and hyperventilated acting style have certainly not suited every role she has portrayed in the movies, but they inject a shot of adrenaline into "Stepping Out," the film adaptation of the English playwright Richard Harris's popular boulevard comedy.
A long-running stage hit in London, "Stepping Out" portrayed the melding of a group of disparate Londoners, mostly women from the same tap-dancing class, into an accomplished amateur chorus line.
The play reached Broadway four years ago in a coolly received production directed by Tommy Tune.
For the movie version, adapted by the playwright and directed by Lewis Gilbert, the setting has been shifted to Buffalo, with the role of the dance instructor Mavis, which was played on Broadway by Pamela Sousa, heavily beefed-up for Ms.
Minnelli.


Momenta to Show 'Pentop' Computer
The Momenta Corporation said it would introduce on Monday what it called the first "pentop" computer, combining a laptop keyboard with the handwriting-recognition capabilities of the new pen-based versions.
The company said its 7-pound portable, which comes with a carrying case resembling a briefcase, should appeal to "mobile executives."


Bridgeport U. Trustees Vote To Keep Talking on Takeover
The trustees of the financially ailing University of Bridgeport voted last night to continue talks about a possible takeover by the Professors World Peace Academy, a group founded and largely financed by the Unification Church and its leader, the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon.
The trustees issued a statement saying that in light of the fiscal difficulties, they had voted to continue exploring all options to save the university.


Salvador Rebel Stronghold Under Attack by Military
Just days after the signing of partial peace accords in New York, the Salvadoran armed forces have launched an air and artillery bombardment of the Guazapa volcano, which they have sought to capture from the guerrillas throughout nearly 12 years of war.
At the same time, President Alfredo Cristiani has set out to convince his rightist political followers and the military leadership that he did not give more than he got in the United Nations-brokered talks.


RJR Plans To Reduce Debt Load
RJR Nabisco Inc. announced plans yesterday for large offerings of common and preferred stock that would help the company retire some of the debt it incurred in 1988 when Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company bought the company in a deal worth $25 billion.
Because the financing will add more than 300 million shares to the 1.1 billion common ones that already exist, RJR's stock fell 62.5 cents yesterday, to $11 a share, on the New York Stock Exchange after the announcement.


McEnroe Is Available
JOHN McENROE thinks he has just over a year remaining in his full-time tennis career and he wants to go out on a patriotic note.
At the United States Open, McEnroe announced his availability for the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain, and this week he informed United States Davis Cup captain TOM GORMAN that he would like to play doubles alongside PETE SAMPRAS in the final against France next month.
The United States will defend its title in Lyons Nov. 29-Dec. 1.
McEnroe, who has accumulated more victories for the United States than any other player in Davis Cup history, is 41-8 in singles and 15-1 in doubles.


The Right Choice for the U.N.
The revived prestige of the United Nations has spurred a lively race for its top job.
Not since the U.N.'s founding have so many first-rate contenders vied for the post of Secretary General.
The choice has to be made by Dec. 31, when Javier Perez de Cuellar's second five-year term expires.
There is one compelling choice in a generally excellent field: Egypt's Deputy Prime Minister, Dr.
Boutros Boutros Ghali, a diplomat with warmth, vision and political savvy.


On 20th Anniversary, Fans of the Islanders May Want a Divorce
The Islanders have little to celebrate as they begin their 20th season tomorrow night in Boston.
Their milestone is burdened with millstones.
They have more problems than some expansion teams -- and less optimism.
For sale since last winter, they have no buyer yet.
Their best player, Pat LaFontaine, has demanded a trade and the team has tried, so far without success, to move him; meanwhile, he did not come to camp.
The captain, Brent Sutter, has said he wouldn't mind a change of scene, although he did finally come to camp.
The top goalie, Mark Fitzpatrick, still has a blood disorder that threatens his career; he is working out with minor league teams but his status is uncertain.


Don't Look Now
Red Sox left fielder Phil Plantier checking the Fenway Park scoreboard Wednesday night as it registered the victory in Toronto that clinched the division for the Blue Jays. (Associated Press )


Lumber Duty On Canada Is Expected
The Bush Administration on Friday is likely to impose duties on imports of lumber from Canada, a move that would make it more expensive to use Canadian lumber in construction here and would add fuel to an already bitter trade dispute, Administration officials said tonight.
All the United States agencies involved in trade policy have endorsed a two-stage plan that would impose temporary duties of up to 15 percent, depending on the province from which the lumber is imported, and would start legal proceedings to prepare long-term duties.


Support for Thomas Inches Toward Approval in Senate
As the full Senate began opened debate on his nomination to the Supreme Court, support for Judge Clarence Thomas appeared today to be edging beyond a bare majority.
Senator Wyche Fowler Jr. of Georgia became the 12th Democrat to declare his support for confirmation.
That total, combined with the 40 Republicans who have pledged to back Judge Thomas, would give him 52 votes.


Corrections
Captions with the Chronicle column yesterday reversed the identities of two men who developed the jet engine.
Hans J. P. von Ohain was on the left and Sir Frank Whittle on the right.


On Stage, and Off
A Public Forum
What do playwrights need to survive?
Commissions of $25,000, the banishment of all critics from the face of the earth and someone who will at least read their plays, with perhaps a good health plan to boot.
What can JoAnne Akalaitis, artistic director of the Public Theater, do about it?
Maybe nothing.
The opinion on last week's "town meeting" for playwrights, attended by 273 people and organized by Ms.
Akalaitis, was split, judging from a sampling of 10 who were there.


Sports of The Times; Whatever Happened To the Ball?
WE know what happened to the bat of Bobby Thomson that struck the ball in the ninth inning of the third and deciding playoff game in the Polo Grounds that won the pennant for the Giants in the late afternoon of Oct. 3, 1951.
The bat is in the Baseball Hall of Fame.
So is the glove that Thomson wore in the game, and his spikes, too.
But whatever happened to the ball, that now precious piece of horsehide, the ultimate symbol of possibly the most mythologized event in American sports?
"It never surfaced," said Bill Deane, a historian at the Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y.
"We've got hundreds of baseballs here commemorating important moments in baseball. But we don't have that ball. I understand that within days after the homer was hit about 20 people called the Giants' office to say that they had the ball. We've had several claimants, too, but none can be verified."


Short-Term Treasuries Post Gains
Treasury bill prices rose yesterday on hopes that the Federal Reserve would cut interest rates soon to stimulate the faltering economic recovery.
But while the short-term market benefited from the prospect of an expected rate cut, the long-term market languished; the 30-year Treasury bond closed slightly lower.


A Late Start on Managing Medicaid
A long-anticipated experiment aimed at providing better, less costly health care for the poor in New York City is finally about to get started.
That's encouraging.
What is not encouraging is that it took the sluggish Dinkins administration almost six months to make this bare beginning.
With Medicaid costs escalating and health care for the poor in disastrous shape, City Hall can't afford to waste any more time.
The experiment is a demonstration project in "managed Medicaid" for up to 35,000 people living in southwest Brooklyn.
The idea is for Medicaid patients to choose from among designated clinics or hospitals and come under the care of one doctor who would "manage" their care.
That way they need no longer rely on emergency rooms, callous Medicaid "mills" and doctors who do not know their medical histories.


Peter Heyworth, Music Critic, 70; A Biographer of Otto Klemperer
Peter Heyworth, a music critic for The Observer of London and the author of an acclaimed biography of the conductor Otto Klemperer, died on Tuesday.
He was 70 years old and lived in London and Dorset, England.
A spokesman for The Observer said Mr.
Heyworth died of a stroke while on vacation in Greece.


Calm Braves Are Happy Hunters
By the time the Atlanta Braves returned home from Cincinnati and a perfect six-game road trip early today, they had moved into a tie with the Los Angeles Dodgers for the National League West lead with only three games to play.
Were they going to dwell on their new status and ponder what could happen this weekend in the final series of the regular season?
Not if Greg Olson was typical.
"I'm going deer hunting tomorrow; I don't care about Friday's game," Olson, the Braves' catcher, said after the Braves completed their road sweep.
"I hope I see a big old buck. I hope to put an arrow through him. I won't even think about the pennant race. Then when Friday comes, I'll think about it again. That's how this team thinks."
Maybe all of the Braves planned to go deer hunting or house hunting or mow their lawns or clean their swimming pools for the last time this year or go grocery shopping or take their kids to the zoo.
Maybe none of them planned to think about the division championship for 24 hours as they took a respite from the rigors of the race.
He's Not Kidding
"There's no need to be concerned with it tomorrow," Olson insisted Wednesday night.
"It's an off day. Tomorrow it won't be important. Tomorrow is for family, fun. Maybe you think I'm just throwing words out, but that's how I feel."
On the three previous days -- Sunday through Tuesday -- the Braves won their games, only to have the Dodgers later win theirs and retain their one-game advantage.
This time, though, the Dodgers' half of the trick did not work.
After the Braves beat Cincinnati, 6-3, Wednesday night, the Dodgers lost to San Diego, 9-4, before a barrage of bizarre bunt hits and other infield singles, and the teams suddenly had the same record: 92 victories and 67 defeats.
Each has three games left, the Braves here with the last-place Houston Astros, the Dodgers in San Francisco with the fifth-place Giants.
If they emerge with the same record after the weekend encounters, they will play Monday night in Los Angeles for the championship.
However it is done, the winner will meet the Pirates beginning next Wednesday in Pittsburgh for the National League pennant.
The Pendulum Swings
Although the consensus in recent weeks had given the Dodgers the edge because of their race-hardened experience, the Braves suddenly must be viewed as the team with an advantage.
They are playing at home; the Dodgers are playing on the road.
They are playing the Astros, a scrappy team without a single ever-present threat; the Dodgers are playing the Giants, a disappointing team with an injured Kevin Mitchell but with a revived Will Clark and Matt Williams and a chance to leapfrog past the defending champion Reds into fourth place.
The Braves also have an overwhelming edge in pitching, at least for the first two games of their series.
Steve Avery, a 17-game winner, who held the Dodgers to one run in 18 innings in two successive starts last month, will pitch Friday night against Jeff Juden, a rookie with major league experience totaling two starts and one relief appearance, not to mention a 6.23 earned run average.
John Smoltz, who has an 11-2 record since the All-Star break, will pitch Saturday against Mark Portugal, a veteran with a 10-11 record, who was skipped in his last two turns while Juden and Brian Williams, another rookie, started.
Sunday Could Be Dicey
The thorniest problem for the Braves could come Sunday, if the race is still alive.
They will use Charlie Leibrandt, who has 15 victories but none in his last four starts (the Reds scored six runs off him in the first inning Tuesday night).
The Astros are scheduled to start Pete Harnisch, their best pitcher with 11 victories and a 2.64 earned run average, the league's fifth lowest.
But he has had a sore shoulder and there is a chance he will not pitch.
But the Braves were not pondering those matchups today.
They were hunting deer and doing all of those other fun things.
For the Dodgers, though, it was a different matter.
Candlestick Park is where the Dodgers lost the 1982 division championship, which the Braves won on the last day.
"They've got to be thinking about '82," said Olson, who today wasn't thinking about '91.
"Especially if it comes down to the last game. Even though probably none of them were there, except Tommy Lasorda and maybe a couple coaches."


Suffering Made Real: A Gordimer Sampler
Lying there in the room that smelled of the sweat of all their bodies, the dregs of their beer, and the bitterness of cigarette ends, hearing the man snort, turn on the cheap iron bed uninhibited in acceptance of himself in sleep, as he was always, Bray thought how it was a remarkable man, there -- like many of the other remarkable men on this continent who had ended up dead in a ditch.
Then the blacks blamed the white men for manipulating power in a continent they had never really left; the whites blamed tribalism and the interference of the East (if they themselves were of the West) or the West (if they themselves were of the East).
The remarkable men talked of socialism and the common man, or of glory and Messianic greatness, and died for copper, uranium or oil.
-- From "A Guest of Honor" (1971)  Past the fowls, water tanks and outhouses, the hot silent arcades of the demolished hotel, the car rocked and swayed over the track.
Suddenly he saw the path, the path he had missed the other day, to the graves of Livingstone's companions . . .
They all looked back, these dead companions, to the lake, the lake that Carl Church (turning to face as they did, now) had had silent behind him all the way up; the lake that, from here, was seen to stretch much farther than one could tell, down there on the shore or at the hotel: stretching still -- even from up here -- as far as one could see, flat and shining, a long way up Africa.
Even animals have the instinct to turn from suffering.
The sense to run away.
Perhaps it was an illness not to be able to live one's life the way they did . . . with justice defined in terms of respect for property, innocence defended in their children's privileges, love in their procreation and caring only for each other.
A sickness not to be able to ignore that condition of a healthy, ordinary life: other people's suffering.
-- From "Burger's Daughter" (1979)  The day the cease-fire was signed she was caught up in a crowd.
Peasant boys from Europe who had made up the colonial army and freedom fighters whose column had marched into town were staggering about together outside the barracks, not three blocks from her house . . .
There were two soldiers in front of her, blocking her off by their clumsy embrace (how do you do it, how do you do what you've never done before) and the embrace opened like a door and took her in -- a pink hand with bitten nails grasping her right arm, a black hand with a big-dialed watch and thong bracelet pulling at her left elbow.
Their three heads collided gaily, musk of sweat and tang of strong sweet soap clapped a mask to her nose and mouth.
They all gasped with delicious shock.
They were saying things to each other.
She put up an arm round each neck, the rough pile of an army haircut on one side, the soft negro hair on the other, and kissed them both on the cheek.
-- From "A Soldier's Embrace" (1980)  They sickened at the appalling thought that they might find they had lived out their whole lives as they were, born white pariah dogs in a black continent.
The joined political parties and "contact" groups in willingness to slough privilege it was supposed to be their white dog nature to guard with Mirages and tanks; they were not believed.
They had thought of leaving, then, while they were young enough to cast off the blacks' rejection as well as white privilege, to make a life in another country.
They had stayed; and told each other and everyone else that this and nowhere else was home, while knowing, as time left went by, the reason had become they couldn't get their money out -- Bam's growing savings and investments, Maureen's little legacy of De Beers shares her maternal grandmother had left her, the house there was less and less opportunity of selling as city riots became a part of life.
-- From "July's People" (1981)  I knew that our army had become -- maybe always was -- yes, what you say, a murderous horde that burned hospitals, cut off the ears of villagers, raped, blew up trains full of workers.
Brought to devastation this country where I was born.
It's there, only the glowing curtains keep it out.
At night, when the curtains are drawn back it is still there in the dark with the blind bulk of buildings, the traces of broken boulevards and decayed squares marked in feeble lights.
Familiar to me, can't say I don't know it, can't say it doesn't recognize me.
It is there, with the sun pressing against the window, a population become beggars living in the streets, camping out in what used to be our -- white people's -- apartments, no electricity, no water in the tiled bathrooms, no glass in the windows, and on the fine balconies facing the sea where we used to take our aperitifs, those little open fires where they cook their scraps of food.
-- From "Jump and Other Stories" (1991)


Beating the BBC Ban
To the Editor:
Re John P. Wirtz's comments (letter, Sept. 13) about Thatcher Government censorship rules imposed on British television and radio: The rules do not prohibit interviews with Irish nationalists or politicians supporting a united Ireland; they ban interviews with members of proscribed terrorist organizations (such as the Provisional Irish Republican Army or the loyalist Ulster Volunteer Force) or their acolytes (Sinn Fein is the political wing of the I.R.A.).


Goodyear Shifts Staff To Stress Marketing
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, in an effort to increase its market share in the United States and Canada, yesterday announced a series of management changes for its North American operations.
The company, the world's second-largest tire producer after Michelin, said it had appointed John F. Fiedler, who is president of Goodyear's Kelly Springfield Tire Company, to be executive vice president for Goodyear's North American tire operations.


Diner's Journal
Rex
It's an unlikely place to find appetizing food -- a crepuscular dining room with an eerie green ceiling and flickering candlelight.
But 16-month-old Rex, the restaurant-cum-private club at 579 Avenue of the Americas, near 16th Street, is a bright star in the gastronomic black hole in eastern Chelsea.


A Weekend Schedule of None but the Braves
The Atlanta Braves will be the epitome of ubiquity this weekend.
Consider this Braves-Astros schedule:


Jung Recognized the Therapeutic Value of the Spiritual Life
To the Editor:
"Therapists See Religion as an Aid, Not an Illusion" (Science Times Sept. 10) discusses the increasing attention of psychologists to religion and rejection of Freud's opinion that religion is a neurotic illusion.
You cite eight psychologists, a child psychiatrist and two Freudian psychoanalysts who look favorably on religion's role in emotional wholeness.
You refer to Job's communion with God and quote a psychoanalyst saying when he was in training, "the attitude was that if a patient brought up religion, you either ignored it or tried to show him it was neurotic." He adds: "But religion is not necessarily neurosis. It may be something that helps people come to terms with an unkind reality."


Gerber Move Into Poland
The Gerber Products Company signed a $26 million agreement to take a majority stake in Poland's biggest baby food manufacturer, Alima S.A.
Under the agreement with the Polish Privatization Ministry, Gerber will pay $11.3 million for 60 percent of Alima's shares and spend $14.4 million more on capital improvements.
The ministry said Gerber could eventually make additional investments of up to $42 million.


William A. Shea, 84, Dies; The Lawyer Behind the Mets
William A. Shea, the politically powerful lawyer whose efforts to bring National League baseball back to New York culminated in both the Mets and in the stadium bearing his name, died Wednesday night at his home in Manhattan.
He was 84 years old and also lived in Sands Point, N.Y.
He died of complications from a stroke he suffered two years ago, his family said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9
Haiti's capital city is tense, as soldiers are often the only people on Port-au-Prince's streets on the fourth day after a military coup.
Diplomats on the scene say the military leader is really following the lead of the soldiers in the streets.
Page A1


Corrections
An article on Sept. 27 about the Southern Christian Leadership Conference endorsement of Judge Clarence Thomas to be a Surpeme Court Justice referred incompletely to the record of his endorsements by other civil rights groups.
The Congress of Racial Equality also endorsed him.


Leo Burnett Concludes Two Joint-Venture Pacts
The Leo Burnett Company, Chicago, has concluded two joint-venture agreements meant to strengthen its advertising agency operations on the Pacific Rim.
A Burnett spokesman said yesterday that the agency would merge its Australian operation with Connaghan &amp; May, Sydney, one of the largest Australian-owned agencies.
Stan May, chief executive and creative director of Connaghan &amp; May, has been named chairman and chief executive of the newly formed agency, to be called Leo Burnett/Connaghan &amp; May.
Mr.
May will report to Bruce Bullpitt, Burnett's regional managing director for Australia and New Zealand.


Why 'Stop the Church' Was Televised; Fair Discussion
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 14 "Beliefs" column reports that WNET-TV, Channel 13, showed the independently produced documentary "Stop the Church" "simply because it's controversial." Since August, when PBS announced its decision to withdraw the program from distribution, "Stop the Church" has aired in Los Angeles, San Francisco and Boston, and has become the center of a national debate on censorship, freedom of expression and religion, acquired immune deficiency syndrome and the role of television.


From Errand Boy to Studio Chief
Mark Canton, a 42-year-old film executive who once worked as a clerk in a Hollywood mail room, was named president of Columbia Pictures today and said he would seek to accelerate the number of projects at the studio and make films that will be, he hoped, "socially relevant."
Following weeks of turmoil, confusion, legal wrangling and embarrassment among officials of the Sony Corporation, which owns Columbia, about the rumored executive shift, the film company announced Mr.
Canton's appointment to replace Frank Price, 61, an experienced film executive who took over in March 1990.
Mr.
Price, who plans to remain aligned with Columbia as head of his own independent production company, will be paid $15 million to $20 million in a buyout deal, people at the studio said.


Leonard A. Rapping Dies at 57; Adviser and Economic Theorist
Leonard A. Rapping, an economist who advised several Federal agencies and helped develop theories on the interplay of human behavior and business cycles, died Tuesday at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
Dr.
Rapping, a resident of Newton, Mass., was 57 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Mongo Santamaria In Concert at Columbia
The band leader and conga drummer Mongo Santamaria will open a concert series at the Miller Theater of Columbia University (Broadway and 116th Street) tonight at 8 o'clock.
Appearing with him will be Ray Vega on trumpet, Mitch Frohman on tenor saxophone and flute, Steve Sax alto and baritone saxophones and flute, Johnny Andreus on drums and timbales, Bernie Minoso on electric bass, Bob Quaranta on piano, and Eddie Rodriquez on bongos.


Best Seller Is a Fake, Professor Asserts
"The Education of Little Tree," a best seller that is supposed to be a memoir about the childhood of an American Indian boy reared in the Tennessee mountains, is a hoax concocted by an author who was a Ku Klux Klan member and anti-Semite, a history professor says.
The professor, Dan T. Carter, who teaches Southern history at Emory University in Atlanta, says he found information that led him to that conclusion while researching a biography of former Gov.
George C. Wallace of Alabama.
Professor Carter said the book's author, Forrest Carter, was really Asa Earl Carter, a violent white supremacist and the author of some of Mr.
Wallace's most famous speeches, including the 1963 inaugural speech in he which he vowed: "Segregation now! Segregation tomorrow! Segregation forever!"


Trying to Work It Out
After fully airing the details of their seven-year love affair in court, MARTINA NAVRATILOVA and her former lover JUDY NELSON have won permission to take their dispute private while they try to work out a settlement.
Texas District Judge HARRY HOPKINS said in Fort Worth that he had suspended an impending deadline for filing briefs in the case so the two women and their lawyers could try to resolve the suit. (AP)


Dollar Ends Lower in U.S.; Yen Posts a Broad Advance
The dollar sank to a seven-month low against the Japanese yen yesterday and finished lower against most currencies in domestic trading after turning in a mixed performance in Europe.
Gold prices rose.
The Republic National Bank in New York quoted an after-hours bid for an ounce of gold at $357.25, up $2.25 from Wednesday's late bid.


A World's Geology on a City's Face
"SEE," Sidney Horenstein says, "this is an ancient worm burrow." He's bending for a closer look at a block of Indiana limestone in front of a brownstone on West 76th Street.
The limestone is a seemingly nondescript slab that many people might mistake for cement, and Mr.
Horenstein is running a finger over a surface bump that most people wouldn't even notice.
"Now what you have to imagine is that 300 million years ago Indiana was covered by this vast tropical sea," he goes on.
"All these animals were living not only on the surface but below the surface, including worms, and the worms created tubes. When the worms either died or vacated the tubes, fine material washed in and filled them up. So what we have now is the trace of where the worms were. These are the burrows they left behind.
"Not graffiti," he adds, straightening up to continue on his walk. "Natural."


New Surety Bond for Banks
The Municipal Bond Investors Assurance Corporation, the leading insurer of municipal bonds, announced yesterday that it was offering a surety bond to cover deposits that local governments place at banks.
The First National Bank of Chicago was the first bank to use the surety bond, but declined to say the amount of deposits covered.


Topics of The Times; Bad Sports in the White House
The White House doesn't like the proposal by Congressional Democrats to insure enough public matching funds for next year's Presidential primaries.
It's the Democratic candidates who would be shortchanged if there isn't enough to go around.
Indeed, President Bush, who faces no primary campaign, could grab the whole pot for himself if his nationwide fund-raising is in full swing before the Democrats'.
That's not just hardball politics.
It's poor sportsmanship.
Public financing for Presidential campaigns was enacted in 1974, along with the $1 check-off on tax returns to pay for it.
In the four elections since, the Government has funded the two major party conventions and their nominees' post-convention campaigns, and has provided matching funds for 49 primary candidates.


A Chronicler of a Land of Strangers
"A writer," Nadine Gordimer once wrote, "is 'selected' by his subject -- his subject being the consciousness of his own era."
In her own case, the time is the late 20th century; the place, South Africa; and in 10 novels and 9 volumes of short stories, she has mapped the emotional and political geography of that troubled land with uncommon intelligence and grace.
As delineated in her books, South Africa emerges as a place blessed with extraordinary beauty and scarred by shocking acts of moral brutality.
It's a place where hard-nosed neo-colonials, bewildered liberals and importunate revolutionaries live side by side -- strangers, in her words, "among people who were strangers to each other."


Topics of The Times; A Spider's World
The smell of grilled chicken lingered after the last barbecue of summer.
The grown-ups, sitting outside in the early twilight, talked about how much the world had changed and how, with each day's turmoil in the Middle East and the Balkans, the children's school maps were growing steadily more dated.
As they talked, a little boy spotted a spider web near the house and dropped a piece of his red paper napkin into its center.
Then someone noticed the spider, crawling out onto the web.
It tugged at the piece of paper, probably several times its own weight, determined that the web remain spotless to lure the spider's prey.


Ernestine McClendon, Actress and Agent, 77
Ernestine McClendon, an actress, comedian and theatrical consultant, died on Sept. 23 at Good Samaritan Hospital in Los Angeles.
She was 77 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
She died of cancer, said Joahn Webb, a friend.


SOVIETS HIT SNAG ON ECONOMIC PLAN
The attempt to create a voluntary economic association from the republics of the Soviet Union ran into a major obstacle today in the form of rivalries within the government of the Russian republic, led by Boris N. Yeltsin.
With Mr.
Yeltsin away on vacation, the Russian Council of Ministers issued a resolution that cast doubt on the announcement earlier this week that Russia had extended preliminary agreement to a proposed "economic union" of the 12 republics still maintaining some form of association with the Soviet Union.


Nadine Gordimer Is Winner Of Nobel Prize in Literature
Nadine Gordimer, whose novels of South Africa portray the conflicts and contradictions of a racist society, was named winner of the 1991 Nobel Prize in Literature today as her country finally begins to dismantle the system her works have poignantly explored for more than 40 years.
In a brief citation, the Swedish Academy, which confers the awards, referred to her as "Nadine Gordimer, who through her magnificent epic writing has -- in the words of Alfred Nobel -- been of very great benefit to humanity."


Critic's Notebook; De Sica Retrospective Buffs His Reputation
ITALY is famous for saints and sinners, and Vittorio De Sica was fond of both.
The great director and actor knew that few people are purely good or evil, and his rich, rascally understanding of human nature informs every film in "Vittorio D: De Sica Behind the Camera and on the Screen." This series of 37 films that De Sica directed or starred in opens today and runs through Nov. 12 at the Museum of Modern Art.
It will be a delicious surprise for viewers who know De Sica only as the director of "The Bicycle Thief," the sorrowful classic of poverty and survival in post-World War II Italy.
And even those aware of his witty, romantic sides will be amazed at how many rarely seen films have been collected here.
As an actor, De Sica began as a matinee idol in 1920's romantic comedies.
He aged on screen as elegantly as Cary Grant, to whom he is often and accurately compared.
Though his reputation as a director was made with his sober, neo-realist works of the late 40's and early 50's -- "Shoeshine," "The Bicycle Thief" and "Umberto D" -- he never lost his taste for sophisticated comedy, never tired of pairing Sophia Loren with Marcello Mastroianni, in "Marriage, Italian Style," "Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow" or some other story of love and pasta.


Dilemma on U.S. Doorstep
Months after ousting Iraqis from Kuwait, the Administration hopes it won't face the issue of using force in Haiti.
News analysis, page A8.


Nabisco Biscuit Hires Marketer
The Nabisco Biscuit Company, leader of the country's $5.6 billion cookies and crackers market, yesterday appointed Barbara S. Thomas, a former Procter &amp; Gamble executive, to be its senior vice president of marketing.
Ms.
Thomas will be responsible for Nabisco Biscuit's marketing, new business development and strategic planning.
She replaces Bruce Wood, who became president of Nabisco Brands' Planters Life Savers.


Nets Sign Lee
The Nets have signed DOUG LEE , a rookie free agent to a one-year contract, WILLIS REED , senior vice president for basketball operations, said yesterday.
Lee, a 6-foot-6-inch guard from Purdue was one of the Nets' final cuts in training camp last season and went on to play in Israel.


Review/Dance; Balanchine, 'Beauty' And Bach
The newfound brilliance of the San Francisco Ballet under Helgi Tomasson's directorship is distilled in the youthful dazzle of Elizabeth Loscavio's dancing.
San Francisco-trained and 22 years old, she is the company's rising star, only one of several young classical dancers improving at a galloping pace.
Nevertheless, no one else in the troupe's brief visit to the City Center (131 West 55th Street), which ends Sunday afternoon, will have to face the challenge that Miss Loscavio met so grandly on Wednesday night.


Quotation of the Day
"The selection of the head of American intelligence is not a popularity contest. I sure as hell wouldn't win one at C.I.A." -- Robert M. Gates. [ A15:1. ]


Art in Review
Bartholomeus Breenbergh Richard L. Feigen &amp; Company  49 East 68th Street  Manhattan  Through Oct. 31
This show brings together paintings and a few drawings by the Dutch artist Bartholomeus Breenbergh (1598-1657).
It is the latest example of a gallery presenting the sort of small monographic exhibition of a lesser-known Old Master artist that museums are reluctant for financial reasons to undertake.
Like many artists of his time, Breenbergh as a young man made a sojourn to Rome, where he was deeply affected by the light, landscape and paintings he encountered.
His work became a blend of Northern and Italian elements, and it influenced many greater artists of the Dutch Golden Age.


Review/Film Festival; Urban Life Seen From a Taxi Seat
THE first image in "Night on Earth," Jim Jarmusch's delirious new comedy, is important: that of universal darkness in the center of which is a rotating sphere of brilliant blue overlaid by wisps of white.
As the camera approaches, the wisps of white turn into cloud formations so beloved by forecasters as "weather systems." Familiar oceans and seas appear, also land masses that are as yet undivided by and unclaimed for national aspiration.


The Deal Is Already Done For Gorbachev's Coup Book
First came the coup of the Kremlin; now comes the coup between hard covers: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has sold his account of the August uprising to HarperCollins for what some in the industry say is $500,000.
Giving new heft and meaning to the ever-growing field of quickie books, HarperCollins says it plans to translate the 74-page typed manuscript, print it, bind it and ship it to stores before the end of this month.


Haley Has an Offer
Center JACK HALEY , a restricted free agent with the Nets, signed an offer sheet from the Los Angeles Lakers yesterday.
Terms of the offer were not disclosed.
The Nets have the opportunity to match the offer and retain Haley, a 6-10 fourth-year pro.
Last year with New Jersey, he played 78 games, averaging 4.5 rebounds and 5.6 points a game. (AP)


Review/Television; Mini-Visits With the Stars
Some viewers find celebrity profiles irresistible.
And all networks find those cheap-to-produce collections of old clips irresistible.
So "60 Minutes: The Entertainers" should have been a winner.
The two-hour special, including excerpts from 23 years' worth of show-business interviews, will be shown on CBS tonight at 9.
It's painless, but easy to resist.


Why 'Stop the Church' Was Televised
To the Editor:
"Should a movie about disrupting a mass be shown simply because it's controversial?" Peter Steinfels asks (Beliefs column, Sept. 14) about the rebroadcast by WNET-TV, Channel 13, in New York of "Stop the Church: Issues and Outrage," produced in Los Angeles.
He fails to mention that my film "Stop the Church" was programmed six months ago as part of the Public Broadcasting Service's "P.O.V.," or "Point of View" series, because it is considered a well-made film, not because it was "controversial." After the programming decision, I signed a contract with "P.O.V." and PBS, and was paid.


Surgeon and Wife Pledge $25 Million to Yale
A San Francisco surgeon and his wife have pledged to donate their entire estate, valued at $25 million, to Yale University.
Most of it will go to the School of Medicine, the largest gift in its history, Yale's President, Benno C. Schmidt Jr., said today in announcing the donation from Dr.
John Anlyan and his wife, Betty.


Arkansas' Clinton Enters The '92 Race for President
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas entered the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination today with an unstinting indictment of a decade of Republican domestic policies and a promise to restore the American dream for "the forgotten middle class."
The 45-year-old Governor offered himself as someone who could "reinvent government," infuse it with the values that Americans hold dear, and use it to address the problems that plague this nation, from crime to economic decline.


NEC's New Notebook Computer Has TV-Quality Color
After years in the laboratory, the product that Japan's computer makers have spent billions to develop is finally out: the first lightweight notebook computers with flat-panel color screens of a quality on par with color television.
The NEC Corporation, Japan's biggest computer maker, introduced its first entry today, a seven-pound battery-operated model called the Color 98 Note, to be priced around $5,000.
The Sharp Corporation of Japan made a similar announcement recently, although it did not say when its model would be available commercially.
And I.B.M.'s and the Toshiba Corporation are each expected to enter the fray within a few months.


10-Day Vehicle Sales Up
Strong sales of 1992 models to fleet buyers and sizable rebates on leftover 1991 models helped increase sales of American-made cars and light trucks by 5.8 percent in late September over the comparable period a year earlier, according to figures released by the auto makers today.
Analysts said the figures overstated actual consumer demand, which remains sluggish but is showing signs of gradual improvement.


White House Seeks Review of Plan To Add a Nuclear Weapons Plant
In response to President Bush's call to eliminate thousands of nuclear arms, White House budget officials have asked the Energy Department to start over again to justify the need to build a nuclear reactor that has been considered central to any of its plans for a smaller, modern nuclear weapons industry.
In the last two fiscal years, the Energy Department spent $678 million on research and design for the reactor, which would produce tritium, a radioactive gas that increases the explosive power of nuclear bombs, and the Government plans to spend more than $5 billion building it.


TV Weekend; Saint or Sinner? Admiral of Ocean Sea Is Elusive
"Columbus and the Age of Discovery," the seven-hour documentary that sails onto Channel 13 at 8 P.M.
Sunday, is at times more like a ceremonial journey than a voyage of discovery.
It puts in at all the obligatory ports, but often the winds of imagination fail and the program finds itself becalmed in colorful settings.
The two-hour opener Sunday embarks from medieval Genoa, the great trading city where Christopher Columbus was born in 1451.
Plenty of background is offered about trade with the Orient, especially the seller's market for gold, silks and spices, and about the desire in Christian Europe, made urgent after the fall of Constantinople, for a route to the East that would end the monopoly by Muslim middlemen.


At the Bar; How Three Missing Zeros Brought Red Faces and Cost Millions of Dollars.
The cable read: PARDON. IMPOSSIBLE TO BE SENT TO SIBERIA.
In one of his famous "Believe it or Not" columns, Robert Ripley wrote about that cable, and how a man's life had been spared when some Czarist apparatchik mistakenly placed theperiod after the first word of it instead of after the second.


Briton, 28, Is Named Editor of New Republic
Andrew Sullivan, a 28-year-old Briton, has been named the new editor of The New Republic.
Mr.
Sullivan replaces Hendrik Hertzberg, who has been editor for nearly 10 years.
Mr.
Hertzberg will become a senior editor with the 77-year-old magazine, a traditionally liberal weekly that recently has become more conservative and iconoclastic.


Schoenberg Is Topic Of Music Theorists
The annual meeting of the Music Theory Society of New York State is to be held this weekend at Columbia University.
The session, held in conjunction with the Arnold Schoenberg Institute of Los Angeles, is focused on Schoenberg's music.


The Spoken Word
WALKING TOURS AND LECTURE, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the Lower East Side, Sunday at noon, followed at 1 P.M. by "La Dolce Vita," a walk through Little Italy, and at 2 P.M. by "Tenements in Focus," a lecture about the work of Arnold Eagle, a W.P.A. photographer.
Fee for each walking tour: $12 ($10 for the elderly and students); lecture, $4.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"American Life in American Art" by Carl Palusci, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "John Baldessari" by Mr.
Palusci, tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.
READING, West Side Y.M.C.A., 5 West 63d Street, Manhattan.
The writers E. L. Doctorow, Roy Blount Jr., Galway Kinnell, Walter Dean Myers and Ntozake Shange will read from their works.
Sponsored by the Writer's Voice.
Tonight at 8.
Tickets: $8.
Information: (875-4124).


Audit of CUNY Senate Shows That $85,000 Was Misspent
An audit by the City University of New York has found that members of the Student Senate spent more than $85,000 on expenditures that were improper or undocumented, including purported loans of $4,500 that paid for three students to travel to Africa and $4,500 for the legal fees of students arrested during a demonstration in Albany.
The audit found that much of the money was spent without the authorization of the full senate, but only of its steering committee, a violation of the senate's rules.
Many of the expenditures, however, were approved by the university's vice chancellor for student affairs, Tilden LeMelle, who is now president of the University of the District of Columbia.
Few Criticisms
The audit did not condemn the expenditure of $49,000 on a lobbying conference in Albany for 200 students and a second, less expensive conference in Lake Placid.
The cost per student at both conferences, auditors said, conformed with state rates.
The expenditure on the conferences had been criticized by student leaders.


Liberian Says Vote Will Put End to Civil War
Amos Sawyer, President of the interim Government of Liberia, announced today that Liberians had agreed on a strategy to settle the two-year-old civil war through "free and fair elections under international supervision."
He expressed the hope that elections could be held in six to nine months.


New Campaigns
*
The Elantra, an all-new subcompact sedan, is the sole focus of Hyundai Motor America's fourth-quarter television and print advertising by Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., Irvine, Calif.
One spot shows an Elantra conquering twisting roads as Chubby Checker sings "The Twist." The campaign continues the company's theme: "Hyundai. Yes, Hyundai." *
For the first time, a television commercial marking the annual Founder's Day of McDonald's Corp. includes a tribute to Richard and Maurice McDonald.
The spot, by Leo Burnett Co., Chicago, honors the brothers as well as Ray Kroc, to whom they sold rights to McDonald's in 1961.
The spot follows news coverage of remarks by Richard McDonald expressing disappointment that the brothers' role in corporate history had been played down.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Ferreira Defeats Lendl  Wayne Ferreira of South Africa scored the biggest victory of his career yesterday, beating a three-time champion, Ivan Lendl, in the third round of the $1 million Australian Indoor championships in Sydney.
Ferreira defeated the second-seeded Lendl, 6-4, 2-6, 7-5, in just under two hours.
Ferreira, ranked 64th in the world and seeded 16th, said his aggression was the decisive factor in his victory over Lendl.
"I had nothing to lose," he said.
"I think he might have been a bit scared." Top-seeded Stefan Edberg of Sweden and No. 4 Andre Agassi of the United States scored easy victories in late matches.
Edberg downed an Australian, Mark Woodforde, 6-4, 6-2, while Agassi overpowered a fellow American, MaliVai Washington, 6-3, 6-1. (AP) Treatment for Graf: Steffi Graf, still recovering from a shoulder injury, was flown to Heidelberg, Germany, for treatment of an injury to her right wrist yesterday after beating Judith Wiesner, 6-1, 7-6 (7-1), in the quarterfinals of the Leipzig International in Germany.
Graf, seeded No. 1, is scheduled to play again tomorrow. (AP) Fernandez Over Kohde-Kilsch: Third-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez made short work of Claudia Kohde-Kilsch yesterday, beating the German player, 6-2, 6-0, and sailing into the quarterfinals of the Milan Indoor in Italy. (AP) McEnroe Over Carbonell: John McEnroe breezed into the quarterfinals of the Toulouse Grand Prix in France yesterday with a 6-1, 6-4 victory over Tomas Carbonell of Spain.
The sixth-seeded McEnroe's opponent in the quarterfinal will be Richard Krajicek of the Netherlands, who upset Jakob Hlasek of Switzerland 6-2, 6-4. (AP) RUNNING  The Longest Run  Sandy Barwick, a receptionist from Auckland, New Zealand, yesterday became the first woman to finish the Sri Chinmoy 1,300-mile race, the world's longest certified run.
It took her 17 days 22 hours to reach the finish line in Flushing Meadows Park.
Barwick, 43 years old, tore a muscle in her right thigh after setting a world best of 12 days 14 hours for 1,000 miles.
It took her another five days to complete the final 300 miles. (AP) GOLF  Clearwater in the Lead Keith Clearwater came out after a short night's sleep to shoot a seven-under-par 63 yesterday for a one-stroke lead after the first round of the $900,000 Texas Open at the Oak Hills Country Club in San Antonio.
Clearwater did not arrive for the tournament until 1:30 A.M. yesterday and got only three hours of sleep before getting up for his early tee time.
(Reuters).


Weicker Plans Partial Closings of State Agencies
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. said today that he planned a limited shutdown of many state agencies beginning next month -- in some cases, as often as one day in every two weeks -- thus cutting paychecks and hours worked for more than 11,000 state workers.
He said that another 1,277 employees would be laid off completely, in addition to the more than 2,400 already given their notices last month.
Mr.
Weicker, who made the announcement at a grim meeting of state commissioners and agency heads at the Capitol, said the cuts were forced by the intransigence of the leaders of the state employee unions in resisting pay and benefit concessions.
He said the layoffs and cuts could all be rescinded if an agreement is reached, but he expressed little hope.
The unions and the state broke off talks last week, and the unions reasserted on Wednesday at a meeting in the Governor's office that their final offer was still their final offer.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
Sales of U.S.-made cars and light trucks rose 5.8 percent in late September, helped by strong sales of 1992 models to fleet buyers and sizable rebates on leftover 1991 models.  [ Page D1. ]


Soybean Prices Depressed As Crop Outlook Improves
Soybean futures prices sagged more than 10 cents a bushel yesterday amid reports that the harvest had been better than expected and as hopes faded for a quick stimulus from additional food aid to the Soviet Union.
Corn and wheat futures also retreated on the Chicago Board of Trade, after gains in recent days.


Police Sergeant Wounded in Brooklyn Shootout With 15-Year-Old
A New York City police sergeant was wounded yesterday during a shootout with a 15-year-old boy who had just shot a man in a dispute over a radio, the police said.
The sergeant, John Massoni, 33, was shot once in the abdomen at 8:23 A.M. when he and three other officers entered the lobby of an apartment building in Flatbush, Brooklyn, the police said.
Sergeant Massoni was not wearing a bulletproof vest, as required by the department.


BUSH'S C.I.A. CHOICE IN COUNTERATTACK AT SENATE HEARING
Robert M. Gates went on the attack today to save his nomination for Director of Central Intelligence, fiercely rebutting allegations that he systematically slanted intelligence analyses in his years as a senior manager at the Central Intelligence Agency.
For more than two weeks, the nominee had been forced to sit in silence as former and current officials came before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence with biting accusations against him.
Today he showered the committee with data and documents in an attempt to discredit some of the accusatory testimony and save his reputation.  'Never Distorted Intelligence'
He offered a case-by-case rebuttal of 20 allegations, in some instances providing documents in an effort to show that the assertions were, he said, "ridiculous." He also tried to dispute assertions that his extraordinarily pessimistic view of Moscow contributed to his -- and the C.I.A.'s -- failure to foresee monumental changes in the Soviet Union.


Marlins Sign Vazquez
The Florida Marlins hired Cuban native ANGEL VAZQUEZ as director of Latin American operations yesterday in the wake of criticism about the lack of members of minority groups working for the expansion team.
The addition of Vazquez was expected even before the recent criticism by the National League's president, BILL WHITE, and the Baltimore Orioles' assistant general manager, FRANK ROBINSON . (AP)


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 561 money market mutual funds decreased by $1.07 billion, to $459.58 billion, in the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 204 institutional funds decreased by $2.5 million, to $139.60 billion.
The assets of the 265 general-purpose funds were down by $780.7 million, to $173.38 billion.
The 92 broker-dealer funds decreased by $284.7 billion, to $146.6 billion, the institute said.


Review/Film; A Heroine With a Heart Of Stone
Katie (Patsy Kensit), the pretty young English heroine of "Twenty-One," is enough to give youth and beauty a bad name.
Wandering through London, she makes condescending observations about her friends and loved ones, observations relentlessly colored by words like "slimy" and "nauseating" and "completely cretinous." In this, Katie is presumably intended as a beacon of truth.
But "Twenty-One," which begins and ends with Katie speaking directly to the camera from the toilet in her New York bathroom, in scenes that are meant to frame the London story as a flashback, has a way of confusing honesty with behavior that is merely coarse, stupid or rude.
The director, Don Boyd, and his co-screenwriter, Zoe Heller, seem to envision Katie as a much more appealing character than she turns out to be, although it would take spectacular charm to lend much gloss to Katie's adventures.
She is seen wearing a white see-through dress to a wedding, then expressing surprise when the groom (Patrick Ryecart) makes a pass at her.
At this, she knees him in the groin, after which she embarks on an affair with him anyhow. (Much of Katie's advice to the camera has to do with what happens "when you sleep with a creep," the one subject she knows much about.) She also flirts so brazenly with her father (Jack Shepherd) that it's remarkable incest is never added to her scorecard.


Books of The Times; From South Philadelphia, Details of a Violent Life
Brotherly Love By Pete Dexter 274 pages. Random House. $22.
Pete Dexter's powerful new novel, "Brotherly Love," begins with a newspaper article reporting two deaths believed to be part of the Philadelphia crime wars.
Michael Flood, president of the Southeastern Pennsylvania Union Council, has been found shot to death in what police sources describe as a "mob hit." His brother, Peter, had already been found dead a hundred miles away, in the backyard of his vacation home.


Back to Mississippi for Trial in Evers Slaying


Fallout Expected in Hanoi Refugee Issue
The Bush Administration may be heading toward a confrontation with the British Government over a reported agreement between Britain and Vietnam to for cibly repatriate Vietnamese living in refugee camps in Hong Kong, Administration officials said today.
State Department officials said they were still uncertain of the details, but Margaret D. Tutwiler, the State Department spokeswoman, reiterated the Administration's long opposition to such forcible repatriation.
"Our position on involuntary repatriation is well known," she told reporters today.


Critic's Choice/Music; Hear It While You Can
The New York Chamber Orchestra of the 92d Street Y began modestly in 1976, when Gerard Schwarz assembled a group of freelance musicians for a performance of Bach's "Brandenburg" Concertos.
The next season, Mr.
Schwarz and Omus Hirshbein, then the director of the 92d Street Y's arts programs, decided to take a chance on a short season.
Within a few years, the orchestra was regarded as a valuable part of New York City's cultural life, with a reputation based on well-played performances of programs shared by standard repertory works, unusual and overlooked pieces, and premieres.


Senator Tells of Monitored Sandinista Contacts
The chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee said today that the private communications between a half-dozen lawmakers and Sandinista leaders of Nicaragua were intercepted by intelligence agencies in the 1980's.
The chairman, Senator David L. Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma, said that after reviewing classified summary of a report on the monitoring effort, which was first reported last month, he had found no indication that the intelligence agencies collected the information improperly or that any lawmaker had been overheard disclosing classified information damaging to national security.


ATOMIC REPOSITORY IS READY, U.S. SAYS
The Department of Energy said today that it had completed all of its reviews and was prepared to open the nation's first permanent repository for nuclear waste.
At the same time that Energy Secretary James D. Watkins made the announcement, Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. transferred control of 16 square miles of desert above the repository from his department to Mr.
Watkins's department.
Federal law requires the land to be in the Energy Department's control before the repository can be operated.


CHRONICLE
In the past four years, MIKHAIL BARYSHNIKOV has danced three works by Martha Graham.
It is only fitting that he repeat one of them on the opening night of her troupe's first season since her death at the age of 96 on April 1.
On Tuesday, Mr.
Baryshnikov is to dance in Miss Graham's "El Penitente" and will do so in three more appearances at City Center during the troupe's stay, through Oct. 20.
"I learned a lot from Martha about the theater and about life," he said.
"My performance is to be a very humble homage to this great lady."


On the Move Outdoors and In, in Search of Knowledge
Here is a sampling of other walking tours this weekend in the New York metropolitan region.
Today
GRAND CENTRAL AREA, Manhattan.
A 90-minute walking tour covering the architecture and history of the Grand Central Terminal area, led by Justin Ferate, a historian; sponsored by the Grand Central Partnership.
Meets at 12:30 P.M. in front of the Philip Morris Building, Park Avenue and 42d Street, every Friday, weather permitting.
Free.
Information: (212) 986-9217.
Tomorrow
BROOKLYN WATERFRONT WALKING TOUR, Sunset Park, Brooklyn.
Includes stops at Owl's Head Park, the 65th Street Railyard and the Brooklyn Army Terminal.
Sponsored by Shorewalkers.
Meets at 10 A.M. at Second Avenue and 65th Street, Brooklyn.
Suggested donation: $3.
Information: (212) 663-2167.
NAME THAT BERRY, Pelham Bay Park, northeast Bronx.
A walk to identify wild berries and nuts.
Meets at 11 A.M. at the Environmental Center, Section 2, Orchard Beach.
Information: (212) 548-7070.
PARK AVENUE, Manhattan.
A walking tour from 46th to 66th Street, sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.
RADICAL NEW YORK, Manhattan.
A walking tour of locations prominent in radical politics in Greenwich Village, the East Village and NoHo, including Cooper Union, the house of Emma Goldman and Astor Place; led by Robert Palmer, an editor, and Robert Erler, a librarian.
Meets at 2:30 P.M. at 339 Lafayette Street, at Bleecker Street.
Suggested contribution: $3.
Information: (718) 262-0948.
Sunday
ARCHITECTURAL WALK, Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
An architectural walk in and around Prospect Park past about 12 buildings designed by the firm of McKim, Mead &amp; White; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Meets at 11 A.M. under the arch at Grand Army Plaza, Park Slope.
Fee: $15, which includes admission to all fall events of the New York-North Jersey chapter of the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Information: (212) 986-1430.
FIFTH AVENUE AND GRAND CENTRAL TERMINAL, Manhattan.
An architectural tour of an area that blended European neo-classicism and American practicality to create centers of commerce, culture and transportation; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
FANTASTIC FUNGI, Central Park, Manhattan.
A walk to identify common species of fungi in the park; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at Fifth Avenue and 106th Street.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
GREENWICH VILLAGE, Manhattan.
A walking tour that focuses on the history and architecture of historic churches, including St.
Luke's in the Fields, St.
John's Lutheran Church, Our Lady of Pompeii Roman Catholic Church, Judson Memorial Church and Washington Square United Methodist Church.
Sponsored by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation and led by its executive director, Scott Marshall.
Meets at 12:45 P.M. at St.
Luke's in the Fields, 487 Hudson Street.
Fee: $12.
Reservations required: (212) 924-3895.
HARLEM ON SUNDAY, Manhattan.
Sponsored by Harlem Spirituals, the tour includes a church service with music, a stop at a historic house and a walk through the Sugar Hill area. 9 A.M. to 1 P.M. every Sunday.
Fee: $27.
Proper dress for church service required.
Reservations required.
Information: (212) 757-0425.
LITTLE ITALY, an Italian-American heritage walking tour in lower Manhattan, sponsored by the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street. 1 P.M.
Also on Oct. 13, 20 and 27, same time.
Fee: $12 ($11 for students and the elderly).
Reservations are encouraged.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
LOWER EAST SIDE, Manhattan.
"The Streets Where We Lived," a multi-ethnic walking tour in lower Manhattan led by Prof.
James P. Shenton of Columbia University; sponsored by the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street.
Noon.
Also Oct. 20 and Nov. 3, 10 and 17, same time.
Fee: $12 ($11 for students and the elderly).
Reservations are encouraged.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
MIGRATORY BIRD WALK, Pelham Bay Park, northeast Bronx.
A tour of a popular rest stop for birds on their way south; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 11 A.M. at the Pelham Bay Environmental Center, Section 2, Orchard Beach.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
MURRAY HILL, Manhattan.
Walking tour of the area that includes the residences of J. P. Morgan and Franklin D. Roosevelt; sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 265-2663.
PELHAM BAY TO FORT SCHUYLER, northeast Bronx.
A walking tour along the Bronx shore to the Throgs Neck area.
Sponsored by Shorewalkers.
Meets at 11 A.M. at Pelham Bay IRT subway station in the Bronx.
Suggested donation: $3.
Information: (212) 663-2167.
SEPHARDIC FLATBUSH, Brooklyn.
A visit to one of the largest Syrian-Jewish communities in the United States; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 10 A.M.
Fee: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.


S.&amp; P. Cuts Ratings for Five Insurers
Continuing what it said was an accelerated review of life insurers amid weakening asset values, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation yesterday lowered its ratings on the claims-paying ability of five insurers.
The rating on the Aetna Life Insurance Company's was cut to AA- from AA+, principally because of problem real estate loans.
The rating of the Lincoln National Life Insurance Company was cut to AA- from AA+.
S.&amp; P. cited an inability to generate the capital necessary to grow, pay dividends and deal with investment losses.


Will Stottlemyre Get the Hook? Just the Notion Draws Protest
The harsh, unforgiving development of late was this: Bud Harrelson was dismissed as manager by the Mets in a shake-up designed, in the words of General Manager Frank Cashen, to afford the club a "fresh start." The stark, lingering question is this: Should Mel Stottlemyre, the longtime pitching coach, be the next to go?
It is a question that causes some people pain, others anger, others to laugh disdainfully, still others to concede a grudging understanding.


More Punishment Doesn't Decrease Crime
To the Editor:
Acting Attorney General William P. Barr argues that there are three reasons for Congress to adopt President Bush's crime bill (Op-Ed, Sept. 24).
Each is an evasion of truth and logic, and boils down to the well-worn claim that more punishment will solve the problem of crime.


For Children
'Blessing of the Animals'  Cathedral of St.
John the Divine  Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street  Manhattan  (212) 662-2133  Recommended ages: 5 and up  Sunday
The seventh annual Blessing of the Animals at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine is an event that brings all sorts of creatures out of the woodwork.
This Sunday's Mass -- an "Earth Mass" -- is being celebrated as part of the church's St.
Francis Day Festival and will feature the Paul Winter Consort and a sermon by Senator Al Gore, Democrat of Tennessee.
Some of the stranger pets that children have taken to the blessing are algae and pythons.
But if your family's pets are more prosaic -- cats, dogs, rabbits, goldfish, monkeys -- they're more than welcome, too.
The 11 A.M.
Mass will run about two hours, so be prepared to sit with your animal until the blessing procession begins toward the end.
Then the church's own bestiary assemblage -- an elephant, llama, horses, goats -- goes to the altar to receive, along with everyone else's pets, a blessing from the bishop.
From 1 to 5 P.M., the outdoor fair takes place, featuring the Ralph Lee Mettawee Theater Company (a puppet and mask ensemble), a marionette theater, animals to adopt, pet contests, a petting zoo, an art exhibition, nature walks and vegetarian foods.
Admission is free to the Mass and the fair; the food is for sale. 'Fantastic Plastic' New York Hall of Science  47-01 111th Street  Flushing Meadows-Corona Park  Queens  (718) 699-0005  Recommended ages: 8 to 10  Tomorrow and Sunday
To some people, polymers and plastic are mysterious entities that are the purview of bifocaled scientists and secretive conglomerates.
Even the word "polymer" sounds artificial to laymen, as if it were an element beamed down by the starship Enterprise.
But a polymer is simply a substance made up of many small, similar molecules that join to make a large molecule, or a polymer.
And plastics are made of polymers.
This weekend, children can go to one of the 75-minute workshops at the New York Hall of Science and put those definitions to work -- making slime, a fluidlike polymer.
A high-school and college teacher will help children make this gooey stuff by mixing a solution of polyvinyl alcohol, sodium borate, guar gum and food coloring.
Children will also be able to make their own polyurethane "super ball" and discuss different types of plastics (including biodegradable ones) and their effect on the environment.
Tomorrow's workshop is from 2 to 3:15 P.M.; Sunday's is 1 to 2:15 P.M.
The fee for each workshop is $12 per child; $3.50 for an accompanying adult.
The museum can be reached from Manhattan by taking the No. 7 train to 111th Street and walking five blocks south. 'Do You Hear What I Hear?'
Little Orchestra Society  Florence Gould Hall  55 East 59th Street  Manhattan  (212) 704-2100  Recommended ages: 3 to 5  Tomorrow and Sunday
The seventh season of the Lolli-Pops concerts begins tomorrow with the theme of listening discerningly to symphonic music.
So it's time to dust off the Mary Janes and take the wool knickers out of the cleaners: concertgoing time has arrived for New York's youngest patrons.
The Lolli-Pops resident members -- Bow the Panda, Toot the Bird, Buzz the Bee and Bang the Lion -- will, with the help of Dino Anagnost's Little Orchestra Society, instill in the audience the differences between high and low notes, soft and loud notes, slow and fast notes.
The children will be taught how to recognize these differences in various pieces of music, like Sousa's "Semper Fidelis" and Copland's "Hoe-Down" (from "Rodeo").
The hourlong concerts take place in an attractive theater with comfortable plush seats, and children receive a gift to take home.
It's a good idea to arrive early because the combination of young children and wheel-to-wheel strollers makes for a noisy scene.
An elevator is available.
Shows are tomorrow at 10:15 and 11:30 A.M. and Sunday at 1:15 and 2:30 P.M.
Single tickets are $30; subscriptions for the three concerts in the series (the others are Nov. 2-3 and 3 23-24) are $84.
Windmill Day
Alley Pond Environmental Center  228-06 Northern Boulevard  Douglaston, Queens  (718) 229-4000  Recommended ages: 3 and up  Tomorrow
The Alley Pond Environmental Center is a 618-acre woodland and wetland enclave with extensive trails.
The center also conducts workshops and classes for children and adults on subjects ranging from gulls to longstitch needlecraft.
Tomorrow, visitors will have the chance to see firsthand the inner workings of the center's newly built windmill.
The original windmill burned to the ground a few years ago; a close replica was constructed and finished just recently.
Its blue-and-white front door and brown shingled facade are a homey touch among the cattails and weeping willows.
Inside, visitors will get to see just how a windmill works -- in this case, one that pumps water -- by climbing two steep ladders to the top.
The redwood container on the balcony, which offers a verdant vista, looks like a hot tub.
The windmill pumps water from below the ground to the surface; the water is then used to replenish the surrounding land and encourage new flora, like wildflowers.
After the tour, visitors may wander along the trails, where the dense rustling reeds, marshiness and vociferous birds can make you feel like you've entered the heart of the Everglades. (You might want to take boots.) The windmill tour costs $2 for adults and $1 for children, and is given every half-hour from noon to 4 P.M. 'Look and Look Again: Children's Art  From Armenia'
Children's Museum of Manhattan  212 West 83d Street  (212) 721-1223  Recommended ages: 4 to 12  Through December
Armenia has been in the news quite a lot this year, but many people do not have an extensive knowledge of its civilization, which dates back 5,000 years.
One way for children to understand Armenians and their culture might be to explore this art exhibition, a show comprised of about 100 paintings from the State Center for Esthetic Education in Yerevan, Armenia's capital.
The exhibition is a sample of work produced by the 6,000 children enrolled every year at the center and its satellites.
There are classes in painting, storytelling, dramatic play, woodcarving, embroidery and sculpture.
This exhibition's sophistication is intriguing and surprising, and descriptive labels enhance the artworks, which are arranged by theme -- nature, spiritual life, portraits, catastrophe, still life, genre and cultural heritage.
Ara Aslanian, a 6-year-old, painted a brooding and expressive portrait of his mother.
"Earthquake," by an 11-year-old, is a moving painting that depicts toppled church crosses.
"Occupation," by a 6-year-old, is dominated by a tank but also by an intensely bright, long-lashed sun in a corner.
All of the paintings are unexpectedly touching and ruminative.
The museum is open from 1 to 5 P.M. on Mondays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays; from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. on Saturdays and Sundays.
Admission: $4.
A catalogue is available for $2.
Keep in Mind
"WILLIAM TELL AND OTHER SWISS FOLK TALES," in which the storyteller Vit Horejs will use traditional European marionettes to tell the legend of William Tell, as well as stories influenced by the German, Italian and French presence in Switzerland.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M. at the Museum of American Folk Art, 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street, Manhattan.
Admission: free.
Information: (212) 595-9533.
FAMILY GALLERY HOUR, an informal walk in the galleries of the Museum of Modern Art, introducing children and adults to different aspects of various collections.
Tomorrow at 10 A.M. at the Edward John Noble Education Center at the museum, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $5 a family, which includes a free return visit.
Information: (212) 708-9480.
"LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD AND THE FROG PRINCE," two puppet plays by Marshall Katzman's Fantasy Puppet Theater.
Tomorrow and Sunday at 10:30 A.M. and noon, at the Puppet Playhouse, Asphalt Green, 555 East 90th Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $3.50.
Information: (212) 369-8890.
"THE PICTURE TRAIN," an Asian-American children's film series and folk-art demonstration, sponsored by Asian Cinevision, a media-arts center.
Tomorrow's English-language films, at 2:30 P.M., are "How the Elephant Got Its Trunk" and "Animals of Asia." The folk-art demonstration will be of folded-paper sculpture.
Free at the Chatham Square branch of the New York Public Library, 33 East Broadway, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 964-6598.
"BARTHOLOMEW AND OOBLECK," a modern-dance performance for families by the Wendy Perron Dance Company, based on the Dr.
Seuss book of the same name.
Sunday at 2 and 3 P.M. outside Belvedere Castle in Central Park (West 81st Street or East 79th Street entrance).
Free admission.
Information: (212) 772-0210.
"DEVELOPING THE PAST," a workshop in which children ages 7 and up can discover the "historical secrets in old photographs" and make their own pinhole camera.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M. at the Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, Manhattan.
Fee: $2 for members, $3 for nonmembers.
Information: (212) 534-1672, extension 206.


David Lean, Director, Is Honored In Service at St. Paul's Cathedral
The actors Peter O'Toole, Sir Alec Guinness, Sarah Miles, Tom Courtenay and Omar Sharif were among the 800 people who gathered today at St.
Paul's Cathedral to honor Sir David Lean, the director of films including "Lawrence of Arabia," "The Bridge on the River Kwai," "Dr. Zhivago," "Brief Encounter" and "A Passage to India." Sir David died in April at the age of 83.
The Rev.
Eric Evans, dean of St.
Paul's, echoed the words spoken of Lawrence of Arabia in that same cathedral in Sir David's film, calling the director "one of the most extraordinary men of our age and our generation."


Syria Is Said to Assure Iran Over Peace Talks
Syria, concerned that its decision to take part in a Middle East peace conference could lead to a rupture in its alliance with Iran, has apparently made overtures to explain its position.
Syria's Army Chief of Staff, Maj.
Gen.
Hikmat al-Chehabi, returned to Damascus on Wednesday after holding six days of talks with senior Government leaders in Teheran, Syria's Government-run news agency reported.


A Software Pact For Wang Labs
Wang Laboratories Inc., the troubled computer maker, entered an alliance with Computer Associates International Inc., a software publisher, under which Computer Associates will combine its software with Wang's computer-imaging technology.
Wang, based in Lowell, Mass., will also provide desktop computers to Computer Associates customers as part of the deal, the companies said.
Terms of the alliance were not disclosed.
Computer Associates, based in Garden City, L.I., is a leading maker of software for mainframe computers.
Earlier this year, Wang announced a major alliance with I.B.M. in which Wang will curtail its own computer-manufacturing operations in favor of selling relabeled I.B.M. computers.
Wang reported a net loss of $385.5 million in the fiscal year ended June 30.


Review/Film; A Period Piece In Search Of a Period
No one expects or wants John Travolta to go on playing the disco king forever, but who would have thought he'd turn into Dick Clark's evil twin?
In the unintentionally silly "Shout," Mr.
Travolta plays a music teacher in a small Texas town in the 1950's.
You can tell he's cool: he smokes, he wears a black T-shirt, he plays the harmonica and he introduces his class to what he calls rock-and-roll.
Actually, the songs on the soundtrack are new and they sound more like rhythm-and-blues, but "Shout" doesn't care about fine distinctions.
It cares about how hopelessly backward the townspeople are, especially the sheriff who says, "What kind of word is cool?"
The Travolta character teaches at a place called the Benedict Home for Boys, a kind of rural work camp for delinquents.
But the worst thing these guys do is steal a radio tube so they can listen to an underground deejay.
"What's a deejay?" one of the boys asks.
Maybe they do need help after all.


Review/Film; A New Boy In Town Captures Her Heart
Everything about "The Man in the Moon," Robert Mulligan's effortlessly old-fashioned family drama set in a small Southern town, has a rosy glow.
It's a reminder that Mr.
Mulligan, a seasoned film maker whose credits include "To Kill a Mockingbird," "Summer of '42" and "The Other," can direct with real tenderness and without fake emotion.
His latest film unfolds gently and gracefully, in a climate where the warmth isn't merely a matter of weather.
Until its final reel, when it strains badly to accommodate an almost biblical stroke of retribution, "The Man in the Moon" is a small, fond film that achieves a kind of quiet perfection.
The story concerns two sisters, and Mr.
Mulligan can find something evocative even in the way the elder braids the younger one's hair.
The latter, 14-year-old Dani (Reese Witherspoon), is just on the verge of real beauty, while the slightly older Maureen (Emily Warfield) has already gotten there.
The girls' family, which is beautifully evoked, exists at all different stages of development, from their toddler sister to their pregnant mother (Tess Harper) and the father (Sam Waterston) who is wary of his daughters' prospective suitors.
In his or her own way, each member of this family longs for a boy.


Settlement On Bhopal Is Accepted
India's Supreme Court gave its assent today to a settlement between the Indian Government and the Union Carbide Corporation for $470 million in compensation for the victims of the 1984 gas disaster at a Carbide plant in Bhopal.
But the court also said in its ruling that the former chairman of the American chemical company, as well as Indian officials with the company here, could be tried on criminal charges arising from the disaster, which left more than 2,000 people dead and as many as 200,000 injured.


Emergency Room Treatment Called Chaotic in New York
New York City's emergency rooms are chaotic, unsupervised, understaffed and uncaring, according to nearly a dozen witnesses who testified yesterday at a hearing on emergency room care.
The hearing, called by City Council President Andrew J. Stein, was held in response to a growing number of allegations that poor management at Kings County Hospital contributed to the death of a young Hasidic man from an untreated stab wound.


Hospital Cited Baby's Abuse Before Death
Two months before she died, apparently from a beating, a Bronx baby was hospitalized with severe bruises, and the hospital told child welfare officials it suspected the baby was being abused, the police and a hospital employee said yesterday.
But despite the hospital's recommendation that the baby and her two older brothers be removed from their mother's custody, no action was taken, said the hospital employee, who requested anonymity.


Abu Dhabi Drops B.C.C.I. Revival in Britain
The Abu Dhabi shareholders who own a majority of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International said today that they had given up hope that the bank's operations in Britain could be revived.
As a result, they said they would begin disposing of the bank's assets in Britain in an orderly fashion and would terminate most of the 1,200 employees here.
The employees have been receiving their salaries even though the British unit has been closed since July 5, when regulators around the world seized the bank's operations after finding evidence of losses and large-scale fraud.


Our Towns
For weeks, every time Anita Winslow Seidel walked into the dry cleaners here, she mentioned all the litter blowing around in the parking lot.
The clerks were very polite.
The parking lot remained very dirty.
Then, one morning the clerks spotted a well-dressed woman sweeping outside.
It was Ms.
Seidel.
The store owner was embarrassed.
He does his own litter cleanup now.


Congress Urges That Doctors Be Tested for AIDS
Congress today approved a bill that suggests but does not require that doctors and other health care workers be tested for the AIDS virus.
The bill was passed by voice vote in the House, and then in the Senate.


Soviets Expecting Shortages of Food
The United States Secretary of Agriculture, Edward R. Madigan, said today that Soviet officials had told him that there would be no famine this winter but that there could be food shortages in some cities that could lead to social unrest.
"They represented to us that there wouldn't be anything as dramatic as famine, but that there could be shortages," he said as he began a nine-day mission to examine Soviet food needs.
The Soviet officials told him that foreign food aid could be essential to prevent unrest over food shortages.


Art in Review
Jim Nutt  Phyllis Kind Gallery  136 Greene Street  SoHo  Through Oct. 19
Imagine a cross between Holbein and Picasso and you have some sense of Jim Nutt's latest paintings.
The artist takes up an ancient and exalted tradition of bust-length, unidealized depictions of women, often enigmatic or seemingly lost in thought, which goes back to the Italian Renaissance and includes the "Mona Lisa." These fictive portraits, with titles like "Tooth," "Bowl," "Pug" and "Daft," signal a striking shift in Mr.
Nutt's work.
His characters have become less cartoonish, less funky and far more affecting.
One feels for them, with their noses in the shapes of ziggurats and charred bell peppers.


Sounds Around Town


Vallone Urges Delay on Homeless Shelters
The New York City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, yesterday stepped up his opposition to Mayor David N. Dinkins's plan to specify about 60 potential sites for shelters for homeless people later this month, urging the Mayor to wait for the recommendations of a study commission in January.
Mr.
Vallone, facing an outcry from neighborhoods around the city and pressure from his members, said the Mayor's plan to list the sites for opening new mid-sized shelters to replace large armories was "ill-timed and ill-conceived." He said he was not sure the city had adequately reviewed how best to care for homeless single people and that more temporary shelters might not be the answer.


New York Fails to Advance in Cup Bid
The organizers for the 1994 World Cup named 19 communities yesterday as the leading contenders to stage games in the monthlong soccer tournament.
New York, the country's most populous city, was not among them.
In reducing a list of 26 bidders, the organizing committee placed New York on a "nonpriority" list of sites now virtually assured of no chance of holding games.
The metropolitan area was not shut out, however.
A New Jersey bid for Giants Stadium in East Rutherford and Rutgers Stadium in Piscataway, and the Yale Bowl in New Haven were among the "priority" sites that representatives of soccer's international federation will inspect over 10 days, starting Oct. 29.


A Moscow Report Expresses Fear Of Following 'Path of Yugoslavia'
A confidential analysis that surfaced last week at a meeting of Supreme Soviet members warns that the Soviet Union is "headed rapidly down the path of Yugoslavia, repeating almost step by step the events there a year or six months ago."
The authorship of the document has come under some dispute.
It is signed "K.G.B. U.S.S.R.," but officials in the intelligence agency and a report in the newspaper Nezavisimaya Gazeta (Independent Gazette) said it was a draft analysis prepared by experts from academic institutes and the K.G.B. for a parliamentary commission studying reforms in the Soviet security system.


Peres Urges Halt to West Bank Settlements
Shimon Peres, head of the opposition Labor Party, called today for a halt to Israeli settlements in the occupied territories and said there could be no Middle East peace unless this country gives up some of the Arab land it has held since the 1967 war.
Mr.
Peres proposed the creation of a demilitarized West Bank, with Israel retaining certain, unspecified areas for security purposes but yielding the rest to a new "Jordanian-Palestinian confederation" that would include the present Kingdom of Jordan.
The crowded Gaza Strip would also be a part of this confederation, he said.
"Peace cannot be achieved without territorial compromise," Mr.
Peres, a former Prime Minister, said in an interview at his party's headquarters in which he reiterated his party's position on several issues.
He said that one of the best ways to expedite the Middle East peace process being promoted by the United States was to freeze settlement activity in the territories.
On both counts -- land concessions and a halt to settlements -- the Labor Party leader is diametrically at odds with the no-compromise stand taken by the Government and the Likud party of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir.
"When somebody says Gaza belongs to us, we are not convinced," Mr.
Peres said.
"We think that we belong to Gaza more than Gaza belongs to us. We are more in a way the policemen of Gaza than its proprietor.
"We would not like to dominate another people against their will," he continued.
"It's a moral issue. It's a political issue. Throughout our history as a Jewish people we have never dominated other people, and whoever dominated us disappeared from history. We don't want to copy that."
Some opinion polls here suggest that a majority of Israelis share his views on a settlement freeze, and that their ranks include a significant share of Likud voters.
But the surveys also suggest that agreement on this issue does not necessarily translate into broad popular support for Mr.
Peres's party, which had belonged to a Shamir-led government until the coalition broke apart 19 months ago.
Political commentators say Labor is now at a low ebb as it prepares for elections scheduled to be held within a year.
Rejecting this view, Mr.
Peres said there will be many new voters in the next election, including a large number of Soviet immigrants.
"None of us knows how they'll vote," he said.


3 New I.B.M. Models Due On Monday
I.B.M. will introduce three new models of its PS/1 home computer on Monday, as part of a fall product offensive that analysts say will strengthen the company's personal computer line.
The new PS/1 models will be based on Intel's 386SX microprocessor, a more powerful chip than the Intel 286 that is used in the current machines.
First shown in June 1990, the PS/1 was an effort to reverse the International Business Machine Corporation's original debacle in the home market with the PC Jr., a machine that customers perceived as underpowered and only partly compatible with the existing I.B.M.
PC line; I.B.M. withdrew the PC Jr. in 1985, two years after introducing it.


Blackhawks Rally To a Tie
Adam Creighton scored the game-tying goal 3 minutes 50 seconds into the third period and Jimmy Waite stopped 25 shots as the Chicago Blackhawks battled the Detroit Red Wings to a 3-3 tie in their season opener tonight.
Michael Goulet had two first-period power-play goals for Chicago.
Canadiens 4, Maple Leafs 3
MONTREAL (AP) -- Montreal captain Guy Carbonneau flipped the puck over Toronto goaltender Grant Fuhr to break a 3-3 tie 2:50 into the third period.
Wendel Clark had two power-play goals and an assist for the Maple leafs.


Art in Review
Petah Coyne  Jack Shainman Gallery  560 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 12 Diane Brown Gallery  23 Watts Street  SoHo  Through Oct. 19
Petah Coyne's latest sculptures are among her best.
As always, they hang from chains, and they are very much about gravity and mass.
Ms.
Coyne hides the chains behind ropes that look like nooses.
The sculptures are painted matte black, and made from chicken wire and wire fences cut into pieces, folded, layered and sewn together.
A new component of her work is the use of clusters of incredibly finely shredded metal, hovering above or around several of these hulking masses.


Knicks Make a Move In the Right Direction
The Knicks, finally, have a small forward who can rebound and score.
Forget about how Xavier McDaniel and his tender knees will fit into the running game ascribed to Pat Riley, who in his last three or four years in Los Angeles coached a Lakers team that played more half-court basketball than people, for some reason, want to remember.
McDaniel is a legitimate big-time talent on a team that was in danger this summer of having its ranks reduced to none.
A truly qualified coach will devise a scheme that best suits his players, and not moan, like Hubie Brown, for the right players to fit his exalted system.
But then, Riley has already demonstrated his flexibility on this subject.


De Sica Screening Schedule
"Vittorio D: De Sica Behind the Camera and on the Screen," a retrospective of films featuring Vittorio De Sica as director and actor, will run through Nov. 12 at the Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street.
Unless noted, films are in Italian with English subtitles.
Screening admission is included in museum admission: $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free under age 16 if accompanied by an adult).
Information: (212) 708-9490.
Today
"WHAT SCOUNDRELS MEN ARE" (1932, directed by Mario Camerini), starring De Sica, 2:30 P.M. (also Sunday at 5 P.M.)
"THE GOLD OF NAPLES" (1954, De Sica), Sophia Loren, Silvana Mangano, De Sica, 6 P.M. (also Sunday at 2 P.M.)
Tomorrow
"DUE CUORI FELICI" (1932, Baldassare Negroni), starring De Sica, 2 P.M. (also Monday at 6 P.M.)
"DOCTOR BEWARE" (1941, De Sica), Anna Magnani, De Sica, 5 P.M. (also Tuesday at 2:30 P.M.)
Monday
"TEMPO MASSIMO" (1934, Mario Mattoli), Anna Magnani, De Sica, 2:30 P.M. (also Thursday at 6 P.M.)
Tuesday
"UN GARIBALDINO AL CONVENTO" (1942, De Sica), Maria Mercader, De Sica, 6 P.M. (also Thursday at 2:30 P.M.)
Oct. 11
"I'D GIVE A MILLION" (1935, Mario Camerini), Assia Noris, De Sica, 2:30 P.M. (also on Oct. 13 at 5 P.M.)
"THE CHILDREN ARE WATCHING US" (1942, De Sica), 6 P.M. (also Oct. 13 at 2 P.M.)
Oct. 12
"NAPOLI D'ALTRI TEMPI" (1938, Amleto Palermi), Emma Gramatica, De Sica, 2 P.M. (also on Oct. 14 at 6 P.M.)
"LA PORTA DEL CIELO" (1944-46, De Sica), Maria Mercader, 5 P.M. (also on Oct. 14 at 2:30 P.M.)
Oct. 15
"I NOSTRI SOGNI" (1943, Vittorio Cottafavi), Maria Mercader, De Sica, 2:30 P.M. (also on Oct. 17 at 6 P.M.)
"ROMA, CITTA LIBERA" (1946, Marcello Pagliero), Valentina Cortese, De Sica, 6 P.M. (also on Oct. 18 at 2:30 P.M.)
Oct. 17
"SHOESHINE" (1946, De Sica), 2:30 P.M. (also Oct. 19 at 2 P.M.)
Oct. 18
"THE BICYCLE THIEF" (1948, De Sica), 6 P.M. (also Oct. 20 at 5 P.M.)
Oct. 19
"MIRACLE IN MILAN" (1951, De Sica), Emma Gramatica, 5 P.M. (also Oct. 24 at 6 P.M.)
Oct. 20
"UMBERTO D" (1952, De Sica), 2 P.M. (also Oct. 22 at 6 P.M.)
Oct. 21
"PEDDLIN' IN SOCIETY" (1946, Gennaro Righelli), Anna Magnani, De Sica, 2:30 P.M. (also Oct. 26 at 5 P.M.)
"INDISCRETION OF AN AMERICAN WIFE" (1953, De Sica), Jennifer Jones, Montgomery Clift, 6 P.M. (in English) (also Oct. 25 at 6 P.M.)
Oct. 22
"THE ROOF" (1956, De Sica), 2:30 P.M. (also Oct. 27 at 5 P.M.)
Oct. 24
"HELLO, ELEPHANT" 1952, Gianni Franciolini), Maria Mercader, Sabu, De Sica, 2:30 P.M. (also Oct. 27 at 2 P.M.)
Oct. 25
SELECTED FILM EPISODES: From "TIMES GONE BY" (1952, Alessandro Blasetti), Gina Lollobrigida, De Sica; "THE ANATOMY OF LOVE" (1954, Alessandro Blasetti), De Sica; "THE WITCHES" (1966, De Sica), Silvana Mangano, Clint Eastwood; "BOCCACCIO '70" (1962, De Sica), Sophia Loren, 3 P.M. (also Oct. 28 at 6 P.M.)
Oct. 26
"BREAD, LOVE AND DREAMS" (1953, Luigi Comencini), Gina Lollobrigida, De Sica, 2 P.M. (also Oct. 28 at 2:30 P.M.)
Oct. 29
"TOO BAD SHE'S BAD" (1955, Alessandro Blasetti), Sophia Loren, Marcello Mastroianni, De Sica, 2:30 P.M. (also Oct. 31 at 6 P.M.)
"THE EARRINGS OF MADAME DE . . ." (1953, Max Ophuls), Danielle Darrieux, Charles Boyer, De Sica (in French with English subtitles), 6 P.M. (also Oct. 31 at 2:30 P.M.)
Nov. 1
"AFTER THE FOX" (1966, De Sica), Peter Sellers, Victor Mature, Britt Ekland (in English), noon (also Nov. 3 at 5 P.M.)
"IL SEGNO DI VENERE" (1955, Dino Risi), Sophia Loren, Franca Valeri, Alberto Sordi, De Sica, 2:30 P.M. (also Nov. 3 at noon)
"TWO WOMEN" (1961, De Sica), Sophia Loren, Eleanora Brown, Raf Vallone, Jean-Paul Belmondo, 6 P.M. (also Nov. 3 at 2:30 P.M.)
Nov. 2
"UN ITALIANO IN AMERICA" (1967, Alberto Sordi), De Sica, Sordi, noon (also Nov. 5 at 2:30 P.M.)
"IL BOOM" (1963, De Sica), Alberto Sordi, Gianna Maria Canale, 2:30 P.M. (also Nov. 5 at noon)
"IL GIUDIZIO UNIVERSALE" (1961, De Sica), Silvana Mangano, Alberto Sordi, De Sica, 5 P.M. (also Nov. 4 at 2:30 P.M.)
Nov. 4
"YESTERDAY, TODAY AND TOMORROW" (1963, De Sica), Sophia Loren, Marcello Mastroianni, 6 P.M. (also Nov. 8 at 2:30 P.M.)
Nov. 5
"IL GENERALE DELLA ROVERE" (1959, Roberto Rossellini), De Sica, Sandra Milo, Giovanna Ralli, 6 P.M. (also Nov. 9 at 2:30 P.M.)
Nov. 8
"IT STARTED IN NAPLES " (1960, Melville Shavelson), Clark Gable, Sophia Loren, De Sica, (in English), noon (also Nov. 10 at 2:30 P.M.)
"MARRIAGE, ITALIAN STYLE" (1964, De Sica), Sophia Loren, Marcello Mastroianni, 6 P.M. (also Nov. 10 at noon)
Nov. 9
"IL VIGILE" (1960, Luigi Zampa), De Sica, Alberto Sordi, Marisa Merlini, noon (also Nov. 11 at 2:30 P.M.)
"THE GARDEN OF THE FINZI-CONTINIS" (1970, De Sica), Dominique Sanda, Helmut Berger, 5 P.M. (also Nov. 11 at 6 P.M.)
Nov. 10
"A BRIEF VACATION" (1973, De Sica), Florinda Bolkan, Renato Salvatori, Adriana Asti, 5 P.M. (also Nov. 12 at 2:30 P.M.)


A Fun Chief at Cadence Is Serious Merger Man
Joseph B. Costello, president and chief executive of Cadence Design Systems Inc., is known for his sense of fun and occasional offbeat behavior.
Last year on Halloween, Mr.
Costello, who is 6 feet 5 inches tall, wore eight-inch-high platform shoes and came to work dressed as Frankenstein, despite having a meeting with important Japanese customers.
Mr.
Costello has been unusual in business as well.
He has made Cadence into a leader in electronic design software through mergers and acquisitions, although many high-technology mergers are prone to fail.


Review/Music; Parnassus Gives a Benefit for Itself
Throughout the benefit concert given by the contemporary-music group Parnassus on Wednesday night, the gold letters above the stage at the Ethical Culture Society seemed to slyly draw attention to themselves.
They read: "The Place Where People Meet to Seek the Highest Is Holy Ground."
That is how the group, now entering its 18th season, has seen itself over the years: seeking to meet on the highest musical ground.
Generally it has found that terrain in the art music that developed out of High Modernism, out of Arnold Schoenberg and serialism, out of the work of composers like Milton Babbitt and Elliott Carter, Mario Davidovsky, Charles Wuorinen and George Perle.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.12
5.00
9.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.02
5.09
7.13
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.08
5.15
7.14
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.22
7.24
8.51
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.83
7.82
8.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.95
8.93
9.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.88
6.89
7.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellweather bonds, notes and bills


Market Place; Good Year For Money Managers
AS a group, the nation's money managers are outperforming the market so far this year, buoyed in large part by a favorable climate for small and medium-sized stocks, estimates released yesterday by CDA Investment Technologies show.
CDA, which based its calculations on quarterly filings made by 525 money managers with the Securities and Exchange Commission, found that the portfolios of those in the reporting group had increased an average of 25.4 percent in the first nine months of the year.
That is 5.1 percentage points better than the rise in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500.


Uncertain Winds on Midwest Farms
In a sun-dappled Illinois cornfield that seemed to stretch to the horizon, a big, green combine rolled across eight rows at a time.
But the cornstalks, often as not, were barren, left lifeless by drought.
"A couple more droughts and I'll be gone," Tom Harms said recently as he steered the giant harvesting machine through parched cornfields that are yielding barely half the usual crop.
"Even so, I know it could be worse."


Letter: On Women's Health; The Gender Gap in Drug Tests
To the Editor:
The lack of data on women's health and drug response is a serious problem.
However, "Toward Healthy Women" (editorial, Sept. 9), along with most other coverage of this issue, implicitly attributes this lack to the failures of earlier research.


Dollar Rises on Jobs Report Except for Loss Against Yen
The dollar got a lift yesterday from a report that unemployment in the United States was slightly better than expected, but trading was still dominated by the Japanese yen.
The yen continued to climb after indications that the Japanese wanted the currency to strengthen to help bring down surpluses with trading partners.


From the 60's, a Poetic Work Of Brazil's New Cinema
The New York Film Festival pays tribute to Glauber Rocha (1938-1981), one of the most influential members of Brazil's Cinema Novo movement, with the showing of "Earth Entranced" ("Terra em Transe") today at 3:30 P.M.
Like the directors identified with the French New Wave, the members of the Cinema Novo, or New Cinema, were young outsiders trying to provide films of a quality and substance not available through Brazil's cinema establishment.
They worked with low budgets and immense enthusiasm, and in a variety of styles.
Unlike the French film makers, they were also committed to political causes.


Jets Get Off Ground by Staying on It
The Jets are leading the National Football League in rushing with an average of 164 yards per game.
It is a point of pride for the offense, something they can point to as a sign that, although they have a 2-3 record, they are heading in the right direction.
It has been 12 seasons since the Jets have finished a season with better than 164 yards rushing per game.
In 1979, they led the league in rushing with 2,646 yards, an average of 165.4 yards per game.
At their present clip, the Jets are on a pace to equal or exceed that total, which was the best in the team's history.


Sharp Rise For Bonds On Jobs Data
Bond prices rose smartly yesterday after the Government released a so-so employment report that showed that the economic recovery continued to limp in September.
"The economy is still moving up, but employment growth is falling short of the norm by a wide margin," said Robert Giordano, director of economic research at Goldman, Sachs.
The economy generated just 24,000 non-farm jobs in September, or 224,000 since payrolls hit bottom last April.


White House Memo; From His Position of Power, Bush Swings Into a Defense
Maintaining an oddly defensive posture as he prepares to enter the 1992 campaign, President Bush called a news conference today to tell the country that he really does care about domestic problems.
Stung by Democratic assaults on high unemployment, civil rights and parental leaves, facing the gloomy prospect of an election year with the economy in recession, and battling polls that show American voters think he spends too much time on foreign affairs, Mr.
Bush insisted that he was as concerned about problems at home as about the global crises that have consumed much of his 31 months in office.


Religion Notes
Movie About Pope
Leaders of the Roman Catholic Church have long complained of "Catholic bashing," be it the desecration of crucifixes in the name of art in museums or the caricature of nuns as monsters in the theater.
One small victory for these critics came recently in the one-letter change of a movie title.


Public &amp; Private; A Bench Memo
If you ever want to have a tooth out without Novocain, you can spend a couple of nights in night court and be numb before you know it.
Case numbers, rap sheets, felonies, prior offenses pass in dizzying succession, and after a while no defendant has a face, much less a future.
Gustin Reichbach had not been working as a judge in Criminal Court long, and so it was possible for him to think that his work need not be futile.
He looked down from the bench in Brooklyn at prostitutes and drug addicts, women who have sex with many strangers and men who swap needles as though they were baseball cards, and he saw the AIDS epidemic spreading before him.


Lisa Blauhut Is Married
Lisa Amy Blauhut, a production associate for the Palmetto division of Roydonware, a New York children's clothing manufacturer, and William Edward Demarest, a staff writer for The Rockland Journal-News in West Nyack, N.Y., were married yesterday at Tarrytown (N.Y.) House.
Judge William K. Nelson of the Rockland County Court officiated.
Mrs.
Demarest, 30 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Blauhut of Piermont, N.Y.
Mr.
Demarest, 30, graduated from Iona College.
He a son of Carole Demarest of Woodside, Queens, and the late Gerard Demarest.


Invoking Kristallnacht Betrays Jewish History; Fanning the Flames
To the Editor:
"A Sudden Twinge of Conscience," William Rhoden's Sept. 13 sports commentary, is an important contribution to the debate on the duty of black athletes to address issues that confront the black community.


Watching Over a Holy Site in Jerusalem


News Summary
International 2-5
Japan's leader will not run again, he says, clearing the way for a chaotic scramble to succeed him.
Toshiki Kaifu, who has been Prime Minister since 1989, made his announcement after losing the support of his most powerful party supporters.
Page 1


Classical Music in Review
'Les Pecheurs de Perles'  New York City Opera


Yugoslav Presidency Splits; Another Truce Is Unheeded
The eight-member presidency of this country split in half today, leaving two bodies asserting that they hold Yugoslav sovereignty.
One, composed of Serbia and its three allies on the old presidency, has declared itself to have superseded the practically defunct federal Parliament.
The other comprises representatives of four republics.
It is headed by Branko Kostic, a Serb, and is nominally headed by President Stipe Mesic, a Croat, who had been the head of the old executive.


She's a Saint to Saints
"Look at my card, baby! It's from JIM MORA, JIM FINKS -- all of them!"
So exclaimed Saints fan MARY ELOISE ADKINSON of Gulfport, Miss., when a bouquet of flowers topped with a black and gold crown arrived from the New Orleans coach, general manager and team.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Bush Administration's attempt to revive the economy by prodding Government bank supervisors to ease credit standards so that banks will make more loans has stirred a fuss.
The supervisors insist that they are not at fault.
Banks are not lending more mainly because demand has fallen, regulators and bankers say.
Also, banks have tightened their credit standards.  [ Page 1. ]


BRIEFS
*
Allergan Inc., Irvine, Calif., a maker of eye-care products, reached an agreement for Carl Zeiss Inc., West Gemany, to buy its microprocessor-based diagnostic instrument company, Allergan Humphrey, for undisclosed terms. *
Chevron U.S.A.
Inc., San Francisco, a unit of Chevron Corp., reached an agreement with Shell Oil Co. to buy Shell's 69 direct-supplied service stations in the greater Atlanta area for undisclosed terms.


Corrections
An introduction to excerpts yesterday from questions and answers at the nomination hearings for Robert M. Gates misidentified Senator Frank H. Murkowski in some copies.
He is a Republican from Alaska.


Barbara de Portago, Consultant, Wed
Barbara de Portago, a special-events consultant to the School of American Ballet in New York, and William James Tapert, a New York investment banker, were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
S.
B.
Matarazzo, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Vincent Ferrer Church.
Mrs. de Portago-Tapert, who attended the Sorbonne, is the daughter of Florence Van der Kemp of Paris and Giverny, France, and Henrik Schlubach of Hamburg, Germany.
She is the stepdaughter of Gerald Van der Kemp, the former curator of the Chateau de Versailles and the curator of the Claude Monet house and gardens in Giverny.
Her two previous marriages ended in divorce.


Corrections
An article yesterday about proposed ethics rules for the New York City Council misstated the source of money used by Councilman Noach Dear for car payments and other expenses.
It came from campaign funds, not from Save Soviet Jewry, a foundation he heads.


McDaniel's Right Where He Wants to Be
One day last year, Xavier McDaniel and Patrick Ewing had dinner at a Seattle restaurant with the lawyer David Falk, who represents each of them.
When the topic of the Knicks came up, McDaniel said he had always wanted to play for the New York team.
A year later, McDaniel finds himself with the Knicks, expected to replace Kiki Vandeweghe as the starting small forward.
So when someone asked McDaniel today if Ewing had anything to do with the trade three days ago that brought McDaniel to New York, the new Knick laughed.


Marietta Tree Remembered


BASEBALL HEADLINE&gt;Braves' Big Weekend Starts on A High Note
ust like that, the Atlanta Braves moved into position tonight to win the National League West championship without the need to pay attention to what the Los Angeles Dodgers do the rest of the season.
Just like that consisted of an Atlanta victory over Houston and a Dodger loss in San Francisco.
The rest of the season consists of games Saturday and Sunday.
Atlanta grabbed a one-game lead tonight, and if the Braves win their last two games, the Dodgers can do nothing to stop them from winning the division title.


Nigerian Vows Widespread Elections in 1992
President Ibrahim B. Babangida of Nigeria pledged today to hold elections at all levels of government by the end of 1992 and accused the international community of failing to support attempts by African nations to democratize and liberalize of their economies.
Speaking as the current chairman of the Organization of African Unity, General Babangida told the General Assembly that African efforts at structural adjustment had not received the necessary international support.
He declared that "African indebtedness is the single major obstacle to development," which he linked to progress toward democracy.


Politicians Plead Not Guilty
Mayor Joseph J. Santopietro of Waterbury and seven political associates pleaded not guilty today to corruption and income-tax evasion charges during an arraignment in Federal District Court.
Judge T. F. Gilroy Daly set the trial for Dec. 3.
He originally set the date for Nov. 5 but changed it because Nov. 5 is Election Day, and the Mayor is seeking re-election.


Egypt and Israel Confident of Parley
The leaders of Israel and Egypt said today that they envisioned Middle East peace talks getting under way at the end of the month, but the Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, voiced continued reservations over the question of who will represent the Palestinians.
Other officials here said that it would probably take another trip to the region by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to work out the details of creating a joint delegation of Palestinians and Jordanians.
The officials said they expected a Baker visit, his eighth since the end of the Persian Gulf war, in the next week or two. 'Very Good' Chance
But even before the announcement of another round of American diplomacy, Mr.
Shamir said today that the chances were "very good" that a peace conference would start late this month.
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt went further, telling Egyptian newspaper editors flatly that the talks would be held at the end of October.


Students and Employees at Yale Join Forces to Protest


House Battles Perception of the Good Life
The House of Representatives voted this week to abolish the bank that would not bounce checks.
But members still have a system for fixing parking tickets, and enjoy free close-in airport parking, Internal Revenue Service agents to help them with their taxes, a stationery store that sells handsome gifts cheaply, and even $5 haircuts.
These privileges are not free, argues Representative Leon E. Panetta, a California Democrat who heads the Budget Committee.
Public uproar over the bank feeds a "building resentment toward the Congress," he said.
That resentment starts with specific perquisites and goes on to a general sense that while living high, the lawmakers ignore the country's problems.


GATES WINS PRAISE OF PANEL CHAIRMAN AS TESTIMONY ENDS
David L. Boren, the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, took the unusual step today of testifying before his own panel, warmly praising Robert M. Gates for his cooperation with Congress while he was a senior manager at the Central Intelligence Agency.
Senator Boren, a Democrat from Oklahoma, has said from the beginning that he will not formally decide until the last minute how he will vote on the nominee for Director of Central Intelligence.
Mr.
Boren said today that his praise of Mr.
Gates should not be considered "determinative" on that question.


Your Taxes; Intangibles Issue Is Likely to Wait
Although passage of a 1991 tax bill is increasingly doubtful, the House Ways and Means Committee has plunged into the debate over intangible assets, the most highly charged of many simplification measures under consideration this year and an area of law that, according to Fred T. Goldberg Jr., Commissioner of Internal Revenue, desperately needs overhaul.
A bill sponsored by Dan Rostenkowski, Democrat of Illinois, the committee's chairman, would fix a 14-year period for depreciating scores of intangibles, like subscription lists, contracts and computer software.
It would also provide for the first time a statutory authority for depreciation of good will.


Defiant Widow Seeks to Reopen Lindbergh Case
The 92-year-old widow of Bruno Richard Hauptmann returned to this small central New Jersey town for the first time since her husband was sentenced to death here 56 years ago and passionately pleaded his innocence in the kidnapping and murder of the Lindbergh baby.
Anna Hauptmann said she had not set foot in Flemington since Feb. 13, 1935, the day Mr.
Hauptmann was sentenced to death in the electric chair, an order which was carried out in Trenton a year later.
Though she said in an interview that she hated to return -- "I was afraid I might faint," she said -- she also said she felt she had to do so.


Nicholls Might Not Report
Bernie Nicholls walked out the sliding door of a Boston hotel today with nowhere to go, and nobody to blame but the Rangers.
Nicholls said he might not report to Edmonton in the Mark Messier deal.
And he said the Rangers were responsible, in part, for his disappointing goal production since coming to New York from Los Angeles in January 1990 for Tony Granato and Tomas Sandstrom.


Guidepost; As Moving Day Nears
Planning a do-it-yourself move requires careful thought.
One of the most important things to do is choose a rental truck of the correct size, neither too big nor too small for the things you have to move.
Here is a general guide.
Check prices with your rental agency; prices quoted below are maximum rates for long-distance moves taking several days, and include mileage.
Rates are higher if you tow a car.
Rates for a move within a metropolitan area are about $79 to $130 a day, depending on the size of the van, plus mileage.
Truck
Cost
Capacity
10-foot van
$999
1 room or 2,000 pounds. Will not hold queen or king mattress and cannot tow a car.
15-foot van
$1,499
3 to 4 rooms or 2,600 pounds. Walk-through cab
18-foot van
$1,749
5 to 6 rooms or 7,400 pounds. Built-in loading ramp
22-foot van
$1,749
7 rooms or 8,000 pounds. Built-in loading ramp
24-foot van
$1,749
7 rooms or 10,700 pounds. Built-in loading ramp.
(Source: Ryder Truck Rental, Inc.)


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Ivanisevic's Aces Stop Agassi  Goran Ivanisevic used a career-high 27 aces yesterday to beat Andre Agassi, 7-5, 7-6 (7-3), in the quarterfinals of the Australian Indoor tournament in Sydney.
Ivanisevic next will face Stefan Edberg, who beat Michael Chang, 6-4, 7-5, in another quarterfinal.
The other semifinal will match Pete Sampras against Brad Gilbert.(AP) McEnroe Loses: Richard Krajicek beat John McEnroe, 6-4, 6-4, in the quarterfinals of the tournament in Toulouse, France.
Top-seeded Guy Forget struggled to beat Marc Rosset, 3-6, 6-3, 6-3. (AP) Milestone for Navratilova: Martina Navratilova tied a record with her 6-2, 6-3 victory over Sabine Appelmans in the Milan Indoor in Italy.
Navratilova, 34 years old, has won 1,309 tournament matches, matching Chris Evert's mark.
Top-seeded Monica Seles defeated Helena Sukova, 6-3, 6-4, to also advance to the semifinals. (AP) HARNESS RACING  Filly Wins Kentucky Futurity  Whiteland Janice, a filly, won the 99th Kentucky Futurity in a race-off yesterday when Somatic broke stride in the homestretch in the final jewel of trotting's Triple Crown, run in Lexington.
Whiteland Janice, driven by Mike Lachance, was two lengths behind when Somatic broke about 70 yards from the wire.
The winning time was 2:004/5 as she became the 35th filly to take the Futurity.
GOLF  McCallister Leads in Texas  Blaine McCallister shot a 64 at the Texas Open in San Antonio to grab a four-stroke lead after two rounds with a 10-under-par 130.
Four strokes back at 134 were Wayne Grady, Bob Gilder, John Cook, Brian Claar and Bill Britton. (AP) N.H.L.
Capitals Open by Foiling Flyers Dino Ciccarelli scored the go-ahead goal late in the second period and Washington goalie Mike Liut stopped 24 shots as the Capitals continued their domination of the Philadelphia Flyers with a 5-2 victory last night in Landover, Md.
Peter Bondra had two goals and Dale Hunter had three assists for the Capitals, who improved to 9-1-1 in their last 11 games against the Flyers.
Meanwhile, Jarri Kurri celebrated his return to the National Hockey League by scoring three goals to lead the Los Angeles Kings to a 6-3 victory over the Winnipeg Jets.
Kurri, who spent the last season in Italy, skated on the same line with a former Edmonton teammate by the name of Wayne Gretzky.(AP)


Patents; Circuit Could Help Computers Mimic Brain
In pursuit of a "neural network" computing system that mimics the human brain, researchers at a California company have patented a new circuit that could serve as an important building block for computers that teach themselves to recognize patterns and images.
To recognize an image, a computer must make sense of millions of bits of data that stream through a vast number of tiny receptors.
Conventional computers try to match patterns of incoming signals with patterns stored in their memories.


Seminoles Try to Avoid Gator Footsteps
If the Florida State Seminoles are where they want to be on New Year's Day, still undefeated after all those weeks, they may look back and discover that one of the best things to happen to their football season took place hundreds of miles away from here.
When the Orangemen of Syracuse defeated Florida so completely on Sept. 21, scoring a touchdown on the opening kickoff and then controlling Florida State's intense rival after that, holding the Gators to minus-17 rushing yards, no group of players had reason to pay closer attention than the Seminoles.


Classical Music in Review
Junge Deutsche Philharmonie
Carnegie Hall


Classical Music in Review
Menahem Pressler  Kathryn Bache Miller Theater Broadway at 116th Street


DeOssie Describes His Care
Giants inside linebacker Steve DeOssie has begun a rehabilitation program for an admitted drinking problem "on an aggressive outpatient basis," he said today.
On Monday, DeOssie was arrested in a parking lot of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport and charged with possession of drug paraphernalia.
DeOssie told the Giants on Wednesday and said publicly on Thursday that he had been an alcoholic for 10 or 11 years, and he asked the Giants for help.
Today, he said the rehabilitation program began Wednesday night "with extremely competent professionals who have been successful before."


Madrid Journal The King Speaks Up, but Not to Everyone's Liking
Spaniards are used to the irony that even dyed-in-the-wool republicans were transformed into convinced monarchists by the way King Juan Carlos guided this country from dictatorship to democracy after the death of Franco in 1975.
Having been groomed from the age of 10 to perpetuate Franco's legacy, he immediately began dismantling the general's authoritarian regime.
And in 1981, with democracy in place but not well rooted, he personally blocked a right-wing military coup aimed at turning back the clock.


Bush Reassures Haiti's Ousted Chief
President Bush met with Haiti's exiled President today and assured him that the United States wants him restored to power.
But both leaders agreed that for the moment, foreign military intervention in Haiti is not an option.
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, a leftist Roman Catholic priest, was ousted in a Haitian military coup on Monday after seven months in power.
He was the country's first democratically elected President.


Giants Shove Dodgers Into Second
All night long they chanted, "Beat L.A." So the San Francisco Giants did, sending the Dodgers to a 4-1 loss at Candlestick Park tonight and putting the Atlanta Braves within two victories of clinching the National League West title.
The Braves' 5-2 triumph earlier tonight over the Houston Astros gives Atlanta a one-game lead with two games to play.
The Dodgers, who fell from the lead for the first time since Sept. 20, now must win both remaining games and hope the Braves lose at least once to force a tie and a playoff.


Albany Takes a Bit More On Auto Inspections
To the Editor:
Until recently, New York State auto inspections were based on a 12-month year with an annual fee.
If an auto inspection expired Aug. 31, the owner had a full year until the next Aug. 31 for reinspection.


Poverty Crippling Students' Health and Learning
The children Geneva Ballou sees in her school nurse's office here can neither breathe nor hear well, and cannot calm themselves when they are upset.
They are part of a silent plague in America's schools: children whose ailments are not life-threatening, but learning-threatening.
In Homewood, the neighborhood of Mrs.
Ballou's school, about 13 percent of children were born underweight, which means they have a much higher risk of school failure.
Nearly one-third of those children were born to teen-age mothers, and 40 percent of those mothers had no prenatal care in the first three months of their pregnancies, leaving their babies even more vulnerable to disabilities that hobble them in school.


Term Limits Make Sense
The specter of term limits haunts politicians everywhere.
Last year, voters in California and Colorado approved referendums curtailing the tenure of state legislators, and the matter is now in the courts.
Now an initiative in Washington State threatens to unseat House Speaker Tom Foley.
Although term limits seem to have an irresistible appeal to a disgruntled electorate, many experts are skeptical.
They see the idea as a Republican ploy to win a House majority and say it would sacrifice valuable expertise by forcing experienced legislators to retire.


2 Agencies Are Merged by Saatchi
After failing in long-running efforts to buy itself back from Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C., AC&amp;R Advertising, New York, was merged yesterday into Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, another New York-based unit of Saatchi.
Buyback negotiations between Saatchi, the giant British advertising company, and AC&amp;R, the agency for Estee Lauder cosmetics and Seiko watches, have taken place for about a year.
At the same time, the agency was shaken by a departure of top executives, the closing of its entertainment division in Los Angeles and the loss of several large accounts.


Trump, the Landlord, Seeks Rent From $100,000-a-Month Guests
Donald J. Trump may be getting an idea of how bondholders feel when they have trouble getting their money back.
The developer is now locked in an odd battle in State Supreme Court in Manhattan that pits him against Pia Zadora, the entertainer, and her husband, the businessman Meshulam Riklis.
Mr.
Trump, whose financial troubles have of late been overshadowed by reports of his social life, is suing Mr.
Riklis, Miss Zadora, and a slew of companies they control.
He claims that under cover of night they moved out of two lavishly appointed floors of the Trump Tower that they had rented for $100,750 a month, leaving about $1 million in unpaid rent.
The lawsuit charges that Mr.
Riklis and his wife surreptitiously moved a host of paintings and antiques from the 18th and 25th floors of the glitzy skyscraper.


Some Like It Hot, but Not for Long


Momenta Head to Offer His 'Pentop' Computer
After founding successful companies in computer-aided engineering and custom chips, Kamran Elahian found ready backers for his third venture, aimed at creating a truly "personal" personal computer.
On Monday, his company, Momenta International, will introduce the first computer that can be operated either with a pen or a keyboard.
Momenta, based in Mountain View, Calif., calls its machine a "pentop" computer.
The size of a three-ring notebook, it weighs just over six pounds, and can function as a pen computer, using an electronic stylus to write directly on its flat-panel screen.
Or, with an attachable keyboard, it can operate as a traditional laptop or notebook computer.


Governor Weld's Example on Abortion
Gov.
William Weld of Massachusetts was an official in the Reagan Administration and had President Bush's help during his gubernatorial campaign.
But like several prominent Republicans, among them Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon and Gov.
Pete Wilson of California, he does not agree with either President's anti-abortion stance.
Indeed, he fears that Roe v.
Wade, the Supreme Court decision that legalized abortion, may soon be overturned or drastically weakened.
That's why he has introduced a bill to make getting an abortion easier in Massachusetts, and to eliminate an 1845 law that makes any kind of abortion a crime.
He sets a good example for other states.


Salary Cuts Seen at USAir
USAir is imposing salary cuts of up to 20 percent on non- union employees and plans to start negotiations to seek the same concessions from its unions, according to a report published today.
Employees could be forced to make concessions in other areas as well, The Washington Post reported, including making employees pay health-care premiums and limiting free employee travel passes to four a year.


Addison Gayle Jr., Literary Critic, Is Dead at 59
Addison Gayle Jr., a critic of black American literature and distinguished professor of English at Baruch College and the City University Graduate Center, died Thursday at Beth Israel Hospital North in Manhattan.
He was 59 years old and lived in East Orange, N.Y.
He had been hospitalized for six weeks and suffered complications from pneumonia, said his wife, Lou Ethel Roliston.


Chemical and Hanover Trim Credit Positions
Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover, continuing to sort out executive tasks as their merger nears, yesterday whittled three senior credit management positions down to two.
The Manufacturers Hanover Corporation now has two senior credit officers, while the Chemical Banking Corporation has one.
"There will be one senior credit individual who no longer is one of the bank's top credit officers," a spokeswoman for Chemical said yesterday.


Sales of Home Elevators Gain As Nation's Population Ages
As one-story ranch houses took over the American landscape after World War II, elevators in residences became curiosities, pretty much confined to elegant older homes or to urban apartment buildings.
But now, with an aging population and high land costs in some areas, builders are finding a greater demand for multi-story houses with elevators.


Observer; Grim Whiskery Pans
Baggy clothes are back in fashion.
Men's fashion, at least.
And fashion, men are always saying, doesn't mean much if you're a man.
So while baggy clothes are back in fashion, you don't really have to wear them unless you want to look conspicuous, or like somebody in the entertainment business.
This kind of men's fashion, which is the kind that changes every year like women's fashion, seems to originate in Italy nowadays.
I don't get to Italy nearly enough anymore, so can't tell you whether the men there really go around lost in billowing acres of cloth, as The New York Times Magazine, for instance, would have us believe.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.00
5.12
7.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.02
5.02
7.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.07
5.08
7.08
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.13
7.22
8.50
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.77
7.83
8.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.92
8.95
9.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.87
6.88
7.77
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellweather bonds, notes and bills


13th Senate Democrat Says He Backs Thomas
Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut today became the 13th Democratic Senator to declare his support for Judge Clarence Thomas, solidifying the majority that the judge has achieved for his confirmation to the Supreme Court.
Mr.
Lieberman said he was impressed with Judge Thomas after a private meeting with him last summer.


Pact Bans Oil Exploration in Antarctic
Climaxing a long campaign by environmental groups to turn the Antarctic into a "world park," 24 countries, including the United States, signed an agreement today to ban mineral and oil exploration in the continent for at least 50 years.
The agreement, which was hailed as historic by governments and environmental groups alike, also includes new regulations for wildlife protection, waste disposal, marine pollution and continued monitoring of the Antarctic, which covers nearly one-tenth of the world's land surface.


Envoys Arrive In Haiti to Seek An End to Coup
In an atmosphere of continuing tension, a high-level delegation of the Organization of American States arrived here today to begin seeking the return to power of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who was overthrown in a military coup on Monday.
Whisked from the white Canadian military aircraft that brought them from Washington, the delegation immediately began closed-door discussions at the airport, first with the ambassadors of member states accredited in Haiti and later with Brig.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, the military leader who has assumed control of the country.


Iraq Tested Missile to Carry A-Bomb, a U.N. Report Says
Iraq has tested a surface-to-surface missile capable of carrying an atomic bomb as part of its program to develop nuclear weapons, according to a preliminary report by the United Nations' Special Commission charged with destroying the country's weapons of mass destruction.
In addition to the project to develop a delivery system specifically for nuclear weapons, the commission has turned up evidence of projects to enrich uranium for use in a nuclear bomb and to assemble the bomb itself.


Federal Agents Track Down A Rural Cocaine Factory
Following a trail of drug traffickers from a suburban town in New Jersey, Federal agents yesterday discovered a sprawling, split-level house in upstate New York that had been stocked with chemicals and turned into a cocaine-processing laboratory.
Investigators picked up clues about the laboratory from a small-time dealer who had been selling to young professionals in the town of North Plainfield, N.J.
That led to the arrest of three Colombians near Newburgh, N.Y., on Sunday; a raid on a warehouse in South Florida on Monday; the arrest of a man thought to be the leader of the group as he parked his BMW at a Holiday Inn in Manhattan Thursday night -- and the seizure of the laboratory in Pleasant Valley yesterday afternoon.


Private Bank for Congress: Service From a Bygone Era
When it closes its doors between now and the end of the year, the bank of the House of Representatives will end an operation that is a vestige of a bygone era.
The bank was established more than 100 years ago, at a time when cows and sheep grazed near the White House, when there were few banks in Washington and lawmakers traveled less frequently between the capital and their home districts where their banks were located.


About New York
And still they come to the shell of the Happy Land social club.
They come on Sunday mornings to lay wreaths, shed more tears, remember the 87 loved ones who died in a fire on March 25, 1990.
They come to mourn a young man whose only dream was someday to be a tailor, a man whose wife was waiting until the next week to tell him she was pregnant, a teen-ager whose mother had begged her not to go out.


Dow Plummets 23.03 in a Late Selloff
Stock prices slid yesterday in moderate volume, with a sharp selloff in blue chips in the last minutes of trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 2,961.76, down 23.03 points for the day and 44.28 for the week.
The New York Stock Exchange composite was down 1.51, to 210.22.


Corrections
A front-page article on Aug. 5 about a woman pregnant with twins who will be her own grandchildren included incorrect data on surrogate births in 1989.
In a letter several weeks after the article, the expert who provided the data corrected himself, saying that the 198 attempted pregnancies and 33 deliveries for the year were not limited to cases in which a surrogate mother carried an embryo for another couple; they also included cases in which women received donated eggs, which were then fertilized in a laboratory dish, to give birth to children for their own families.


Review/Television; With Freud, Cable Is a Little Racier
Every so often, cable television likes to demonstrate that for no very compelling reason, Federal regulations allow it to be more permissive, more "adult," than its broadcasting counterparts.
The latest example is a new Home Box Office weekly series called "Sessions." The first episode is at 10:10 P.M. tomorrow
The show, created by Billy Crystal, focuses on the midlife crises of Dan Carver (Michael McKean), who attends Friday afternoon therapy sessions with Dr.
Sidney Bookman (Elliott Gould).
The meetings are almost painfully personal and are sexually candid.
Topics explored in the first three episodes include impotence, masturbation, bondage fantasies and mommy fixations, all of which, Dr.
Bookman assures Dan, are perfectly normal.
"What's not normal?" Dan wonders.
"Dressing pets like people," Dr.
Bookman says authoritatively.


German Visits Refugees Amid New Attacks
President Richard von Weizsacker visited three hostels that house refugees and foreigners today, and assured residents that "the great majority of Germans" support their right to live here peacefully.
"Germans and foreigners are human beings together," Mr. von Weiszacker told residents of one hostel near Cologne.
"I want to help you so you can live here without fear."


Albert Rubenstein, 78, Retail Chain Executive
Albert Rubenstein, the president and chairman of the Franklin Stores Corporation from 1953 until the company was sold in 1973, died on Tuesday at Stamford Hospital in Connecticut.
A resident of Stamford and New York City, he was 78 years old.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


Quotation of the Day
"It's the first time that the international community has formally recognized the finite nature of this planet. We hope that future historians will identify today as a turning point in world awareness." -- Steve Sawyer of Greenpeace, describing an international agreement to save Antarctica.  [ 3:4. ]


Joblessness Fell a Bit Last Month
The nation's unemployment rate edged down a tenth of a point, to 6.7 percent, in September, but a disappointingly slim increase in company payrolls indicated that the economic recovery was losing momentum, Government figures showed today.
The labor market report, the first sweeping view of the economy's performance last month, was not regarded by private analysts as weak enough to insure an immediate round of interest rate cuts by the Federal Reserve.
On the other hand, they said the numbers would not sway the Fed from its general stance of favoring easier credit.


Ramos, One Confident Catcher, Thinks He'll Stay With Yankees
John Ramos learned baseball and economics at Stanford, and both were on the mind of the Yankees' 26-year-old rookie catcher last night, several hours before the Yankees blew the opener of a three-game set with the Cleveland Indians at the Stadium, a series that will conclude the dismal regular season.
A two-run, two-out home run by James Thome in the top of the ninth won the game, 3-2.
Ramos, who was called up from Columbus on Sept. 17, did not get into last night's game, but he has taken advantage of the playing time that Manager Stump Merrill has budgeted for him in recent days, and the healthy numbers he has put together have him feeling good about his future with the Yankees.


Arden Product Promises Eyes Out of This World
After its customers took swiftly to single-dose moisturizing capsules for the face and throat, called Ceramide Time Complex Capsules, Elizabeth Arden followed up with an eye product.
Introduced this month, Ceramide Eye Time Complex Capsules look more like crystal pop-beads than the gelatin capsules of moisturizer that the company says help eliminate dryness, puffiness and dark circles around the eyes.


Can Women's Clothing Be Comfortable?
To the Editor:
For anyone "leading a reality-based life," as Anna Quindlen so aptly puts it in "Rebels Without a Clue" (column, Sept. 18), the planned obsolescence policy of designers of women's clothing may indeed give one to laugh, with tears in her eyes.


A Quandary Over Abuse
The cases of 8-year-old Tiesha Carter and 8-month-old Ashlei M. Orellane, severely abused children, raise serious questions about how well New York City is balancing the goal of keeping troubled families together with its responsibility to protect children, child welfare advocates say.
In both cases, the city had early reports that the children were bruised and at risk of further beatings but left them with their mothers.
Tiesha, found by the police a week ago, was beaten, burned and had been locked in a closet.
Ashlei died on Tuesday, from a beating, the authorities said.
Their mothers have been charged.


Keeping Up With the Beat While Working Out
Fitness instructors urge anyone who exercises regularly -- whether by running, bicycling, tennis, aerobics or pursuing other physically demanding activities -- to monitor their heart rate.
But taking a pulse by hand can be inaccurate; it is easy to miss a beat when taking the pulse by hand.
Pulse-rate monitors can eliminate much guesswork and allow as safe a workout as possible.


Patents; A Fuel Cell That Utilities Might Use
Physical Sciences Inc. of Andover, Mass., which researches energy technologies, has patented what it says is a highly efficient way to produce electricity by combining hydrogen and chlorine.
Although still a long way from commercial readiness, the new fuel cell could allow electric utilities to smooth out their power production between times of high and low electricity demand.
And, because the "exhaust" from the fuel cells consists of high-purity hydrogen chloride, the new generator could serve a dual purpose for industrial companies that use hydrogen chloride.


Checking on their Checks, Some New York Representatives Find Bad News
When auditors first disclosed that many lawmakers had regularly written bad checks at the House of Representative's bank, a spokesman for Tom Downey insisted that the Congressman had always kept enough money in his account to cover his checks.
Today he reversed himself.


Corruption Inquiry in Sidewalk Work Begins
The Manhattan District Attorney's office has begun a criminal investigation into complaints by New York City officials about possible corruption by private inspectors and repair companies who were hired to maintain the city's sidewalks.
A spokeswoman for District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau said the investigation began this week following a surge in complaints that property owners had been overcharged for shoddy and unnecessary repairs.


Seems Like Odd Times For Switched Players
It's one of the cliches of sport, this time with a double twist, so both SCOTT STEVENS and BRENDAN SHANAHAN may have some moments of confusion in New Jersey this evening.
They will be playing against their former teammates for the first time, Stevens on defense for the Devils and Shanahan on offense for the St.
Louis Blues.
"It'll be a little different because there hasn't been a lot of time in between," said Stevens, a former Blue who was awarded to the Devils a month ago in compensation for Shanahan, a former Devil who signed with the Blues as a free agent.


Second Near Collision Spurs F.A.A. Inquiry
A Midway Airlines DC-9 came within 1,000 feet of a Southwest Airlines Boeing 737 in the sky near Midway Airport here Thursday night, the second near miss around the airport in a week, the Federal Aviation Administration said today.
Although the two planes were much farther apart than were another Southwest jet and a small private plane that came within 50 feet of colliding on Sept. 26, the second incident prompted the agency to open a study of the airspace around Chicago.


Traffic Alert
Nigerian Parade: Madison Avenue will be closed today between 46th and 56th Streets from noon to 3 P.M.
Corporate Challange Finals: Park Avenue will be closed today between 29th and 56th Streets from 9 to 10 A.M.


Today at Babi Yar the Spirits Will Rest
Over the years, Aleksandr Shlayen has made hundreds of pilgrimages to the deep ravine on the northern edge of Kiev, where he stands quietly among the birch trees and listens for the voices of the dead.
He says he does not strain very hard to hear them.
"Here, they were machine-gunned, and there, their bodies fell and were buried by the thousands," Mr.
Shlayen said today, hunched against a cold wind as he gestured toward the steep hillside, where scores of his family members and their neighbors, all of them Jews, died 50 years ago.
"At Babi Yar, each tree grows up from the dead."


A Bitter Struggle Lies Ahead On Dinkin's Homeless Plan
Mayor David N. Dinkins's plan to spread single homeless people around New York City in 20 to 30 new shelters has unleashed a convulsive debate on the city's approach to one of its biggest problems -- and one of the Mayor's core political concerns.
In moving to disperse homeless individuals from barracks-style shelters to smaller neighborhood settings in which he hopes their health and mental problems might be better met, Mr.
Dinkins is squarely in line with city policies of the last half-decade.
In fact, he is behind schedule, and $258 million in capital funds have already been earmarked for building over the next five years.


Bridge
All four American teams today qualified for the playoffs of the NEC World Team Championships here, though one of them had to struggle to the finish line.
Only the top four teams in each group made the cut.
In Group E of the Bermuda Bowl, the standings were: first, Brazil, 254 victory points; second, Sweden, 252; third, Poland, 244.35; fourth, United States II, 223; fifth, Hong Kong, 210; sixth, Canada, 185; seventh, Pakistan, 160.65; eighth, Suriname, 119.


Review/Film; A Fugitive Who's Out For Blood
In the mean, flashy revenge thriller "Richochet," which opened yesterday at neighborhood theaters, Denzel Washington plays Nick Styles, a police officer who makes an arrest during an amusement-park shootout.
This event is memorable because it leads to the incarceration of the crazed Earl Talbot Blake (John Lithgow), because it greatly advances Nick's career and because Nick contrives to do it while stripped down to his skivvies.
The film, while supposedly concentrating on the war of nerves between Nick and Earl, also concocts as many excuses as possible for Mr.
Washington to show off his fine physique.


INSIDE
Jobless Rate Edges Down
Unemployment in the U.S. fell a tenth of a point in September, to 6.7 percent, but the rise in company payrolls was disappointingly slim.
Page 33.
October Mideast Talks Seen
The leaders of Israel and Egypt said they envisioned the opening of Middle East peace talks at the end of the month.
Page 3.
Rangers Get Their Man
In a major hockey deal, the Rangers obtained Mark Messier, Edmonton's nine-time all-star, in exchange for three players.
Page 27.


Taj Mahal Is Out Of Bankruptcy
The Taj Mahal Casino that Donald J. Trump built in Atlantic City has emerged from bankruptcy.
Last year, the casino, hurt by the recession and the decline of gaming revenue in Atlantic City, was unable to meet all the interest payments on bonds it had sold to finance construction.
As part of a settlement with bondholders.
Mr.
Trump agreed to cede 50 percent of the equity in the casino to bondholders in exchange for lowered interest rates on the debt and more time to pay it off.
A "prepackaged" bankruptcy petition, in which the majority of creditors and the debtor had already agreed on a plan that needed the court's approval, was approved in Federal bankruptcy court yesterday.
As part of the petition, Mr.
Trump must insure that the casino meets projections for earnings and performance in order to keep control of the company's board.


Jays Win First Playoff Preview
Todd Stottlemyre, selected earlier as a playoff starter, pitched a strong game as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Minnesota Twins, 4-1, tonight in the return of bullpen ace Tom Henke.
Stottlemyre (15-8), who was named Toronto's No. 4 playoff starter against Minnesota, is 2-0 with a 0.96 earned run average in his last three starts.
He allowed six hits, walked two and struck out five before leaving with two on and none out in the sixth.


T.A.C. Panel Sides With Suspended Reynolds
Butch Reynolds, the world-record holder at 400 meters, moved within one final argument of returning to competition yesterday when a review board of the national governing body for track and field found too little evidence to support the charge he had used a performance-enhancing drug or the two-year suspension he received last year as a result.
The finding by a three-member panel in Washington gives the national body, The Athletics Congress, the right to appeal Reynolds's case before the International Amateur Athletic Association, which said Reynolds tested positive for an anabolic steroid, nandralone, after a race on Aug. 12, 1990 in Monte Carlo.


Corrections
A brief report on the Company News page of Business Day on Thursday about R. H. Macy &amp; Company's plans to build a Macy's department store in Denver misstated the company's total number of stores.
The company operates 98 Macy's stores, 22 Bullock's stores and 27 I. Magnin stores, for a total of 147.


Invoking Kristallnacht Betrays Jewish History
To the Editor:
In the full-page advertisement by the Crown Heights Emergency Fund (Sept. 20), the characterization of the events following the automobile death of a black child in Brooklyn on Aug. 19 as a Kristallnacht is a betrayal of Jewish history and ethics.
Such an invocation of an incipient "holocaust" to raise funds is contemptible.


Nets Miss The Point As Camp Opens
When Willis Reed was a Knicks rookie in 1964 out of Grambling, there was no question about which day he would make his first appearance in uniform.
His contract was signed long before training camp.
He had good reason to be there.
"I got a $3,000 bonus for signing and an $11,000 contract," Reed said today as the New Jersey Nets opened another camp at Princeton University without their first-round draft pick.
"Plus, I was able to negotiate a performance bonus. If I had a good year, they had to give me another $2,500. Ned Irish was nice enough to say, 'I'll let the general manager, Eddie Donovan, decide if you had a good year.' "


Lower Rates Give Bond Funds a Lift
Falling interest rates proved to be a rising tide that lifted the performance of all mutual funds investing in bonds in the last quarter.
Although all categories of bond mutual funds turned in positive performances in the quarter that ended on Sept. 30, data compiled by Lipper Analytical Services showed that many did much better than others, depending on the type of bonds the funds had bought.
In figuring the performance of each fund, Lipper measures the change in asset value of a share in each fund, plus reinvested dividends.


Cubs Re-sign Dunston
As a star shorstop for the Chicago Cubs, there's no telling how much SHAWON DUNSTON could get as a free agent after the season.
Now even Dunston won't be finding out, at least for another four years.
Yesterday, the 28-year-old infielder from Brooklyn signed a four-year deal that will bring him $12 million, including a $1.5 million signing bonus.
Dunston, who is making $2.1 million this season, will get the same amount next year, $3.1 million in 1993, $2 million in 1994 and $3.3 million in 1995.


Viola Looks at Understudies And Manages to Say 'Bravo'
he central plot of the Frank Viola saga has been documented and dissected all season.
Viola, the star left-hander who can depart via free agency at the season's end, has collapsed on the mound when he was supposed to be campaigning.
The subplot, of course, has been the auditions of his potential replacements.
And so with the final act still to unfold, Viola had some final thoughts on the aspirants, chiefly Pete Schourek and Anthony Young.


Why New York City Must Build Incinerators
To the Editor:
The environmental groups who are opposed to Mayor David N. Dinkins's decision to build resource-recovery plants in New York City are living in a dream world.
They are determined to fight any waste-disposal plan that includes incineration, despite the realities of the situation.


Sports of The Times; It Says Here That Women Can Block
WHAT'S the big deal?
That was my reaction when I heard a couple of girls were playing high school football on Long Island this season.
Well, maybe not playing football, but place-kicking.
Last Saturday, Jacqueline Gainer became the first female to ever score a point in New York State during Valley Stream Central's 10-0 victory over East Meadow.
Today, Susan Price is expected to take the first kick if Central scores a touchdown at Long Beach.


Invoking Kristallnacht Betrays Jewish History; People on the Fringe
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal (column, Sept. 3) writes of the silence of African-American leaders regarding the shouts of "Heil Hitler" in the midst of the Crown Heights turmoil.
No one who remembers the 1936 Olympics when Adolf Hitler looked on with disdain as the track star Jesse Owens shattered his conjectures of racial superiority can say in good conscience that Hitler is a hero or friend to the African.
What happened to the Jewish people in World War II was one of the sickest illustrations of the worst of humanity.


Roberta Feuerlicht, 59 Historian and Author
Roberta Strauss Feuerlicht, an author of 18 books of history and biography who frequently espoused liberal social and political causes, died yesterday of congestive heart failure, her husband said.
She was 59 years old.
Mrs.
Feuerlicht was born in 1931 in New York City.
She earned a bachelor's degree from Hunter College in 1952, and after working as an editor of The Glen Oaks News and This Month magazine, began writing books.
She published biographies of Oliver Wendell Holmes, Gandhi, Marie Curie, Theodore Roosevelt and Martin Luther King.


CHRONICLE
JODIE FOSTER, who is on a publicity tour to promote the film "Little Man Tate," canceled an interview with NBC's "Today" show yesterday when the morning show said JOHN HINCKLEY, the would-be presidential assassin, would be mentioned in her introduction.
The actress customarily refuses to discuss Mr.
Hinckley, who in 1981 said he shot PRESIDENT REAGAN to impress her.


Excerpts From Senate Hearings on Nominee to Be Director of Intelligence
Following are excerpts from today's hearings by the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on the nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence, as transcribed by Reuters and the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a private transcription service.
Statement By Senator David L. Boren Democrat of Oklahoma
After hearing Senator Hollings last night, I felt that in a way I had not been fully fair to the nominee because I have not shared in open session and before these hearings close, I think I should share in open session some of my own insights into actions by this nominee that I think should be considered by this committee.


U.S. HAS NEW PLAN AGAINST SMOKING
The Federal Government today announced its largest anti-smoking program ever, a 17-state campaign that it says will prevent 1.2 million smoking-related deaths over seven years.
The seven-year program "aims to help more than 4.5 million adults stop smoking, two million more young people never to start, and to reduce smoking prevalence to less than 15 percent of American adults," the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, told a news conference.


Manhattan Boat People: Lo Rnt, Riv Vu
Riverside Park was not meant to be a housing project, but over the years two groups of people have made it home.
One formed a small shantytown of homeless men and women.
The other established yachting's version of a trailer park on Manhattan's Upper West Side, living year-round on 120 boats and floating homes in the city's 79th Street Boat Basin.
The homeless people were called squatters, and the boat owners were called a community, but to some critics there was not much difference: Both groups had turned public waterfront into private housing at unbeatable prices.
For $300 a month -- less than it costs to park in nearby commercial garages -- boat basin residents can not only park their cars in a city garage, they get a berth big enough to moor a three-story home.


National Forests: Going, Going . . .
The forests are sanctuaries not only of human life but also of the human spirit.
And every tree is a compact between generations.
So declared President Bush in 1989.
Yet Mr.
Bush has done little more than his indifferent predecessor to stop the devastation of these sanctuaries.
Logging in the national forests continues at a furious pace.
And neither the President nor Congress has tried to strike a fair compromise between the needs of nature and industry.


Heavy Losses For L. A. Gear


Braves' Big Weekend Starts on A High Note
Just like that, the Atlanta Braves moved into position tonight to win the National League West championship without the need to pay attention to what the Los Angeles Dodgers do the rest of the season.
Just like that consisted of an Atlanta victory over Houston and a Dodger loss in San Francisco.
The rest of the season consists of games Saturday and Sunday.
Atlanta grabbed a one-game lead tonight, and if the Braves win their last two games, the Dodgers can do nothing to stop them from winning the division title.


EXECUTIVES
*
Hermes of Paris Inc., New York, a subsidiary of Hermes International, has promoted Chrys Fisher to chief executive from chief operating officer.
He remains president.
Michael Boroian has been named executive vice president and chief operating officer. *
ITT Consumer Financial Corp., Minneapolis, an ITT Corp. unit, promoted Peter Laqueur to chairman and chief executive from president.


Corrections
A report on Monday about the wedding of Amy Handler and Andrew Levine misidentified the school at which the bridegroom's mother teaches.
It is the Holy Innocents School, in Brooklyn.


U.S. Takes Trade Actions Against Canada and China
In separate actions, the Administration restricted some imports from Canada and China today, and it is likely to start an investigation of Chinese trade practices early next week, Federal officials said.
The Commerce Department and the Office of the United States Trade Representative announced that they were imposing temporary duties on imports of softwood lumber from Canada and that the United States would start a legal proceeding that could lead to long-term duties.


Review/Pop; The Sensuous Life, Lived to the Full
Two different forms of excess made it to Luther Vandross's show at Madison Square Garden on Wednesday, the opening night of a four-concert engagement, which ends tomorrow.
The first showed up in the lyrics.
Mr.
Vandross presents himself as a man intoxicated with sensuality; every other song had him singing about spending just one night with the object of his affection, then, having had the moment of ecstasy, going on with life.


Treaty to Safeguard Antarctica Is Signed
Climaxing a long campaign by environmental groups to turn the Antarctic into a "world park," 24 countries, including the United States, signed an agreement to ban mineral and oil exploration in the continent for at least 50 years.
The agreement, which was hailed as historic by both governments and environmental groups, also includes new regulations for the protection of wildlife, waste disposal, marine pollution and for the continued monitoring of the Antarctic, which covers nearly one-tenth of the world's land surface.


Review/Ballet; Premieres Fill Show From West
The San Francisco Ballet introduced three New York premieres by Helgi Tomasson, its artistic director, and another by Val Caniparoli, a longtime resident choreographer and dancer in the company, on Thursday night.
This third program of a triumphant season, which ends only too soon with tomorrow's matinee performance at the City Center (131 West 55th Street), was stunning on all accounts.


Battling for Life, He Fights U.S. for Malpractice Award
Chief Warrant Officer Martin Gaffney of the Marine Corps thought he had finally won the battle.
He thought the $3.8 million awarded him in June by a Federal judge in a medical malpractice suit against the Navy would enable him to plan for the future of his 8-year-old daughter, Maureene.
Already his wife and infant son had died of AIDS, the victims of a tainted blood transfusion at a Navy hospital in 1981, and tests had found that Mr.
Gaffney was infected with the AIDS virus.
At that time he showed no symptoms of the disease.


Company Drops A Plan to Build Brooklyn Plant
A plan to build a medical-waste treatment plant in the Brooklyn Navy Yard was abandoned this week because the developer said it would be difficult for him to comply with state environmental requirements.
The decision was hailed by many residents of Williamsburg, Greenpoint and other north Brooklyn neighborhoods who had strongly opposed the plant.
They complained that it posed a further environmental threat to an area already rich in waste-treatment plants, oil-storage tanks and solid-waste transfer stations and that was the scene of a longstanding underground oil spill.


No Letup for Twice-Burned Collins
There is no rest for weary cornerbacks.
So on Sunday, when the Giants play the Phoenix Cardinals, Mark Collins will face another stiff test from two underpublicized and underrated wide receivers.
Collins, the Giants' left cornerback, has been one of the best in the National Football League, but he has been beaten for touchdowns this season by Wendell Davis of the Chicago Bears and Michael Irvin of the Dallas Cowboys.
He was so disgusted with his game against the Cowboys last Sunday that he stormed out of a defensive meeting the next day.


Rangers Roll the Dice and Trade for Messier
Mark Messier, who has five more Stanley Cups than the Rangers have earned in the last 51 years, arrived this afternoon at the Forum with a doctor's note, a firm handshake and no guarantees.
Neil Smith had brought him here, in a bold, long-rumored trade that will surely decide the near future of both the franchise and the Rangers' general manager.
In exchange for the 30-year-old Messier and future considerations, high-scoring Bernie Nicholls and two young prospects, Steven Rice and Louie DeBrusk, were sent to Edmonton.


An Expensive Rookie
They had to trade away a veteran starting guard to make a deal for a frontcourt reserve, but the Seattle SuperSonics completed it yesterday.
They signed their first-round draft choice, RICH KING, to a four-year, $2.8 million contract.


A-Plant's Closing Brings Shrugs as Well as Doubt
After Federal regulators recommended that the Yankee Rowe nuclear plant be closed indefinitely for safety reasons, workers here this week portrayed the shutdown as a bureaucratic mix-up and said they were proceeding as if it were a routine maintenance interruption.
"There are always problems and always solutions," Gregory Maret, the plant's technical director, said on Wednesday, the day after the shutdown.
"We'll continue to operate as normal except the plant will be in a cool condition and we won't be generating electricity. Other than that, it's just another day in the wonderful hills of New England."


New York Drops Painters to Hire Inmates, Union Says
The Dinkins administration is laying off unionized painters and replacing them with welfare recipients, jail inmates in work-release programs and ex-offenders, union leaders say -- a practice, they contend, that violates the law and further strains the administration's contentious relations with organized labor.
But supporters of the use of welfare recipients and others in city painting jobs say the goal is simply to educate these people and help them find jobs, not to displace union workers.


Japanese Premier Forced to Give Up Bid for New Term
Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu was forced today to abandon his effort to win a second term in office after his most powerful party benefactors abruptly withdrew their support.
The sudden withdrawal by Mr.
Kaifu cleared the way for a chaotic scramble to succeed him among several leaders of the Liberal Democratic Party, which has governed Japan uninterrupted for 36 years.
He is to remain in office until his term expires on Oct. 30.


Dinkins Aide Held in Fraud On Citizenship
An aide to Mayor David N. Dinkins has been charged with falsely representing himself as a United States citizen to obtain his $52,500-a-year city job.
It took more than a year for the City Department of Investigation to discover that the aide, Frank T. Ling, 36 years old, had provided the city with a false naturalization certificate, a fake driver's license, and a fake letter from a college official stating that he had earned a bachelor's degree in psychology from New York University.


Union Blames Poor Training in Death
Union officials charged yesterday that poor training, rather than staff misconduct, was to blame for the choking death of a mentally ill prison inmate who was found dead last month after having been restrained by a team of unsupervised nurse's aides at Kings County Hospital Center.
"Our members have been made scapegoats for a problem that should have been addressed a long time ago," said James Butler, president of the union local representing municipal hospital workers in New York City.
"We told them things like this could happen."


Week to Raise Consumers' Consciousness
As the 10th National Consumers Week approaches, official Washington is once again trying to focus public attention on consumer rights, responsibilities and decision-making.
The week, Oct. 20 through 26, is coordinated by the United States Office of Consumer Affairs.
It will feature speeches, seminars and conferences with the theme "Today's Choice -- Tomorrow's Opportunity." In addition, companies and trade associations are tying into the Government's activities to create, they say, greater consumer consciousness about better buying.


Patents; Screen for Swimmers Protects Against Insects
Hoping to protect swimmers from mosquitoes and other insects, an insurance adjuster in Jacksonville, Fla., has invented a floating screen that surrounds people as they swim in their pools.
The inventor, James Schelfhaudt, said he was looking for a form of protection that would be cheaper than enclosing an entire pool.
Named the Ka-coon, the screen could be made for one person or for several.
Mr. Schelfhaudt received patent 5,048,551.


Review/Film Festival; Please, How Many Lentils for Your Musical Saw?
In the studiously zany French fantasy film "Delicatessen," apocalyptic rubble and 1940's American kitsch make for a peculiar mix.
The setting of the title is part of a half-demolished apartment house that stands amid unexplained postwar devastation, in a world where lentils have become currency and underground guerrillas called "troglodists" refer to apartment-dwellers as "surfacers." In spite of such apparent hardship, an antic spirit prevails at the apartment house in question, which is presided over by a butcher (Jean-Claude Dreyfus) with Sweeney Todd-like predilections.
"I'm a butcher, but I don't mince words," he says.
Into this establishment comes Louison (Dominique Pinon), a former circus clown who would be the most eccentric person in the place if the competition were not so stiff.
Also on hand are the shy, very correct Julie (Marie-Laure Dougnac), who plays the cello to accompany Louison on the musical saw; Mrs.
Interligator (Sylvie Laguna), who is urged by inner voices to attempt suicide in extremely creative ways; the Kube brothers (Jacques Mathou and Rufus), who intently manufacture little cannisters that make mooing sounds, and an assortment of fellow oddballs.


Price Waterhouse Proud of B.C.C.I. Audit
To the Editor
"How B.C.C.I.'s Accounts Won Stamp of Approval" (front page, Sept. 16) contains errors and misleading statements.
Perhaps this is because you had to rely on fragmentary, distorted information.
Criticism of Price Waterhouse by so-called experts who have access to only a fraction of the relevant information, by litigants adopting a biased position or by members of former management who were better placed than auditors to prevent or discover fraud should not be taken seriously.


Braves' Big Weekend Starts on A High Note
Just like that, the Atlanta Braves moved into position tonight to win the National League West championship without the need to pay attention to what the Los Angeles Dodgers do the rest of the season.
Just like that consisted of an Atlanta victory over Houston and a Dodger loss in San Francisco.
The rest of the season consists of games Saturday and Sunday.
Atlanta grabbed a one-game lead tonight, and if the Braves win their last two games, the Dodgers can do nothing to stop them from winning the division title.


Gold Up for 5th Straight Day As Soviets Deny Sale Plans
Gold futures prices rose for the fifth straight day yesterday, turning higher late in the session on New York's Commodity Exchange after a Soviet official said his country had no plans to sell gold from its reserves.
Gold for delivery in October finished $1.30 higher at $359 a troy ounce, bringing the gain for the week to $9.90.
December silver ended at $4.17 an ounce, down 4.8 cents.
The contract traded as low as $4.13 during the session.


A Crash Landing, but a Happy Ending


Nadine Gordimer, Humanity's Nobelist
Nadine Gordimer's newest collection of short stories, titled "Jump," includes a bitterly ironic fable that extends themes she has often explored during her 40 years of writing about life under the apartheid system in South Africa.
A white South African family that lives in affluence surrounds its home with razor wire when apartheid starts dissolving in riot and killing.
The young son is caught and mangled in the razors when he acts out the tale of Sleeping Beauty, with himself as the prince and the wire as a forest of thorns through which he must pass.


BANK REGULATORS REBUT PRESIDENT
Anxious to revive the economy, the Bush Administration is publicly prodding the Government's bank supervisors to ease up on credit standards so that commercial banks will make more loans.
But the White House tactic, first sounded a week ago and reiterated yesterday by the President, stirred up a fuss this week among the supervisors, who insist that they are not at fault.
Banks are not making more loans, regulators and bankers say, mainly because demand for loans has fallen and not because regulators have clamped down too much.
In addition, many bankers acknowledge that they have voluntarily raised their credit standards in the last year or so to eliminate potential borrowers who might not be able to repay their debts.


Iowa Democrats Considering Plan For Secret Balloting in Caucuses
Iowa Democratic leaders said today that they were considering a change in their state's Presidential caucuses next February to make the balloting private, a move that could cut into the home-state edge of Senator Tom Harkin, one of six declared candidates for the party's Presidential nomination.
The party leaders said the change in the caucuses, whose balloting has long been public, would allow other candidates to compete more fairly with Senator Harkin on his home ground and thus help preserve the caucuses' national influence as the first event in the Presidential primary season.


MEMPHIS CHOOSES FIRST BLACK MAYOR
Willie Herenton, former Superintendent of Schools here, has become the first black ever elected Mayor of Memphis, defeating the incumbent, Richard Hackett, by only 172 votes of about 250,000 cast.
The result of the nonpartisan mayoral election on Thursday was not determined until 8,130 absentee ballots were counted by hand early this morning.
In the end, Mr.
Herenton received 122,585 votes, or 49.45 percent, to Mr.
Hackett's 122,413, or 49.38 percent.
Robert Hodges, a perennial mayoral candidate here who claims to be from a planet he calls Zambodia, received 2,921 votes.


Invoking Kristallnacht Betrays Jewish History; Carnival Good Will
To the Editor:
"This Year Kristallnacht Took Place on August 19th Right Here in Crown Heights," (advertisement, Sept. 20) shows crass insensitivity to the decent black people of the district who neither endorsed nor took part in the violence inflicted upon their neighborhood.
I was out on the street during the period of the disturbance in Crown Heights, and the only "firebombing, car burnings, vandalization" I saw were confined to the black portion of the district.


CHRONICLE
Last year, Senior Action in a Gay Environment, known as SAGE, celebrated Cole Porter; this year it is to be Lorenz Hart who will receive the accolades at a musical tribute Monday evening at the Promenade Theater, Broadway and 76th Street.
Among the performers will be GLORIA DeHAVEN, SYLVIA SYMS, JULIE WILSON, JO SULLIVAN LOESSER and STEVE ROSS.
REX REED, the host, who is better known as a newspaper columnist and critic than as a singer, will do a number called "Why Can't I?" from the 1929 Rodgers and Hart musical, "Spring Is Here."
ARLENE KOCHMAN, the executive director of SAGE, a social-service organization serving the older gay and lesbian population, said the purpose of the benefit was to "reclaim lesbian and gay history with the celebration of a historical figure." Hart died in 1943.


Review/Film Festival; Nicaraguans Seen Then and Now
"Pictures From a Revolution" is a somber meditation on what sometimes looks like the futility of all social struggle.
It's a report on Nicaragua today, recorded by Susan Meiselas, an American photographer who covered the Sandinista revolution, its victory and its collapse.
The film, which will be shown at the New York Film Festival today at 6:15 P.M., was jointly produced, directed and edited by Ms.
Meiselas, Richard P. Rogers and Alfred Guzzetti, who also collaborated on "Risk: The Story of a Nicaraguan Family" (1984-85).


CHRONICLE
She's the kind of person who is constantly giving parties to celebrate happy occasions in other people's lives, so turnabout seemed only fair play yesterday when a bunch of MARY HOLLOWAY'S friends gave her a surprise birthday tea party.
Ms.
Holloway, the executive director of the Association for a Better New York and a friend to many of the city's movers and shakers, knew something was up when her staff refused to book appointments for the afternoon, but she had no idea what until she walked into the Astor Court at the St.
Regis Hotel.
"Usually for my birthday, we just have Chinese in the back room of the office," she said.
"Instead, here we're having tea and scones and little sandwiches."


Salomon Agrees to Pay Freddie Mac Fine
Salomon Brothers Inc. said today that it would pay a penalty imposed by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation for falsifying bids in the sale of Government-sponsored bonds.
But 17 other Wall Street firms have sought more time to decide whether to pay the fines.
The agency, known as Freddie Mac, has given the others until 9 A.M.
Monday to pay penalties resulting from the discovery of inflated orders and faked sales confirmations -- or be barred from future sales of Freddie Mac securities.
While the total penalty imposed on the group is only $1 million, the Wall Street firms fear the precedent set by the Freddie Mac action and want more time to review their options.


Palermo at the Plate
Umpire STEVE PALERMO will take one of his longest walks to the baseball diamond tonight, and it will be his first walk onto the field since a bullet hit his spinal cord and paralyzed his lower extremities.
Palermo will make the march from the dugout to home plate before the Texas Rangers play the Oakland Athletics at Arlington Stadium.
He will be wearing leg braces and crutches.
Palermo, 41 years old, and TERENCE MANN, a former Southern Methodist defensive tackle, were shot July 7 when they helped two women who were being robbed outside a Dallas restaurant. (AP)


More Turns Could Add To the Plot Of Boat Race
Thirty-seven offshore powerboats have registered to compete on the Hudson River tomorrow in the New York Offshore Grand Prix, the national circuit's 1991 championship competition.
In contrast to last year, the race course will be made up of shorter laps with more turns.
While designed for spectators, racers predict that the course will be more complicated.
"It will probably be one of the most exciting races that can be seen," said John Carbonell, executive director of the Offshore Professional Tour, the group that organizes racing.


Big Weekend At Belmont
The horse world will stage its own pennant races this weekend at Belmont Park with three major stakes that will form steppingstones to the Breeders' Cup series of championships four weeks later.
In the first of the weekend's Grade I stakes, five horses will go to the post today in the $850,000 Jockey Club Gold Cup, a mile-and-a-quarter race that will feature Strike the Gold, the star of the 3-year-old class and the winner of the Kentucky Derby.


Classical Music in Review
Jeffrey Siegel Pianist 92d Street Y


Keeping the Government Out of Housing
To the Editor:
The suggestion ("How to Revive Housing Starts," Forum, Sept. 22) that states assist home buyers by underwriting "low-interest loans" to people whose income falls below some figure is unwise.
The Government already offers a sizable subsidy to homeowners who write off the interest expense of their mortgages.
If the Government didn't allow this, the Internal Revenue Service would have collected more money to reduce the Federal budget deficit.
And if state governments took the risk of exposing their finances to potential default and foreclosure costs, taxpayers would have to be called upon to provide a bailout.


Bush Makes Aid to Israel Subject to Conditions
FOR an issue charged with so much deep passion, the debate over housing loan guarantees for Israel ended last week in a remarkable hush -- but not because there was no clear winner.
Indeed, it was precisely because the Bush Administration had trounced Israel and its Congressional supporters that neither side had an interest in ballyhooing the outcome.
Israel and its supporters did not want to advertise their defeat.
And the Administration did not want to publicly relish its victory, because it expects that it will have to fight this issue again four months down the road and there would be no point in antagonizing its opponents any more than it already has.
Last week Senators Bob Kasten, Republican of Wisconsin, and Daniel K. Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii, announced that they were acceding to President Bush's request to delay until February their legislation offering $10 billion in loan guarantees to help Israel resettle Jews emigrating from the Soviet Union.
While the Senators said they had 70 co-sponsors for this legislation -- enough to override a Presidential veto -- what they didn't say was that many had signed on only on the understanding that the bill would be delayed as the President asked.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; An Updated Company Town for Bloomfield
THE company town, where corporations built cheap housing for their workers close to the factories, is being revived, with changes meant to make the 19th-century concept appropriate for the 1990's.
One such development, thought to be the first in the Northeast, has been proposed by Greater Hartford Homes, a consortium of the University of Hartford, the Hartford Graduate Center, St.
Francis Hospital and Hartford Hospital.
It has been designed by Niles Bolton Associates of Atlanta and Svigals Associates of New Haven to appeal to professionals in the early stages of their careers.


On the Street; Whimsical Touches Add Sparkle to Tartan
The faucet-knob buttons decorating the front of the Franco Moschino jacket impart a touch of whimsy to this autumn's Scottish tartan suit.
Smiles are in order when a traditionally cut suit is embellished with plastic knobs.
The idea is that practical fashion does not have to be boring to be functional.


Dr. Valerie Hepburn Marries Curt Jones
Dr.
Valerie Jane Hepburn, an emergency room physician at Flushing Hospital Medical Center, Queens, was married yesterday to George Curtis Jones, a musician and freelance composer and arranger known as Curt Jones.
The Rev.
Bruce Southworth, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the chapel at Pantagis Renaissance, a catering hall in Scotch Plains, N.J.
Dr.
Hepburn-Jones, 39 years old, is the daughter of Audrey Doremus of New York and the late David A. Hepburn.
The bridegroom, 34, is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George I. Jones of Linden, N.J.


'Pretty Stupid Stand'
What does MARTINA NAVRATILOVA think about the International Tennis Federation rule that restricts participation in the 1992 Olympics to players who participated in the I.T.F.'s 1991 Federation Cup?
"It's a pretty stupid stand, which would keep some of the best players out of the Olympics while a Filipino player, who never performed in an international tournament, will be probably allowed to play," she said.


Reporter's Notebook; Noriega, by Personality, Turns Trial Into a Drama
He is a prisoner on trial, charged with 10 counts of drug trafficking, money laundering and racketeering, and facing a sentence of up to 140 years.
But Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega continues to exert a power and fascination over the former subalterns and associates who have been called as witnesses against him.
Thanks to that ability to inspire fear and deference in his underlings, General Noriega has been able to transform his trial into a stage for both melodrama and farce.
Even more than the numerous tales of intrigue and treachery that have been told since the trial began Sept. 5, the general himself has been responsible for the most theatrical gestures and moments.


New Yorkers, etc.
It's nice to know whether it's acceptable to pick up asparagus with your fingers, who is introduced to whom when distinguished personages are involved, and how to address British royalty and the President of the United States.
Such knowledge can be invaluable when chatting with the Queen or visiting the White House, introducing Brooke Astor to Colin Powell, or simply at a black tie dinner when holding aloft a stalk of asparagus could seriously detract from the overall effect.
These and other tricky behavior niceties are covered, happily, in many books and articles on etiquette.
What these books fail to address are the little niggles that come up constantly, particularly in a big city.
Most of these niggles, which are not quite problems but are something more than pinpricks, provoke not so much ire as resentment coupled with resignation.
It's impossible to say anything without looking nasty and mean.
A show of temper for something so small would appear foolish.


T. W. Barr Wed To Pamela Britt
Pamela Lee Britt, a vice president of the Johnson &amp; Higgins insurance brokerage in New York, and Terry William Barr, the chief operating officer at the Leonard Newman Agency, a financial and insurance brokerage in White Plains, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
E.
Walton Zelley Jr. officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Metuchen, N.J.
Mrs.
Barr, 33 years old, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College.
She is a daughter of Joan Hoag Britt of Alexandria, Va., and David Van Buren Britt of Rowayton, Conn.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Children's Television Workshop in New York.
Her mother is president of Fit For Us All, an Alexandria aerobics company.


INSIDE
Efforts on Haiti Continue
International efforts to restore the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide as President of Haiti continued, with the army apparently resisting.
Page 9.
Indonesian Crash Kills 133
An Indonesian military transport plane crashed shortly after takeoff from Jakarta, killing all aboard and one person on the ground.
Page 3.
Hasidim to Regain Books
The Russian Supreme Court ordered the return of 12,000 volumes of religious writings long sought by the Lubavitch sect of Hasidic Jews.
Page 12.
Bush's Remarkable Streak
The President's introduction tonight for a movie about the gulf war marks the seventh time in 10 days he has been on national television.
Page 26.
Braves Win Division
The Braves beat the Astros, then the Dodgers lost to the Giants, ending baseball's National League West race.
SportsSunday, Section 8.


Japan Focuses on Takeshita for Premier
A bruising contest for the political leadership of Japan got off the ground today with all eyes focused on former Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita, a wily and secretive leader of the governing party's biggest faction with the power to make or destroy any candidate's chances.
Mr.
Takeshita and his ally, Shin Kanemaru, were the ones who at the last minute withdrew their support from Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu on Friday, forcing him to drop his efforts to win another term in office.
Until this week, they were Mr.
Kaifu's biggest benefactors.


Casing In The Bomb; Disarmament Plan Quickens Calls for A Peace Dividend
IN most respects, the budget deal President Bush and Congress struck last October was as pleasant for the politicians involved as a skinned knee.
The President was forced to renege on his no-new-taxes pledge.
Democrats had to concede that there would be no growth in social programs for years.
But the agreement did have one fundamental political attraction: it was supposed to put off further argument about spending and taxes until after the 1992 elections.
Now, that has gone by the boards.
When the President startled the nation a week ago Friday by announcing that he planned to scrap a significant portion of the nuclear arsenal, it was guaranteed that the size of the military budget will once more come under intense political scrutiny.
And that will throw open the door to fresh debate on the basic budget issues that have divided politicians for years: how high taxes should be, how large the deficit should be and how much the country can afford to spend on health, highways and the myriad other Government programs voters demand.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Sept. 21  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill 275,000
1361 Madison Avenue (95th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; part-time doorman, dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 decorative fireplaces; maintenance $810, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Carnegie Hill Properties)  Chelsea 400,000
442 West 23d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a brownstone; dining area, fireplace, south garden; maintenance $382, 8% tax-deductible (Broker: Kingman Associates)  Upper West Side 775,000
110 Riverside Drive (83d St.)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,300-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, eat-in kitchen, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,850, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Greenthal West)  Upper West Side 285,000
252 West 85th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; entry foyer, dining room; maintenance $914, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Harrison Properties)  West Side 2.1 million
1 West 64th Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, library, 3 fireplaces, balcony, Central Park view; maintenance $2,849, 42% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group - Nancy R. Sweetser Real Estate)  BRONX  Soundview 230,000
1145 St.
Lawrence Avenue  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; finished basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Realty World/Gold Circle Realty)  Wakefield 220,000
4053 Amundson Avenue  2-family detached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other, 1 bath, dining room in each; 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Albert R. Bryan Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Brooklyn Heights 285,000
66 Orange Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; elevator, dining area, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 2 terraces; maintenance $1,144, 62% tax-deductible (Broker: Harbor View Realty)  Carroll Gardens 172,000
376 President Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,022-sq.-ft. condo in a prewar building; dining area, high ceilings, Manhattan skyline view; common charge $160, 100% tax-abated (Prudential/Carl F. Peek)  Park Slope 351,000
458 14th Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, 3-story brownstone; dining area, french doors, semi-finished basement, south garden, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Susan N. Breen Realty)  QUEENS  Kew Gardens 53,000
141-05 Pershing Crescent  (Griswald)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining area, renovated kitchen and bath, 2 exposures; maintenance $347, 52% tax-deductible (Broker: Kraham Realty)  Middle Village 310,000
58-19 83d Street  2-family attached brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; hospitality suite on first floor, 21- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Century 21/ Metalios Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Princes Bay 137,000
532 Foster Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached Ranch; eat-in kitchen, enclosed rear porch, 108- by 60-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)  Sunnyside 174,000
135 Onterio Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage, 20- by 106-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ DeSimone Realty)


Miss Cronin Weds
Catherine Siobhan Cronin and Frederic Lawrence Stone, graduates of the University of Vermont, were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York by the Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley.
The bride, 23 years old, is the daughter of Dennis Cronin and Joan Ghiselin, both of New York.
Mr.
Stone, 27, received an M.S. from the University of Vermont.
He is the son of Henry A. Stone of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich., and Marian A. Lawrence of Lubec, Me.


Playwright, 18, Wins and Learns
DENISE MAHER may not remember what she called her first play, or even what it was about.
But she'll never forget her second, "Secrets to Square Dancing," the attention being lavished upon it and the fact that it paved the way for a hands-on introduction to how the theater works.
Twice a winner, the 17-minute play was one of five plays selected by the New Jersey Young Playwrights Festival for a professional staged reading at the State Theater in New Brunswick.


Taxi Dress Code
The Taxi and Limousine Commission passed these rules in 1987: Drivers must be clean and neat.
Shirts must have collars and no holes.


Gorbachev's Remarks on Arms Cuts
Following is the text of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's arms-control statement today, as distributed by Tass, the official Soviet press agency, and translated by The New York Times:


Clark Kellogg, Catalogue Designer
In 1990, when Clark Kellogg, president of Kellogg Communications in Manhattan, was asked to design New York's Family Album, New York State's quarterly picture catalogue of children who need to be adopted, he let the children speak for themselves.
It is first the photographs, and then the words, that make the children, many of whom have been abandoned and have emotional problems, appealing.
The first album was published in January, the third this month.
"The children are all so frail, so humanly vulnerable and shy," said Mr.
Kellogg, 40 years old.
Joseph Berger, who lives in Manhattan, photographed the children so that they looked relaxed, trusting, sweet; words that might mean adoptable.
The text revealed more of the child's personality, from what he wanted to be (a police officer, for example) to what he was afraid of (fightingwas one child's terror).


Negotiations Stalled in Zaire Over the Control of the Army
Zaire's new Prime Minister said today that negotiations with President Mobutu Sese Seko to form a crisis government were stalled over who would take charge of the army and security.
"We are blocked on one main issue: defense and security," Prime Minister Etienne Tshisekedi said at a news conference a day after talks with Mr.
Mobutu.


S. L. Brown Weds Jean MacGregor
Jean Agnes MacGregor, the host of "Rhode Island Weekly," a public affairs program on Times-Mirror Cable Television of Rhode Island in Providence, was married yesterday to Stephen Lee Brown, the associate publisher of The Phoenix's NewPaper in Providence.
The Rev.
John Edmunds, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the bridegroom's home in Jamestown, R.I., assisted by the bride's brother, Ronald MacGregor, a brother of the Episcopal Order of St.
Gregory.
The bride, a graduate of Emerson College, is the daughter of Greg MacGregor of Pompano Beach, Fla., who retired as a public relations officer for the New York Blood Center, and of Eileen Palmer McMorrow of Baldwin, L.I., a retired radio actress who used her maiden name, Eileen Palmer.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Toughest Fight Yet For Hydro-Quebec
Hydro-Quebec, the $50 billion utility that is wholly owned by the Quebec government, has powered a vast industrial expansion in the province.
And the company is committed to further development that would almost double its output of inexpensive hydropower.
But getting there might be a problem.
For the first time, the company is encountering fierce resistance.
Hydro-Quebec's chief executive, Richard Drouin, has faced tough fights before.
He took office three years ago amid a labor battle in which unionized workers ransacked some of the company's executive offices.
He has since brought a measure of labor calm and improved the reliability of the company's electrical service.


TRAFFIC ALERT
Nigerian Parade: Madison Avenue will be closed today between 46th and 56th Streets from noon to 3 P.M.
Corporate Challenge Finals: Park Avenue will be closed today between 29th and 56th Streets from 9 to 10 A.M.


Miracle Is Now Official: The Braves Win It!
The Atlanta Braves stood massed on the infield grass just to the first-base side of the pitcher's mound.
For four minutes, they stood crammed together and watched the television screen high above the center-field seats.
When the San Francisco Giants recorded the last out in their game with the Los Angeles Dodgers, the Braves leaped in the air, ran excitedly toward the dugout and joyously tossed their caps into the stands.
The upstart Braves, the so-called America's team that fell into disrepute by finishing last for three successive seasons, had snatched baseball's sole unclaimed division championship out of the clutches of the Dodgers.


For the Dodgers, 4 Days Gone Wrong
The season came down to the last weekend, but not the last day.
In the end, the Los Angeles Dodgers were victims of their most storied rivalry.
They weren't quite certain how to react to it.
Four days ago, they had a one-game lead in the National League West.
Three days ago, they were tied.
On Friday, they were a game behind the Atlanta Braves.
Today, after a 4-0 loss to the San Francisco Giants, it was all over.


Rams Bounce Back And Frustrate Lions
A 1-yard touchdown run by sophomore tailback Mike Thomas with just under four minutes to go in the game gave Fordham a 20-16 comeback victory over Columbia yesterday at the Lions' Wien Stadium.
After a pair of second-half field goals put Columbia up by 16-7, Fordham scored two touchdowns in the fourth quarter.


AFTERMATH OF AN EMERGENCY
As a social worker and a parent, I am outraged that the protective-service system allowed for such sloppy casework.
Unfortunately, this episode is symptomatic of larger systemic problems.
The overwhelming workload of public protective-service agencies often leads to lower standards, haphazard follow-up and burnout.
JOY SWANSON ERNST
Chevy Chase, Md.


Tourney in South Africa
South Africa, which has only recently begun to be readmitted to international sports competition in recognition of the easing of its racial policies, yesterday was awarded its first major international event since the beginning of the boycott.
The Association of Tennis Professionals announced that the world doubles final would be played in Johannesburg on Nov. 18-24.
"We are pleased by the progress which has been made in South Africa over the past few years," said MARK MILES , the chief executive of the A.T.P.
Tour.


Shells Still Fall on Croatian Towns Despite Truce
The thunder of exploding Yugoslav Army shells and and air-launched rockets continued to roar around the Croatian port city of Dubrovnik and dozens of other Adriatic coastal towns today, hours after the presidents of the warring Yugoslav republics of Croatia and Serbia agreed to a cease-fire.
Pro-Serbian Yugoslav Army units also carried out many artillery and air attacks today against inland regions of Croatia and staged a new offensive against the town of Karlovac, threatening to block the last main highway linking the breakway republic's capital, Zagreb, with the coast.


Protecting the Faucets From Winter's Freeze
ORDINARY outdoor faucets, technically called sillcocks, are prone to freezing and bursting in winter.
As a result, they have received much attention from plumbing designers and gadget inventors.
One device that solves the problem is a freeze-proof sillcock.
A specially designed faucet that replaces an ordinary sillcock, it can be installed by soldering.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 27 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the film "City of Hope" misidentifies the actor shown.
He is Vincent Spano.


Soviet Sign I.M.F. Accord
The Soviet Union formally acquired special association status with the International Monetary Fund, opening the way for large-scale technical economic assistance.
Page 12.


Elena Ford-Niarchos Is Married To Stanley Olender in Southampton
Elena Anne Ford-Niarchos and Stanley Jozef Olender, the owners of Stanley O's, an estate maintenance service in Southampton, L.I., were married yesterday at the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary Roman Catholic Church in Southampton.
Msgr.
Edmond J. Trench performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Ford Olender, 25 years old, graduated from New York University.
Her mother is Charlotte Ford Downe of New York and Southampton, the author of "Etiquette" and co-author with Claudia Stern of "Modern Manners." Her father is Stavros S. Niarchos, the Greek shipping executive.
She is the stepdaughter of Edward R. Downe Jr., the founder and chairman of Downe Communications in New York.


Tibet Hotels
To the Editor:
Nicholas Kristof's remark in "The Mystique of Tibet" (Travel, July 28) that the tourist hotels in Shigatse and Gyantse do not meet international standards is true enough, yet misleading if it leaves the impression that the two hotels are on a par, since in my recent experience, there is a world of difference between them.
The Gyantse hotel is more than adequate for all but the persnickety, whereas the Shigatse hotel is a disaster in terms of the service, food, cleanliness, adequate (and sometimes just running) water, and the cooperation of the staff.


No Zeal, Please
MONSIEUR
By Jean-Philippe Toussaint.
Translated by John Lambert. 107 pp.
New York: Marion Boyars/Rizzoli International. $19.95.


A BUMPIER RIDE FOR NEW YORK TAXIS: New Drivers; Teaching English As a Taxi Language
The motorized taxi industry -- which began in New York City in 1907 when red cabs with green trim were lining up outside the Plaza Hotel -- has always been a magnet for immigrants.
That has, at different times in the last 84 years, created language problems that have never been easy to solve, largely because drivers come from so many different countries.
In the early years, experts say, most drivers who were not American were recent arrivals from Europe, mostly Irish, Italians and Eastern European Jews.


Rebel Front Says It Can Fix War-Battered Angola
As Angola emerges exhausted from 16 years of civil war, most people think that their lives can only improve.
They may be disillusioned.
"During the war I suffered a lot," said Emiliano Chitunda, a baker, "but now my life is becoming more normal." Mr.
Chitunda called President Jose Eduardo dos Santos "a good man" because he signed the peace agreement concluded with the Government last May.
But Mr.
Chitunda put his faith in Jonas Savimbi, the guerrilla leader of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola.


Believe This: It Wasn't '69
To the Sports Editor:
In "For Present Imperfect Mets, the Past and the Future Glow," (The Times, Sept. 22), the phrase, "Ya gotta believe" was associated with the Mets' 1969 World Series triumph.


Reality and Anne Sexton
To the Editor:
On Aug. 25 you printed a letter headlined "Anne Sexton's Vision of Reality" from surviving relatives.
I am not familiar with Anne Sexton's poetry.
However, I am certainly impressed with the dignity and integrity of her surviving relatives.
Please tell Lisa Taylor Tompson and Mary Gray Ford of Scituate, Mass., that I shall save a copy of their letter as an example of family love, loyalty and integrity.
HELEN L. MUSHINSKY  Wallingford, Conn.


Susan S. Wilder Has a Wedding
Susan Sanford Wilder, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas R. Wilder of Potomac, Md., was married yesterday to Robert Barry Danziger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Danziger of Bedford, N.Y.
James L. Wilson, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Roger Sherman Inn in New Canaan, Conn.
Mrs.
Danziger, 28 years old, graduated from Union College.
She is an account supervisor at Grey Advertising in New York.
Her father is an agent for Deck House Inc., a home design company based in Acton, Mass.


Great Balls of Fire! Britain Takes a Time Trip
According to Philip Larkin, "Sexual intercourse began/ In 1963/ (Which was rather late for me)/ Between the end of the Chatterley ban/ And the Beatles' first LP."
As with sexual intercourse, so, too, was Britain "rather late" with pop culture.
But those two symbolic acts -- the liberation of the past and the promise of the future -- marked the start of Swingin' London and one of the few industries in which the United Kingdom is now a net exporter.
Mrs.
Thatcher and the Princess of Wales aside, the only British subjects the average American will be familiar with today are rock stars.


Rich Is Better
To the Editor:
As the former general manager of the Broadway production of "Nick and Nora," I was interested in David Richards's article "The New Nora in Joanna Gleason's World"  [ Sept. 8 ] .
It was marred by a misstatement concerning the production.
Mr.
Richards states that the creators of "Nick and Nora" were "ready to go two seasons ago," but the producers were not.
This is simply not true.
I have seen this notion set forth in at least two other publications this fall, and it is time to set the record straight.


TOFU CHEESECAKE (NO JOKE)
This cheesecake is served at the Rancho La Puerta spa in Tecate, Mexico, where it gets raves from guests.
A serving has only 196 calories, 7 grams of fat, 0.7 grams of saturated fat and 77 milligrams of sodium.  4 ounces whole wheat honey graham crackers  3 tablespoons corn oil margarine at room temperature, plus margarine for greasing the pan  1 1/4 cups pineapple juice  2 tablespoons gelatin or 1 1/2 tablespoons agar-agar  1 pound soft tofu  5 1/2 tablespoons honey  6 tablespoons freshly squeezed lemon juice  1 tablespoon grated lemon peel  1 teaspoon candied ginger, minced
1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees. Lightly grease a 9-inch pie plate with margarine.
2.
In a food processor, or by hand, crumble the graham crackers, add the margarine and work to a fine crumb. (If the mixture is too dry add a little more margarine.) Press the cracker mixture onto the bottom of the pie plate until the surface is smooth and even.
Bake for 10 minutes.
Cool.
3.
Heat the pineapple juice to a near boil.
Stir in the gelatin or agar-agar gradually and simmer until it is dissolved, about five minutes.
Cool for at least five minutes.
4.In a blender or food processor, combine all the other ingredients with the pineapple juice mixture and blend one minute.
Pour into the baked crust.
Refrigerate 3 to 4 hours.
Yield: Eight servings.


Theresa Russell, Cool in the Heat
"It could be cooler," Theresa Russell is saying.
"It still could be cooler." Having just dealt with the prancing ministrations of two hair and makeup stylists, two press agents and a hotel employee delivering an ironing board, Ms.
Russell is now insisting to another man from maintenance that the air-conditioning needs adjusting.
"If you can make it really cold, could you make it now?" she asks, collapsing into an easy chair on a smoggy morning.
"There's only going to be more activity."


Refund Programs At London Hotels
Three London hotels have introduced a plan to woo missing American visitors back to the city by offering refunds of up to more than $170 a day.
Guests can get the refunds at the Ritz in Piccadilly, and the Stafford and the Dukes, both in St James's Place, through next April 30.
The Re-Fund-Able London Program allows guests reserving higher-priced rooms reimbursments for purchases or expenses.
Standard room accommodations do not qualify, and restaurant bills are not included.
On checkout, guests show receipts and the equivalent amount is deducted from the bill.
Refund allowance per night works out at up to $52 for a superior single, $78 for a superior double and $173 for suites.
Another hotel, the St.
James's Court, on Buckingham Gate in the St.
James's section, says it is the first to introduce a program that repays to business travelers the 17.5 percent value added tax on their bill.
On leaving the hotel, the guest completes and hands in a form.
The information required includes the name of the traveler's company.
The tax on room, meals, conference facilities and other expenses are repaid in dollars in the United States.


When Printmaking Was a Private Affair
Every so often, there is a museum show on 20th-century art that does not set out to stun us.
Nor does it offer a quick fix.
Famous names appear in it, here and there, but they get just the same billing as artists whom we have never heard of before.
In exhibitions of this sort, promotional activity ranks zero on the Richter scale.
When we leave, it is not with pounding heart and a cerebellum running red hot.
But we say to ourselves, "That, too, is history."


M. A. Semel Weds Elizabeth Regan
Elizabeth Garner Regan, an associate at the Manhattan law firm of Townley &amp; Updike, and Michael Andrew Semel, until recently the city editor of The Virginian-Pilot and The Ledger-Star in Norfolk, Va., were married yesterday in Cannon Memorial Chapel at the University of Richmond.
Justice A. Christian Compton of the Virginia Supreme Court performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Regan, 29 years old, graduated from Princeton University.
She has a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University and a law degree from the University of Virginia.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William Whitfield Regan of Richmond, where her father is an internist.


For 2d Time Recently, an Airline Bars a Bush Aide in a Wheelchair
For the second time in two months, a commuter airline affiliated with Northwest Airlines has refused to let a member of a Presidential committee board because he uses a wheelchair.
Rick Douglas, executive director of the President's Committee on the Employment of People with Disabilities, said Friday that he was blocked from boarding a commuter aircraft in Manchester, N.H., on Thursday night.
Mr.
Douglas, who has multiple sclerosis, said he was told by the employees of Precision Airlines that he could not get on the plane unless he could walk.


A Long-Distance Affair
TO THOSE WITH A PASSION FOR flea markets, Richard Lambertson lives an enviable life.
During the week, he is the design director of Gucci in Italy, but on the weekends he shops at flea markets all over the world.
"Often, I'll just choose a city that's holding one, then pick up and go," he says.
Lambertson's one-bedroom apartment in Milan is a testament to his travels.
Located in a renovated 18th-century building, it is decorated primarily with booty from these weekend adventures.
With an eye for the unusual, Lambertson collects disparate things that still have a unified spirit -- from a Venetian gilt picture frame to some 1920's soda-fountain chairs bought in Minnesota.
"It's like a Cocteau drawing," he says of his home and its surrealistic assortment of objects.
Call it his own take on International Style, or just a passion for quirky things, but "surprisingly," he admits, "somehow everything fits."


Dollar Sinking Against Yen
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
129.70
133.12
132.20
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6675
1.6695
1.5372
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1313
1.1333
1.1500
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7375
1.7435
1.9455
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$359.00
$349.00
$394.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Elgin Marbles
To the Editor: Robina Riccitiello quoted a gallery tour guide at the British Museum ("Art Comes to Life at London Museums, Aug. 11) as saying that the Elgin Marbles, which are so pristine white today, in antiquity were originally painted over with bright colors.
Bright colors?
Who says so?
I have never seen any scholarly writing or scientific examination that proves beyond a doubt that the Greek sculptors of the Classic period polychromed their work.
If traces of pigment have been detected on the Parthenon sculptures, who is to say when this color was applied?
Might it not have been done centuries later as part of a renovation and sprucing up?


Dying Town Considers Salvation in a Landfill
The corrugated Appalachian terrain of McDowell County is as pretty as America gets this time of year, with the leaves starting to turn along the banks of the shimmering Tug Fork River.
But it is as sad as America gets, too, with the hills that are dressed in foliage ravaged by coal mining, and the river fouled by raw sewage because the county seat, Welch, has never had the money to build a sewer system.
Now some hope has dawned, but it is hope tinged with despair and a sense of ignominy.
A developer is proposing to set up a vast landfill in a remote 6,000-acre hollow three miles from town to treat and store sewage sludge, household garbage and incinerator ash from other states, brought in by 150 to 200 railroad cars a day.
It would be the nation's largest repository for non-toxic out-of-state refuse.


Plain Talk About Eating Right
Americans can be divided into three categories: the blissfully ignorant, who never pay a nickel's worth of attention to the nutritional trigger words as they come and go -- calcium, fiber, cholesterol, fat; the "nutritionally correct," who have a thorough grasp of the principles of healthful eating and think brownies don't taste as good as sprouts, and the rest of us, who wish we were like the people in group one and despise those in group two.
Most of the rest of us would like to do the right thing, but are totally befuddled by the mixed messages we receive from magazines, newspapers, radio, television, the Federal Government, advertising and, of course, our friends.
We don't know whom to believe, so we fashion a personal version of healthful eating -- "niche" nutrition, if you like -- cherry-picking the advice we can live with, irrespective of its merits, and discarding the rest.


The Graham Company Faces Life Without Martha
For the first time in its 65-year history, the Martha Graham Dance Company will open a New York season without Graham, though the founder's imprint remains strong.
She helped plan the two-week run that begins on Tuesday at the City Center, and even left an unfinished dance, "The Eye of the Goddess," from which an excerpt will be presented.
Graham also laid plans further into the future.
She chose two longtime associates, Ron Protas and Linda Hodes, to run the company, and suggested directions they might take over the next few years.
Work by other choreographers was to be introduced into the all-Graham repertory, and new choreographers were to be developed in the choreographers' workshop offered at the school she founded in 1927.


Feasting On A Festival
The old man choked on a piece of candy, was shot in the back, strangled by a curtain and drowned in a fountain, all in a matter of seconds.
What's a coroner to do?
This is a whimsical murder scene in "Toto the Hero," the first feature by the 34-year-old Belgian director Jaco van Dormael and the most delightful surprise at this year's New York Film Festival.
Any festival that includes even one discovery like "Toto" can't be all bad, and as it happens, this year's was nearly all good.
The festival closes tonight with a much grittier killing.
In "Homicide," David Mamet's most ambitious and serious film yet, the murder of an elderly Jewish woman sets off an intense identity crisis for a detective who thinks of himself as a cop, not a Jew.


Are Auctions Driving Housing Prices Down?
LAST spring, as many housing developers despaired of hitting their price goals in an open market and began to auction off their apartments and town houses, some holdouts protested that the auctions would push the market lower and drag down prices on all properties.
Auctioneers, eager to break into the New York area's rich market of overbuilt and undersold housing, insisted that a quick sale of most units in a troubled development, even if at a discount, would shore up the prices of the remaining apartments and houses and secure higher prices for them.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Glen Head 175,000
13 McCouns Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 63-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace; taxes $1,500.
Muttontown 600,000
113 Sterling Court  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, inground pool, 1 acre; taxes $8,000.
Oyster Bay 180,000
90 East Main Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, dining room, basement, inground pool, 2-car garage; taxes $3,000.
Rocky Point 124,000  39 Magnolia Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 16-year-old ranch; fireplace, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $3,000.
Wading River 260,000
26 Heritage Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old contemporary; fireplace, deck, 1 acre, 2-car garage; taxes $3,700.
Westbury 179,000
621 Nelson Place  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 34-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, family room, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $5,900.
OTHER AREAS Hartford, Conn. 75,000
81 Granby Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old ranch; unfinished basement, needs work, 1/4 acre; taxes $1,640.
Armonk, N.Y. 350,000
1 Spruce Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, dining room, family room, underground sprinkler; taxes $4,480.
Freehold, N.J. 64,900
113 E. Pilatus Platz
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 17-year-old ranch-style condominium; c/a, patio, porch; monthly maintenance $118; taxes $1,749.


Lured by Zlotys, Ivan Plays The Model Migrant Worker
In the factories and on the construction sites of eastern Poland, there is a new model employee these days.
Trustworthy, tireless, and willing to accept half the prevailing wages, these highly prized workers speak broken Polish and are likely to answer to names like Nikolai, Mikhail or Ivan.
They are Russians, Lithuanians and Ukrainians.
Like the Poles who have for years streamed west to work without permits in America and Western Europe, they are flocking to Poland, eager to earn sums equivalent to eight months Soviet pay in a month.
Some enter legally, while many more come on tourist visas and then melt into the cities and countryside, wherever there is work.


Fashion Statement
To the Editor:
In " 'Star Trek': It's a Wonderful Galaxy"  [ Sept. 15 ]  James Gorman claims that the pajamas worn on the TV series were one of its secret success ingredients.
But he does not go far enough in outlining the effect of those pajamas on the fashion world of everyday American life.
At the ries' inception of the series in 1966, I asked, "How long will it be before we can dress in those comfortable, no-nonsense kinds of clothes?" Jogging outfits led the way.
Today, grandmothers attend P.T.A. meetings in such "pajama" suits.


Making a Difference; Mr. Guccione Cleans House at General Media
As recently as a year ago, Robert Guccione was on a growth binge.
His closely held publishing company, General Media International, seemed to be branching out in all directions.
Building on his flagship properties, Penthouse and Omni, Mr.
Guccione launched Longevity, a health magazine, in 1988.
Last year, General Media acquired Compute as well as three car magazines.
But late last month, the binge came to an end, at least for now, when General Media announced that 120 people companywide -- about 18 percent of the 650-member staff -- were being let go.
The company also said that it was merging the staffs of Compute and Omni, a science magazine, by moving Omni's editorial operation from New York to Greensboro, N.C., where Compute is based.


Crowds of Hasidic Jews Battle Police in Jerusalem
Club-swinging police officers on horseback charged into surging crowds of ultra-Orthodox Jews today in the most severe clashes over Jewish religious sensibilities that this battle-tested city has experienced in several years.
Several thousand demonstrators, virtually all men in black hats and caftans, took to the streets in Jerusalem's Hasidic neighborhoods of Mea Shearim and Beit Israel to protest a new road that runs alongside their neighborhoods.
Orthodox Jews are forbidden to drive on the Sabbath, and they regard the new thoroughfare as violating the sanctity of their observance of the holy day.


Cuttings; The Textures and Colors of a Fall Garden
The Monarch butterflies were clustered about the butterfly bush at Wave Hill this week, and its white spires were all the more beautiful for the orange and black tiger-striped creatures sipping their nectar.
"People think of the garden as dying now, but I like it," said Marco Polo Stufano, the director of horticulture at Wave Hill, as a cool wind blew up from the Hudson.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
"I LOVE PAUL REVERE, WHETHER HE RODE OR NOT"  By Richard Shenkman.
Harper Perennial, $20.


This Week: Plant Those Daffodils (and Get Out the Rakes)
Keep planting early spring bulbs, and begin planting tulips.
Save some bulbs, like daffodils, crocuses and tulips, to plant in pots.
Sink them into the ground and mulch them, or store them in the garage (one where the temperature remains at about 40 degrees).
Then bring them into the house this winter to force the blooms.


The Fanciful False Faces of Pre-Columbian Americans
In the pre-Columbian Americas, every day was Halloween -- a time to wear masks.
Masks were worn by children, shamans, dancers and ballplayers and accompanied rulers to the grave.
Masks were donned to help win battles, conceal identities and throw great parties -- all of which is documented in the exhibition "Faces of Eternity: Masks of the Pre-Columbian Americas," at the Americas Society, 680 Park Avenue, at 68th Street, through Dec. 15.
The little-known story of the role of masks in North, Central and South America before the arrival of Europeans is told with 83 masks and sculptures made between 1000 B.C. and the 16th century.
Many of the fantasy face coverings -- which depict fierce beasts, eccentric gods and human skulls -- are exhibited for the first time.
Most were worn for celebrations, performances and burial and transformation rites; others were fashioned into jewelry or plaques that were affixed to buildings.
The sculptures of masked people and animals were made for temples and tombs.


Sports of The Times; Jeff Torborg and Don Baylor Appear to Be Just Right for New York
THERE are only three things wrong with Jeff Torborg's coming home to manage in New York:
1. He has a contract in Chicago.
2. He is not twins.
3. He is not black.


Stretching Lobster for Out-of-Season Dishes
A CHANGE of seasons does not necessarily mean a new list of ingredients.
Often only the preparation is revised.
Consider lobster: in midsummer, it is wonderful to indulge in a shore dinner at a seaside restaurant, with steamed lobsters, corn on the cob, plates of coleslaw and a bib around the neck.
Or, more informally, lobster might be diced in a mayonnaise salad and served on a bun as a lobster roll at a roadside stand.
Also, the lobster club sandwich has become a favorite of young American chefs.


Bounces Favor Rutgers In Victory Over Army
One hundred years after they first met, Rutgers and Army proved that some things don't change.
The ball still takes funny bounces.
And it was apparent that this game was going to be decided by who bounced it the least.
At the end, Rutgers held on and, helped by Army's erratic kicking game, came away with a 14-12 victory at Giants Stadium today.


When UConn Romps, Yale Gets Flattened
Spectators arrived at the Yale Bowl this afternoon to encounter a familiar scenario: a Connecticut team without a victory was facing a Yale team that hadn't lost.
And for a second year in a row, the outcome was familiar, too, as the Huskies took out the frustration of four straight losses by thrashing the Eli, 34-20.


Beame, 85, in Hospital in Critical Condition
Former Mayor Abraham D. Beame was in intensive care yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center after suffering an apparent heart attack, hospital officials said.
The former Mayor was in critical but stable condition, said Kelly Larkin, a hospital spokeswoman.
He arrived at the emergency room about 7:45 A.M. complaining of chest pains, shaking and chills, she said.


Woody Plants Need a Jump on Spring
KEEP planting.
And not just hardy spring-flowering bulbs.
There is ample time until the middle of October to set out woody plants, particularly new landscaping shrubs, perennials, grass seed and even trees.
Of course, hardy bulbs can be planted as well, but too many gardeners forget about the fall planting season and believe they have to wait until spring to set out anything else.
The chief reason for setting out woody plants now is to allow the plants time to form a strong root system.
Then when spring does come, the plants will be ready for the big push and flowering.


Votes in Congress LP&gt;Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate   1. Unemployment Benefits: Vote on passage of a $6.4 billion measure to provide extended unemployment benefits for people who have been out of work at least half a year. Approved 65 to 35, Oct. 1.   2. Family Leave: Vote on passage of a bill that would require many employers to grant up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for workers to care for newborn babies or ill family members. Approved 65 to 32, Oct. 2.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
CURTIS 32, ADAMS 25 Curtis quarterback Jeff Forde threw four touchdown passes and added to his tremendous statistics (17 touchdowns in 4 games) to help the Warriors (3-1) slip past the Spartans (2-1).
In a contest in which all but two scores were on pass plays, both quarterbacks proved they could air it out.
Elijah Dixon (3 touchdowns, 12 of 27 for 227 yards) threw all his touchdown passes to Garfield Green (7 completitions for 140 yards) in a losing cause.
WEST ISLIP 14, BELLPORT 6 West Islip (3-0) intercepted two passes including a 99-yard return with 15 seconds to play, to lead the Lions over the Clippers (0-2).
All the scoring came as a result of turnovers with Mike Seward intercepting Bellport's potential game-winning pass and going the distance of the field to help preserve the victory.
Bellport struck first when Tony Furman scored a 5-yard quarterback keeper after the Clippers recovered a fumble at West Islip's 7-yard line.
With less than five minutes remaining in the first half, West Islip took advantage of a Denis Finnegan interception and put together a nine-play, 50-yard drive that was capped with a 8-yard Simeon Sheirant pass to Patrick Wallace.


Bulgaria: The Old World at Ancient Prices
IMAGINE walking into a government tourism office in Manhattan, paying a little less than $5 and receiving not only the directions but also the key to a stranger's private apartment in one of the better parts of town.
Or imagine walking into one of the finest restaurants in Manhattan, consuming a five-course meal with wine, with live piano music in the background -- all for less than $10.


Making a Difference; CBS's VP for Gloating
David F. Poltrack, the senior vice president of research for CBS, has been making the argument for years: Television is following an outdated system in its pervasive skew toward younger viewers.
Instead of aiming shows at viewers aged 18 to 49, programmers should go for those 35 to 54.
"The aging baby boomer is clearly the market orientation of the 90's," Mr.
Poltrack says.
By sheer coincidence, CBS's audience has always been the oldest among the networks.
For the last eight years, Mr.
Poltrack, 46, has been the most quoted font of numbers in the television business -- always in the loyal service of his network.


Stacey Quinn Weds
Stacey Ann Quinn, a vice president of Citicorp in New York, was married yesterday to Andrew James Pskowski, a vice president of All State Distribution Northeast, an institutional supply distributor in Montgomery, N.Y.
The Rev.
John B. Wehrlen, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Maritime Center in Norwalk, Conn.
Mrs.
Pskowski, 32 years old, graduated from Endicott College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Quinn of Fairfield, Conn.
Mr.
Pskowski, 38, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Pskowski of Montgomery.


Holy Cross's Latest Victim
Holy Cross quarterback Tom Ciaccio passed for three touchdowns and fullback Jerome Fuller ran for another today as the Crusaders beat Harvard, 28-13, and extended their winning streak to 13 games.
The Crusaders (4-0) haven't lost to an Ivy League team in 20 games over the last six years.


That New Device For Catching Speeders
Photo-radar will allow the police to write many more speeding tickets ("Speeders Beware: New Device Looms," Sept. 1).
The system is very efficient and virtually impossible for motorists to detect.
Unfortunately, it seems that the reason for its introduction has nothing to do with safety.
James Arena of the State Division of Highway Traffic Safety says that a motivation is to insure compliance with a Federal requirement in order to continue to receive Federal highway funds.


Corrections
An article in the Arts and Leisure section on Sept. 29 about football movies misstated the title and date of an early film in the genre, and misidentified its star.
The film is "Brown of Harvard," released in 1926; its star was William Haines.
A brief boxed report with the article misidentified the car rental company for which O. J. Simpson has made commercials.
It is Hertz.


Blue Jays Subtract Doubt by Adding 3
It took a while for Toronto to put the Boston Red Sox away in the American League East, but, with about a week left in the season, it became all but inevitable that the Blue Jays would win.
So the how, who and why became as important as the when.
Not surprisingly, the answers, in three simple words, turned out to be the same ones most often used by the Blue Jays this season: Alomar, Carter and White.


Multiculturalism Divides More Than It Unites; Dr. Drew's Death
To the Editor:
In revisiting aspects of his early education that paid homage to African-Americans, Hugh B. Price (Op-Ed, Sept. 23) mentions Dr.
Charles Drew, who "discovered blood plasma and saved the lives of many American soldiers in World War II." I was a pupil in the colored grammar school of Atlanta in 1950, when Dr.
Drew suffered a fatal car accident in North Carolina.
It was generally reported, and believed, that since the laws of Southern states did not permit colored and white people equal access to public facilities, Charles Richard Drew could not be admitted to the nearest emergency clinic.
Therefore, his death was, to some extent, thought to be a result of racism.


GARCIA'S 2D TRIAL DRAWING TO CLOSE
A Federal prosecutor in the second extortion trial of former Congressman Robert Garcia urged the jury last week to convict him and two co-defendants, saying that the case, arising out of the Wedtech scandal, was about the trading of "noble principles" of public service for money.
"This is about knowledge and intent and willfulness," the prosecutor, Michele S. Hirshman, an assistant United States Attorney, said in her closing argument on Wednesday in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
"It's about how they exchanged service and noble principles for money, and they hid it."
But Mr.
Garcia's lawyer, Barry A. Bohrer, told the jury that he and his client were waiting to hear them clear Mr.
Garcia.
"We've been waiting a long time to hear two words," Mr.
Bohrer said, "Bob Garcia is 'not guilty.' " Elected in 1978
Mr.
Garcia, who was elected as a Democrat in 1978 to represent a Congressional district that includes the South Bronx, is on trial for the second time on charges that he extorted money from officials of the Wedtech Corporation.
The defunct Bronx military contractor became the center of a scandal in the late 1980's that toppled White House aides, Congressmen and city officials who had been involved in a system of illegal payments that helped the company win lucrative Government contracts.
Mr.
Garcia's wife, Jane Lee, is also charged with conspiracy and two counts of extortion.
A lawyer from Puerto Rico, Ralph Vallone Jr., is being tried with the Garcias and is charged with conspiracy and a single extortion count.
If convicted, the Garcias face a maximum of 45 years in prison and a $750,000 fine.
Mr.
Vallone, who is on trial for the first time, faces up to 25 years and a $500,000 fine.
The jury is expected to begin deliberations tomorrow.
The Garcias were convicted in 1989 on similar charges, but the conviction was reversed on appeal last year and a new trial ordered.


Corrections
A picture in Evening Hours last Sunday, showing a man on a motorcycle, carried an incorrect caption.
The picture showed a guest at a street party on Sept. 23 at Barneys New York to introduce Donna Karan's men's clothes.
The caption, about a party at the Pierpont Morgan Library on Sept. 26 to celebrate the opening of a new wing, referred to a photograph that was inadvertently omitted.


Service Charges By Banks Scrutinized
AMID growing concern that the state's banks need to be more responsive to consumers' needs, state legislators are considering several proposals that would make banking services more straightforward and accessible to a wider range of residents.
After recently enacting legislation that requires banks to offer low-cost "no frills" checking accounts to customers, lawmakers are now examining measures that would require banks to disclose all fees and account requirements in writing, provide free cashing of government checks and create basic savings accounts carrying minimal fees and opening deposit requirements.


Devils Batter the Blues And Look Like Geniuses
The big picture looked in focus for the Devils in their season opener.
They dominated the St.
Louis Blues and delighted a festive crowd at Byrne Meadowlands Arena with a 7-2 triumph this evening.
The tight forechecking by the Devils was perhaps the most pleasant element of the game for Coach Tom McVie, who wants his team to establish an identity built around that attribute.


U.S. Is Set to Store Nuclear Waste Despite New Mexico's Objections
Barring a court order, the first shipment of plutonium waste to the nation's first permanent nuclear waste repository will leave a nuclear weapons plant in Idaho on Oct. 10 and arrive in New Mexico two days later, the Department of Energy said Friday.
The announcement, by a spokesman in Washington, came a day after Energy Secretary James D. Watkins bypassed Congressional approval and said the $1 billion Waste Isolation Pilot Plant, 26 miles east of Carlsbad, N.M., was ready to begin operations soon after the shipment arrived.


Perspectives: Rentals in Brooklyn; Buying for the Long Term Back in Fashion
EIGHTEEN years ago Isaac Erlich was a guidance counselor in the city school system in Brooklyn.
He was wheeling his year-old daughter in a carriage one rainy day when he ducked for shelter into a real-estate office in Park Slope.
He left it intrigued by the idea of buying a six-family house with $15,000 down and moving his family into one of the apartments.
That was the beginning of a new career in real estate.
Before the 80's had ended Mr.
Erlich had bought and converted into co-ops about 15 small buildings in the neighborhood, most of them with five to 12 apartments.
He made money selling the vacancies.
He still holds the unsold renter-occupied apartments.


Headliners; Prize Literature
When writers can't be read where they live, they tend to change addresses.
Not Nadine Gordimer.
Though since 1958 her novels have been banned repeatedly in her native South Africa, Miss Gordimer stayed on, producing poignant tales of love and oppression under apartheid.
Eventually, her work proved to be "of very great benefit to humanity" said the Swedish Academy last week, in citing Miss Gordimer for the 1991 Nobel Prize in Literature.
Her several masterpieces, including "Burger's Daughter" and "July's People," have each been banned at one time in South Africa, but lately her works have all been available.
Also available last week were the rather faint congratulations of President F.W. de Klerk, who managed to stretch Miss Gordimer's achievement into "an honor for South Africa." Miss Gordimer, the first woman to win the literature prize in 25 years, said that for all of the recent progress in her country, "We've got to go on pressing."


Where Frustrated Singers Act Out Their Dreams
THE hour is late and the bar is hopping.
All eyes are on the stage, where a crooner sings "That's Life" into a microphone.
It's Frank Sinatra's song, it's Frank Sinatra's arrangement, the orchestra sounds like Frank Sinatra's, but it's Greg Caponetto singing.
The applause sign flashes, the audience whistles and Mr.
Caponetto, a bar patron, returns to his table.
Now three friends take the spotlight to belt out "You're So Vain." The audience and singers can see Carly Simon's lyrics on three video monitors on the stage.
MTV-like music videos flash colorful imagery.
The three singers cavort to the beat, accompanied by Carly Simon's type of backup sounds.


Fans Remember the 'Eternal Music' of Miles Davis
As several hundred relatives, musicians, politicians, writers, actors and just plain jazz fans gathered to bid farewell to Miles Davis yesterday, only the music playing in the background was "Kind of Blue."
In a two-hour memorial service at St.
Peter's Lutheran Church in midtown Manhattan, there were tributes to the genius of the trumpeter and composer, who in his later years was also a prolific painter.
There were fond memories of his orneriness, his wit and his eccentricities, including cooking while wearing a tuxedo.
There were sober recollections of his struggles with drug addictions and, since the mid-1970's, a series of debilitating medical problems.
But, finally, there was his music, which the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, a friend for 25 years, described as "eternal music that elevated feeling into art and song into prayer."


New Lines and New Life For Furniture Maker
ETHAN ALLEN Inc. -- the 60-year-old Connecticut company that is one of the nation's best-known furniture producers -- is being propelled into new product diversity and marketing clout by an unusual chief executive who arrived in the United States in 1965 as a political refugee.
The executive, Farooq Kathwari, a native of Kashmir, is showing American business leaders how to take a tired company and give it a completely new spin.
In 1989 Mr.
Kathwari, now 46 years old, led a group of company managers, dealers and other investors in a $385 million leveraged buyout of Ethan Allen from Interco Inc., a St.
Louis conglomerate.
Since then, by applying new disciplines, motivating efforts and marketing skills, he has imbued the company, based in Danbury, with new life.


Leaders Come and Go, But the Japanese Boom Seems to Last Forever
TOSHIKI KAIFU became Japan's Prime Minister two years ago, riding a wave of public disgust over the ruling party's scandal-tainted ways.
Yet there seemed little sense of outrage last week when the same sort of political kabuki he promised to reform was played out in public once again, forcing him to abandon his campaign to cleanse Japanese politics and announce that he would not run for re-election.
The reason for the subdued reaction, at least in part, was contained in an equally important but little noticed event during the week: Japan set a record for its longest post-war economic boom.
The Japanese seem to have taken prosperity for granted, assuming that the politicians can maneuver as viciously as they like with little impact on their steadily humming economic machine.
It is not hard to understand this feeling: At a time when the American economy is struggling with recession, the Japanese economy has just completed its 58th month of uninterrupted growth.
It topped the 57-month Izanagi boom -- named for one of the mythical beings who created Japan -- that lasted from October 1965 to July 1970.


Off-Season Exercise: Morris Can Walk Out
Jack Morris, who will start the first game of the American League pennant playoff Tuesday for the worst-to-first Minnesota Twins, always seems to be a free agent.
He was three times in the last five years, and he could be again as soon as the World Series is over.
Morris, instrumental in the Twins' rapid, unprecedented rise in the American League West, is one of 22 players who can become free agents if the options in their contracts are not exercised.
Morris's case, however, is the only one of the 22 where the player holds the option.
He can exercise the option, he can reject it and negotiate a new contract with the Twins or he can reject it and become a free agent.
Again.


Stretching Lobster for Out-of-Season Dishes
A CHANGE of seasons does not necessarily mean a new list of ingredients.
Often only the preparation is revised.
Consider lobster: in midsummer, it is wonderful to indulge in a shore dinner at a seaside restaurant, with steamed lobsters, corn on the cob, plates of coleslaw and a bib around the neck.
Or, more informally, lobster might be diced in a mayonnaise salad and served on a bun as a lobster roll at a roadside stand.
Also, the lobster club sandwich has become a favorite of young American chefs.


Testing Commitment to Quality
To the Editor:
It doesn't take a rocket scientist (or even a freshman business student) to realize that the criteria for an effective business model that fails to include financial and new product measures are not complete. ("Being Baldrige-Eligible Isn't Enough," Forum, Sept. 22) If the authors know executives who mistake the Baldrige guidelines for a complete model, I'd like to know who they are; I'll ditch any stock I may have in that company.


Making a Difference; Turning Off The Juice
The Yankee Rowe nuclear power plant in Massachusetts was shut down last week because Government engineers finally decided after a lengthy study that they had doubts about its safety.
But the main reason they spent so much time looking was Robert D. Pollard.
Mr.
Pollard is the senior nuclear safety engineer at the Union of Concerned Scientists, a nonprofit organization that worries about nuclear power and nuclear war.
The group, which has offices in Boston and Washington, petitioned the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in June for an immediate shutdown of the 31-year-old plant.
Mr.
Pollard's complaint: the plant's critical steel parts were known to be brittle from age but the owners had not conducted the analysis required by N.R.C. regulations to see just how brittle.


Charles R. Cory Wed To Kimberlee Scott
Kimberlee Jae Scott, an associate at the S. G. Warburg &amp; Company investment bank, and Charles Robinson Cory, a principal at Morgan Stanley, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
James C. Scovill performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church of Litchfield, Conn.
Mrs.
Cory, 26 years old, graduated summa cum laude from Southern Methodist University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Phillip H. Scott of Arcadia, Calif.
Mr.
Cory, 36, graduated summa cum laude and received an M.B.A. and a law degree from the University of Virginia.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Cory of McLean, Va.


The Noise Police Take the Boom Out of the Bronx
Mike Negron can't understand all the fuss.
So what if his stereo consists of four 300-watt SuperPro speakers, a 280-watt Sherwood amplifier and a pair of generic, but still powerful, tweeters.
So what if such a setup, which can generate more than 80 decibels of sound and could be found on a concert stage, is installed in his
car
.
"I don't play it loud," said Mr.
Negron, who is 20 years old and lives near Fordham University in the Bronx.
"I play it clear."


Making a Difference; Apple's Man at the Front
After 11 years in key positions at Apple Computer Inc., Edward W. Birss is leaving.
But he's not going far.
Mr.
Birss, 38, is expected to become the chief operating officer of Taligent, a joint venture being formed by Apple and the International Business Machines Corporation that is perhaps the most far-reaching part of their broad alliance.


An Economic Forecast: Clouds but Some Sun
ONCE a year, the mountain comes to Mohammed.
That is when well-known forecasters appear in Westchester to discuss the economy of the region at the yearly fall symposium sponsored by three of the county's leading business groups: the Westchester County Association, the Westchester County Bankers Association and the Westchester Business Partnership.
"We in Westchester are in danger of becoming too insular and talking only to one another," S. J. Schulman told an audience of 125 business and community leaders at the Rye Town Hilton at this year's meeting, on Sept. 27.
"We need to hear other voices, like those of Richard Ravitch, former Metropolitan Transportation Authority chairman and chairman of the Citizens Budget Commission, and Rosemary Scanlon, the chief economist for the Port Authority, to tell us about the region's economy and what we can expect for Westchester."


Woman's Body Found in Plastic Bag
The body of a woman stuffed into a plastic bag was found off an exit of the Pelham Parkway in the Bronx yesterday afternoon -- not far from where the body of a man was found tied to a fire hydrant on the Hutchinson River Parkway on Friday night, the police said.
A police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, said not enough was known about the two killings to establish any link between them.


Avoid the Jokes When It Comes to Violence
To the Editor:
"In Cable's World of Boutiques, a Generalist Thrives," (Sept. 15), about USA Cable, says that "some in the industry jokingly refer to USA as the 'murder and mayhem' network because so many of its programs are about women in jeopardy or people getting killed." Why jokingly?
Just as Brandon Tartikoff set ultra-violent national broadcasting standards at NBC with "Miami Vice," "Crime Story" and, most recently, "Nasty Boys," USA Cable showcases reruns of "Miami Vice" and assorted movies showing gratuitous violence as an "entertainment art form."


Headliners; Old Story
After 21 years on the job, Joyce Stratton thinks her superiors considered her too old to work for the New York City Department for the Aging.
Last week she filed suit charging the agency with "a systematic pattern and practice of firing and forcing out older employees." The 61-year-old Dr.
Stratton, who has a Ph.D. in sociology, said that before she was dismissed in February there had been no complaints about her work and that she had been "replaced by a person who is substantially younger." In addition to losing her $51,000 annual salary, Dr.
Stratton also lost her pension rights, she said.
Officials at the agency denied that any discrimination was involved.
They said that Dr.
Stratton was laid off as part of a retrenchment in which the department she headed shrank from 24 to 6 people.
"Joyce was not let go because of age discrimination," said Helene S. Wolff, a spokeswoman for the department.
"We have employees much older than Joyce, in their 70's."


Data Update
VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
(Residential in millions of dollars)
Aug. 91
Aug. 90
Change
New York
435.5
315.6
43%
New Jersey
150.4
144.9
4%
Connecticut
83.6
80.0
4%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.15
9.18
10.46
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.86
6.89
8.40
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.02
9.05
10.25
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.73
6.77
8.06
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.04
9.05
10.35
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.78
6.85
8.40
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.27
9.31
10.62
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.39
7.42
8.54
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
5.50
5.56
7.79
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.10
9.10
9.70
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Parents Vie With Schools Over Helping Handicapped
AT Commack High School, Christopher Brown, who has a severe neural hearing loss, attends classes with a full-time interpreter who signs all his lessons.
The district pays $16,000 a year for the service.
At Syosset High School, Louis Ambrosio, who uses a wheelchair because of spina bifida, has a full-time special-education aide that costs the district $15,000.
She assists him with taking notes, work in the chemistry laboratory, retrieving books from his locker and other tasks.


When High Officials Seem to Speak In Racist Innuendo
Within a few days last month statements by President Bush and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York raised questions about the insidious bigotry that finds expression in codes and phrases that on the surface are free of slurs, but that have a message that is unmistakable.
Was Mr.
D'Amato, who was kicking off a re-election campaign, guilty of playing to anti-black sentiment when he suggested shortly after New York Mayor David N. Dinkins canceled a long-planned trip to South Africa that "maybe if he wants to go over there on a long sabbatical and let someone else run the city, we'd be better off"?


North and South Korea Are Still Far Apart
Despite speculation that the entry of both North and South Korea into the United Nations might nudge the two enemies a little closer, diplomats from both countries are still staking out positions as far apart as before.
On Wednesday, North Korean officials welcomed President Bush's pledge to eliminate short-range nuclear weapons, but said they would not allow international inspections of their nuclear plants until all such weapons are withdrawn from South Korea.


Woody Plants Need a Jump on Spring
KEEP planting.
And not just hardy spring-flowering bulbs.
There is ample time until the middle of October to set out woody plants, particularly new landscaping shrubs, perennials, grass seed and even trees.
Of course, hardy bulbs can be planted as well, but too many gardeners forget about the fall planting season and believe they have to wait until spring to set out anything else.
The chief reason for setting out woody plants now is to allow the plants time to form a strong root system.
Then when spring does come, the plants will be ready for the big push and flowering.


Headliners; Cloak and Flowers
Is the hard-edged competition between the K.G.B. and the Central Intelligence Agency headed toward the collegiality of foreign exchange students?
Maybe not quite, but Yevgeny M. Primakov, the new head of Soviet foreign intelligence, proposed an unheard of level of cooperation between the two services last week.
For starters, he suggested that the C.I.A. and K.G.B. -- actually an as yet unnamed spinoff that will be to the K.G.B. what the C.I.A. is to the F.B.I. -- could team up to combat terrorism and drug trafficking.
"Intelligence is very secret, but for years it has been closed even in those aspects where it should be open," he said at a news conference.
"I am in favor of opening everything up where it can be opened up." How Washington will respond is unclear.
While Mr.
Primakov was bantering with reporters, his would-be counterpart, Robert M. Gates, was still rotating slowly on the confirmation grill.


Big Deal for Knicks As Anthony Signs Up
After weeks of tedious negotiations, Greg Anthony and the Knicks accomplished their goals today.
Anthony, the Knicks' top pick and the No. 12 choice over all in the National Basketball Association draft, signed a lucrative contract.
The Knicks signed a 23-year-old point guard with speed, impressive intelligence and the potential to make an immediate contribution.


As Taxes Rise, Legislative Contests Draw More Scrutiny
THE Board of Legislators, long considered an invisible level of government, may be entering a new era with this year's election, one of increasing visibility under bipartisan leadership.
The new visibility, according to legislators seeking re-election or vying for three empty seats on the Board of Legislators, is emerging as a result of growing voter impatience over rising county taxes.
Once the lowest level of assessment on a property owner's tax bill, the figures for county assessments are beginning to exceed those imposed by village or town authorities.


Camera
Today, getting a roll of standard black and white film processed is a chore because most laboratories are set up for color only.
Now the Ilford Company has come to the rescue with a novel idea: a black and white film that can be processed in a one-hour photo lab, right along with everybody's color rolls.
Ilford has created a film for these times: XP-2.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Farmingdale 140,900
6 Shafto Street
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 36-year-old Cape Cod; 2-car garage, den, h/w floors, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,866.
Freehold 64,900
113 E. Pilatus Platz
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 17-year-old ranch-style condominium; c/a, patio, porch; monthly maintenance $118; taxes $1,749.
Howell 138,500
548 Laurelwood Court
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2-year-old condominium town house; family room, fireplace, maintenance $94; taxes $2,996.
Jackson 119,000
7 Citadel Court
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old split level; fireplace, 1-car garage, family room, c/a; taxes $3,029.
Livingston 500,000
7 Aspen Drive
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 12-year-old contemporary; c/a, 2-car garage, fireplace, deck; taxes $10,197.
Short Hills 410,000
50 Thackeray Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 38-year-old colonial; family room, patio, 2-car garage, fireplace; taxes $6,140.
OTHER AREAS Hartford, Conn. 75,000
81 Granby Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old ranch; unfinished basement, needs work, 1/4 acre; taxes $1,640.
Armonk, N.Y. 350,000
1 Spruce Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, dining room, family room, underground sprinkler; taxes $4,480.
Glen Head, L.I. 175,000
13 McCouns Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 63-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace; taxes $1,500.


The Holocaust, in a Polish Child's Eyes
MACIEK is a Jew who converts to Catholicism, trembling lest his fatally circumcised identity be exposed.
He masters the arts of deceit and becomes an expert confabulator.
He witnesses the burning of the Warsaw Ghetto and other Nazi atrocities, as well as the disintegration of his family, and, somehow, survives the Holocaust.
Maciek is a 7-year-old Polish child in World War II.
"Little Maciek," as he is referred to in the book, is the voice of "Wartime Lies," a haunting first novel by Louis Begley of Sagaponack and New York City.
The 57-year-old writer is a partner in the law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, where he heads the international department.
Alfred A. Knopf published "Wartime Lies" this year to critical acclaim and the great surprise of Mr.
Begley's friends and colleagues.


Brazilian Superboat Driver Finds Speed 'in the Blood'
Taking risks is part of life for Eike Batista, a 34-year-old Brazilian entrepreneur who a decade ago combed the Amazon jungles in search of gold dust.
He has since cashed in on his Indiana Jones life style, preferring instead a home at New York's Trump Plaza and a crack at the national offshore powerboat championship.
Batista drives Spirit of the Amazon, a 50-foot speed machine that has dominated the offshore powerboat circuit this year.
His craft, which carries four 1,100-horsepower engines, is one of 10 Superboats expected to race today in the $75,000 New York Offshore Grand Prix on the Hudson River.


Owners Still Charged In Happy Land Case
A judge has refused to dismiss charges against the owners of the building that housed the Happy Land social club, where 87 people died in a fire in March 1990.
The club was ordered closed for safety-code violations months before the fire, but the place was reopened illegally and city officials never followed up.


Columbus Landed, er, Looted, uh -- Rewrite!
History has often been a bit tough on Christopher Columbus.
Logs of his travels were apparently lost by a dimwitted grandson, and an ill-informed German cartographer kept Columbus's name off of two continents (someone told him Amerigo Vespucci was there first).
Had Columbus's long affair with the daughter of a Spanish wine presser not been so widely known, the Vatican might have overlooked the uncertain miraculousness of his deeds and made him a saint.
Popular culture has treated the explorer rather more generously.
The World's Columbian Exhibition in Chicago 401 years after the fact called itself the "Jubilee of Mankind." The evident flaw of Fredric March's Columbus in the 1949 film seemed to be his uncontrollable urge to brood.
As recently as 1985, the mariner from Genoa sailed through a full six hours of prime time on CBS television looking like a very nice guy.
The mini-series did feature some nasty Spaniards given to rape and plunder, but its hero kept to the sidelines through most of it, anguish all over his face.


Afrocentric Brooklyn School Opens
In a church basement classroom adorned with a large map of Africa and a banner proclaiming "Mesua Abo Bra" -- meaning "learning for life" in the Akan language of Ghana -- 10 young Brooklyn children embarked last month on an experiment in learning.
Dressed in blue-and-white uniforms, with ties made of colorful West African kente cloth, the 5- and 6-year-olds are the first class of students in a new, self-proclaimed "Afrocentric" school affiliated with one of America's most historic black churches, the Bridge Street African Wesleyan Methodist Episcopal Church in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section.


The Capital Convenes After Dark
LIKE the traffic, night life in the nation's capital also follows a beltway system.
Inside, behind closed doors, is the continuous round of embassy receptions, charity balls, cocktail parties and little dinner parties so essential to politics in this city.
Outside is a larger circle of bars, pubs, clubs and trendy restaurants that teem with college students and younger people on their way up the corporate or political ladder.


Proposed Trains Between Planes In New York
It has long been one of the great ironies, and frustrations, of New York City travel that the city with the world's largest subway system does not have a rapid rail link to its airports.
Late last month, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo laid out a plan to build a people-mover system that would link La Guardia and Kennedy International airports to each other and to existing mass transit lines.


Abby P. Warner, Manager, Weds Thomas L. Macy, School Official
Abby Parker Warner, a senior manager of business advertising for MCI Communications, and Thomas Lawrence Macy, the assistant head of the middle school and a humanities teacher at the Maret School, both in Washington, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Duane S. Alvord performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's Church, Norwood Parish, in Chevy Chase, Md.
The bride, 34 years old, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Brainard H. Warner 3d of Chevy Chase.
Her father is a partner in the Washington law firm of Ogilby, Huhn &amp; Barr.


Julia M. Lautenbach Is Married
Julia Marie Lautenbach and William Maxman, 1986 graduates of Emory University, were married yesterday at the Wee Burn Country Club in Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Pierre Botton, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Maxman, 27 years old, is a customer support representative for the International Business Machines Corporation in Philadelphia.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Terry Lautenbach of Darien.
Her father is a senior vice president at I.B.M. in New York.


CAMPUS LIFE: Wellesley; Counselor's Switch Prompts a Debate About Gay Rights
To the administration, it was a "great step forward" to hire a lesbian with a live-in partner as a head of house, but not a good idea to assign her to a dorm with a lot of first-year students.
But to some students, switching the counselor to an upperclasswomen-only dorm, which already had a head of house, was an act of discrimination -- and the disagreement has led to some critical self-examination across campus about attitudes toward homosexuals.


MED SCHOOL IN EIGHT EASY LESSONS
For Dr.
J.
John Cohen, explaining cell behavior is as much a matter of physicality as physiology.
With arms extended upward in a "V," Dr.
Cohen takes on the shape of an antibody, locking his arms around an invisible bacterium, then kicking out one leg to illustrate the cell's inflammatory response.
His rapt audience -- a diverse group ranging from 10-year-olds who want to become doctors to 80-year-olds who wish they had -- are participants in the University of Colorado's Mini-Medical School, a free lecture-and-discussion series open to anyone who wants to learn more about the science of medicine.
Dr.
Cohen, a professor of microbiology, immunology and medicine at the University of Colorado School of Medicine, uses the same teaching techniques that have proved successful in his regular courses.
And he encourages the other mini-med lecturers, all of whom are professors at the medical school, to do likewise.
"When you're talking to hundreds of people," Dr.
Cohen says, "it's as much an act of theater as education. I bring skeletons down and wave them around -- whatever we have in the way of tricks to keep their interest."


Read On! Read On! And On! And On!
Among the large, illustrated volumes associated with the Columbus quincentennial and recently published that could not be included in Richard L. Kagan's review, the following may be of special interest to readers:
ATLAS OF COLUMBUS AND THE GREAT DISCOVERIES by Kenneth Nebenzahl (168 pp., Rand McNally, $75).
Kenneth Nebenzahl, a rare-book dealer in Chicago and an authority on the history of cartography, brings together splendid reproductions of maps made before the time of Columbus, during his life and in the century following his death.
His account of cartography, and the maps themselves, reveal dramatically, spectacularly, the growth of human knowledge, and perhaps of European rapacity, in a century of discovery.


Unplugging the Capitol Hill Perk-olator
Part of the pleasure of being a Congressman is getting to spend billions you don't really have, all for the good of the country.
But how do you explain to constituents when you're caught doing a bit of free-lance deficit financing by overdrawing your personal House of Representatives checking account?
On Sept. 18, the General Accounting Office reported that House members wrote 8,331 bad checks in the year that ended June 30, 1990, without paying any interest or penalties.
In the last half of the year studied, 134 members wrote overdrafts of more than $1,000 each; 24 members did so every month.


Poetry Is Different
To the Editor:
Lisa Taylor Tompson and Mary Gray Ford ground their rather incoherent attack on Diane Middlebrook's biography of Anne Sexton upon the questionable notion that there is such a thing as unmediated "truth," which only the sane can perceive.
Anne Sexton's own visions of "reality" they call "perverse." Sexton may have been a "seriously troubled woman," but what are we to make of the following example, which her nieces choose to illustrate her perversity: "Anne saw Christmas as a particularly villainous season. Yet her sister Blanche (our mother), growing up in the same household at the same time, saw reindeer on the roof, Santa Claus and expressions of love"?
Which
sister was insane? NATANIA ROSENFELD  Philadelphia


Hackett Changes Uniform But Results Are the Same
Jeff Hackett knows all about the anxieties of coming close but losing.
After all, he lost 18 times last season playing goal for the Islanders despite a 3.62 goals-against average.
Now he performs for the San Jose Sharks, an expansion team that surrendered 52 shots Friday night and lost, 4-3, to the Vancouver Canucks in its first National Hockey League regular-season game.


Dr. Klemmer Has a Wedding
Dr.
Sarah Colman Klemmer and Dr.
Leonard Nick Girardi, both residents in surgery at the New York Hospital-Cornell University Medical Center, were married yesterday at the Church of St.
John and St.
Mary in Chappaqua, N.Y.
Msgr.
Robert McCormick performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
Dr.
Sarah Girardi, 29 years old, graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, from which she also received her M.D.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Klemmer of Chappaqua.
Her father is a director of Webb Johnson &amp; Klemmer, executive recruiters in New York, and is president of Big Brothers/Big Sisters of New York.


Q and A
Frank Lloyd Wright Homes
Q.
Can you suggest an area for viewing Frank Lloyd Wright buildings that would maximize viewing time and minimize driving time? -- Gerald L. Brandenstein, Astoria, Queens


Seles and Connors: No Time for Gimmicks
The promoter called it a tennis classic.
And in the beginning, the prospective players, Monica Seles and Jimmy Connors, called it a quick day's work for a million dollars.
But some people, especially those who think tennis players should put as much distance as possible between themselves and an adjective like greedy, called it a potential travesty.
On Thursday, after months of negotiations that first heated up back in April, the "classic" lost its headliners.


Corrections
An article on page 8 of the Arts and Leisure section today about a show on Oscar Levant refers incorrectly in some copies to a piano composition he plays in the film "An American in Paris." It is the Concerto in F by George Gershwin.


Jets Go Off to Cleveland For Same Old Rough Stuff
Because the Cleveland Browns had a bye last Sunday, along with the three other American Football Conference Central Division teams, their new head coach, Bill Belichick, had a chance to sit in the press box at Giants Stadium and watch the Jets dismantle the Miami Dolphins, 41-23.
"I was pretty impressed with everything," said Belichick, whose Browns (2-2) will get an even closer view of the Jets (2-3) today at Cleveland Stadium (1 P.M., Channel 4).


California Kick With 0:33 Left Overcomes U.C.L.A. for 4-0 Mark
Doug Brien, who had not made a field goal longer than 33 yards, hit a 47-yarder with 30 seconds remaining to cap a fourth-quarter comeback that gave California a 27-24 victory over U.C.L.A. today in a Pacific-10 Conference game.
The victory was the second straight over U.C.L.A. after the Bruins had beaten the Bears 18 consecutive times dating to 1971.


Loire Valley
To the Editor: Like Mervyn Rothstein ("Chateau Country," Aug. 18), I enjoy visiting less well-known chateaus in the Loire Valley.
Last year, French friends took me to see Langeais and Saumur, both west of Tours.
At Langeais, where the chateau dominates the prosperous, pretty village, we were the only visitors and could spend as much time as we wished in each room.
We could appreciate such details as the floor tiles -- intricate patterns, each room different.


A Long Romance With Death
THE DEATH AND LIFE OF SYLVIA PLATH
By Ronald Hayman. Illustrated. 235 pp. New York: Birch Lane Press. $19.95.
ROUGH MAGIC
A Biography of Sylvia Plath.
By Paul Alexander.
Illustrated. 402 pp.
New York: Viking. $24.95.


A Principle For Many People
To the Sports Editor:
I enjoyed William C. Rhoden's column, especially the highly moral statement: "An individual who bears witness to wrongdoing and remains silent will eventually be a victim of this silence." This principle is particularly relevant to Jews, like me, because of our sensitivity to bigotry (racism, anti-Semitism and every other corrosive prejudice) and to the best teachings of our religion (although its practitioners too often fall short).
HARVEY ROSEN New York


Fleur Fairman Has a Wedding
Fleur Ellen Fairman and Timothy Norman Wallach, both investment advisers in New York, were married yesterday at the Isola Bella Estate in Salisbury, Conn.
Peter Oliver, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Fairman, 35 years old, is a partner in Farallon Capital Management Partners.
She graduated magna cum laude from Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis E. Fairman 3d of Pittsburgh.
Her father is a retired Westinghouse Electric manager.


A Tokyo Weekend At a Flea Market
TOKYO's 21st-century aura is really only skin deep.
Its citizens are nostalgically passionate about their heritage, and antiques are becoming increasingly valued as tangible reminders of traditional culture.
Sky-high rents have driven all but the most expensive dealers to slightly out-of-the-way neighborhoods.
So a day of serious antiquing can add up to quite an undertaking -- and a major tab for taxis.


AFTERMATH OF AN EMERGENCY
I personally felt that the authorities did an extraordinary job in this case in that they did not disregard the evidence submitted to them because they were presented with a white family.
They went ahead and did the same investigation that they would conduct on any family that was presented as a possible candidate for child abuse.
The same mistakes were made that are usually made by overworked caseworkers.
PATRICIA GRAHAM
Rumson, N.J.


Becker Takes Aim
BORIS BECKER is back and loaded for bear, or rather for STEFAN EDBERG.
Out for five weeks with a thigh injury, Becker told the Abendzeitung newspaper in Munich that he has recovered, was ready to play and was eager to regain the No. 1 ranking from Edberg.
"It's time that I join the others and play a little tennis," he said.
He plans to join the tour in Tokyo this week, then go on to Stockholm and Paris and then to Frankfurt for the Masters. (AP)


CAMPUS LIFE: Idaho; Black Athletes Set Up Fraternity For Minorities
At the University of Idaho, where the student body is overwhelmingly white, seven black football players are leading the way toward making minority students more comfortable in a strange land.
The athletes have established the state's first chapter of Phi Beta Sigma, a predominantly black fraternal organization.
Last Sunday, a public program at the student union building marked the chartering of the Alpha Alpha Zeta Chapter.


A Suburban Family: 'Listen to the Lions'
"ALL I want is for you to be happy, so the Lord can look down and tell me I'm doin' my best," Tessie O'Brien McBride announces to her son, Emmett, a nonachiever, who, at 34 years old, has earned the title "Player of the Week" in college football.
When Tessie, an accredited "Catholic Woman of the Year" isn't extolling Emmett as a "true American hero" and "the last of vanishing breed," his father, Dr.
Mac McBride, an aspiring "Surgeon of the Year" is calling him "a dumb lug" and "a powder puff."


Iona Routs Stony Brook
Harold Smith, a freshman wide receiver, caught touchdown passes of 19 and 68 yards from quarterback Bill Hyland as Iona routed Stony Brook, 37-6, in a Liberty Conference game yesterday afternoon in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Hyland, who also combined with Byron Womack on an 18-yard scoring pass, finished 15 for 26 for 248 yards for the Gaels (4-1 over all, 1-1 in th conference).
Womack also rushed 5 yards for a second touchdown.


Fernandez Moves To End Stalemate
Faced with a stalemate between a district superintendent and a majority on his school board, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez this week ordered a three-trustee panel from the central Board of Education to choose an administrator of special education for District 2 in Manhattan.
"While I fully understand the strong views of both sides, the process of selecting a district administrator for special education cannot be thwarted due to a superintendent's unwillingness to recommend and the school board's refusal to appoint," Mr.
Fernandez wrote Wednesday in a letter to the school board president, Po-Ling Ng.


Foreign Affairs; Iran-Contra, the Movie
You've read the book.
You could have seen the movie -- or at least heard it -- last week on ABC's "Nightline." In it were many of yesteryear's heroes: Daffy Duck played by Lieut.
Col.
Ollie North, Goofy by former National Security Council adviser Bud McFarlane, Peter Lorre by Israeli counterterrorist chief Amiram Nir, and the Marx Brothers rendered to perfection by moderate-pragmatic Iranian terrorists.
Ted Koppel let you hear their very own voices.
He and his staff obtained tapes of the actual conversations in 1986, recorded surreptitiously by an ever-helpful Peter Lorre.
You could listen to Daffy and Goofy diligently peddling arms to Iran while asking the Marx Brothers to "cause" the return of American hostages.
You could hear Groucho promising to "attempt" to do his best, while he seems to be asking Daffy if he'd like to buy the Brooklyn Bridge.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
MOUSE AROUND.
Written and illustrated by Pat Schories.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $11.95. (Ages 3 to 6) A drop of water from a leaky sink wakes a little mouse who sets off, in this wordless book, to explore.
He goes on a paper route, into town, has many adventures, but somehow ends up back in the nest.


South Bronx Artists Get Their Message Across With a Push of a Button


3 Die, 39 Are Hurt in Blasts At Pakistan National Offices
Three people were killed and 39 wounded in four bomb blasts within a few minutes outside Government offices in Karachi today, the police said.
The bombs, timed to explode late in the morning, were planted in cars outside police headquarters, the Sind provincial government secretariat, a Karachi Development Authority office and a Crime Investigation Agency center.
A senior police official, Jamil Ahmed Khan, said seven of the people who had been wounded were in serious condition in a hospital.
There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the bombings.


Cynthia McVay, Consultant, Weds Kenneth Krasne, Marketing Director
Cynthia McVay, an associate with McKinsey &amp; Company, management consultants in New York, was married yesterday to Kenneth Krasne, the director of sales and marketing for Krasdale Foods in the Bronx.
The Rev.
Howard Fish, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at the Puck Building in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Krasne, 30 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and received an M.B.A. and a master's in international studies from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Scott McVay of Princeton, N.J.
Her father is the director of the Geraldine R. Dodge Foundation, a grant-making foundation in Morristown, N.J.


Managing; The Fast Track's Diminished Lure
UNTIL 20 months ago, Michael Lee, a founding partner of the San Francisco law firm Minami, Lew, Tamaki &amp; Lee, worked the same long hours as his partners.
Then, his daughter was born.
"I consider Wednesdays with my little girl inviolable, except for dire emergencies," said Mr.
Lee.
Sally C. Landauer's youngest child is 20.
But Ms.
Landauer, a partner at Ball, Janik &amp; Novack in Portland, Ore., takes Mondays off.
"I work in my garden, I play with my dog, I even read novels," she said.


White House Accepts Congress Terms for Peru Aid
The Administration has reluctantly accepted cuts and conditions set by Congress on $34.9 million in military aid to Peru, delaying the arrival of American military trainers and demanding the Peruvian military to improve its human rights performance, officials say.
The agreement opens the way to a gradual increase in United States involvement in Peru's war against the Maoist guerrillas known as Shining Path, an effort the Administration says is vital for its own war on drugs.
Shining Path rebels protect cocaine growers and traffickers in areas they control and attack social workers who try to train coca farmers to cultivate other crops, American officials said.


Commercial Property: Connecticut Taxes; Has Some of the Allure Faded? The Jury Is Still Out
"CONNECTICUT is still appealing for New York companies because of its lack of a personal income tax. It's surprising how powerful that is."
That was the word in March 1990 from the Commissioner of Economic Development for the state of Connecticut, Stephen B. Heintz.
Today, Connecticut has an income tax.
Mr.
Heintz is gone.
And, understandably, the state's economic development officials are stressing a different perspective.


WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE
Don't They Know The World Stopped Breathing?
By Renee Fersen-Osten Shapolsky Books. 259 pages. $16.95


Kimberly Elsas and Ronald Jaeger Are Married
Kimberly Jane Elsas, a student at the Fordham University Graduate School of Social Services, and Ronald Evan Jaeger, a financial analyst with Metropolitan Life in Westport, Conn., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
George J. Willis Jr., an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
George's-by-the-River in Rumson, N.J.
The bride, 24 years old, graduated from Susquehanna University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jason Morse Elsas Jr. of Rumson.
Her father is a retired managing director of Salomon Brothers in New York.
Mr.
Jaeger, 26, graduated from Bentley College.
He is a son of Mrs.
Karl Wuster of Ridgewood, N.J., and the late Evan Jaeger of River Edge, N.J.
His mother, Joyce Wuster, owns Joyce's Choices, a jewelry store in Paramus, N.J.


HEARINGS ON GATES SHOW MANY LAYERS OF HIS PERSONALITY
In his quest to become the country's new chief of intelligence, Robert M. Gates has undergone three straight weeks of painful examination by 15 Senators, an ordeal that has laid bare the many layers of his personality.
And the picture that emerged from the Senate Intelligence Committee's hearings was of a nominee for Director of Central Intelligence who is both contrite and arrogant; meticulously organized but forgetful of crucial facts; boyish and disarming at times with his Kansas twang, but harshly blunt in chastising analysts in front of their colleagues; enlightened enough to admit that he had learned from his mistakes, but so demanding that few seem able to meet his rigorous standards.
The Benefits and Risks
Exhibiting qualities that could both help and hinder him if he is confirmed for the job he sought and lost four years ago, Mr.
Gates left the Senators wondering whether the benefits of his experience would outweigh the risks of the divisions his work provoked at the Central Intelligence Agency -- whether he is, in the words of the committee's chairman, Senator David L. Boren, "someone who can make a fresh start" at the C.I.A.


Wild Orchids? In Schenectady? Aloha!
Orchids growing wild in New York State?
Yes, within the city limits of Schenectady, as well as in the Adirondack and Catskill Mountains -- hardly the environments conjured up by the popular image of orchids as tropical plants that require careful nurturing.


Wild Orchids? In Schenectady? Aloha!
Orchids growing wild in New York State?
Yes, within the city limits of Schenectady, as well as in the Adirondack and Catskill Mountains -- hardly the environments conjured up by the popular image of orchids as tropical plants that require careful nurturing.


Miracle Is Now Official: The Braves Win It!
The Atlanta Braves stood massed on the infield grass just to the first-base side of the pitcher's mound.
For four minutes, they stood crammed together and watched the television screen high above the center-field seats.
When the San Francisco Giants recorded the last out in their game with the Los Angeles Dodgers, the Braves leaped in the air, ran excitedly toward the dugout and joyously tossed their caps into the stands.
The upstart Braves, the so-called America's team that fell into disrepute by finishing last for three successive seasons, had snatched baseball's sole unclaimed division championship out of the clutches of the Dodgers.


Book Tests Mulroney's Skill at Bouncing Back
A book that portrays Brian Mulroney as a former alcoholic and womanizer who flunked out of law school has much of the country snickering and friends of the Prime Minister trying to discredit the author.
"Mulroney: The Politics of Ambition" also shows, however, that he has conquered his alcoholism, relies on his Yugoslav-born wife Mila as "his strongest supporter and toughest critic," and has repeatedly bounced back from failure and defeat, "somehow turning each seemingly fatal setback to his advantage."


In the Spotlight: Credibility
WITH his nomination to head the Central Intelligence Agency in the balance last week, Robert M. Gates abruptly swiveled from addressing doubts about his role in the Iran-contra affair to defending his intellectual honesty as the agency's top analyst in the 1980's.
The issue in the third and final week of the Senate Intelligence Committee hearings was whether Mr.
Gates was an independent and objective broker of the intelligence provided to top policy makers.
Or was he instead driven by ambition and his hard-line views on the Soviet Union to make the agency's analyses dovetail with the views of his patrons under President Ronald Reagan?


Answering The Mail
Q.
A metal shed in my backyard has been there for many years.
The inside of the metal is in good condition, but the exterior is rusted and mildewed.
How can I prepare this metal for painting?
A.
Scrape off the loose and flaking rust, using a scraper and wire brush.
Wash with 1 part bleach to 4 parts water to clean the mildew and then rinse with plain water.
After it dries, apply a liquid rust converter, special liquids that convert rust on the metal into a coating that forms an excellent foundation for paint.
In addition, the new coating helps prevent further rusting.
When it dries, apply a coat of rust-resistant metal primer and finish with two coats of exterior house or trim paint.


STRANGERS AT THE GATE
Miller aptly describes the challenge that mass immigration pre-sents to the economies of Western Europe, but the tone of the article is that those who would seek to prevent these movements are somehow racists or reactionaries.
Such is not the case.
Control of immigration is essential to the definition of what constitutes a sovereign nation-state.
The ultimate answers to the reduction of human suffering in the "failed economies" of Eastern Europe as well as those of most of the Middle East and North Africa must rest with changes in the economic, social and political policies of the nations themselves.
Western Europe and the United States, too, can do much to mitigate some of the hardships through the provision of technical and economic assistance, trade concessions and family-planning information.
Such aid, however, should be directly linked to international standards of human rights and to a direct diminishment in military expenditures by recipient nations.


Pfeiffer's Blue-Plate Special
Michelle Pfeiffer is peeved.
She has heard the comments about her playing a drab, plain, even frumpy waitress in the new film "Frankie and Johnny." She has heard the snickers.
Only in Hollywood would one of the most gorgeous film stars in town step into a role that personifies the ordinary.
"To say that this woman is homely is not true at all," said Ms.
Pfeiffer, her voice rising as she recalls the Off Broadway version, with Kathy Bates as Frankie.
"Kathy Bates is not homely. She's a beautiful woman. She's older than I am and physically different, but homeliness is not the issue here." It is, she said, loneliness.


He Writes To Praise . . .
To the Sports Editor:
I suspect all manner of fools will write to complain about William C. Rhoden's column, "A Sudden Twinge of Conscience" (The Times, Sept. 13).
I felt compelled to write to praise.


In 7 TV Appearances, Wealth of Exposure for Bush
President Bush provides a special introduction tonight in an ABC television movie called "Heroes of Desert Storm," which mixes news coverage of the Persian Gulf war with dramatic re-creations of events.
Mr.
Bush's videotaped appearance will mark the seventh time in 10 days that he has been on national television in an extraordinary streak, even for a President.
Those appearances have come on the major networks as well as on the Public Broadcasting Service and cable television, although the forums have been extremely varied:


POSTINGS: Resolving Some Issues; Foreclosure On a Co-op
What happens when a mortgagee forecloses on a co-op building that converted from a regulated rental?
It occurs so rarely that many questions arise, and Justice David B. Saxe of State Supreme Court has ruled on some of them in a case involving three co-op walk-ups at 145-49 East 61st Street.
The mortgagee, Angela De Santis, foreclosed on a sponsor who had converted the property to 24 co-ops and a store.
Seventeen tenants had remained without buying.
Their occupancy rights are protected, the judge found, as long as they pay their rent.
But he granted a writ to oust one tenant who owed $10,300 in rent.
Hearings were ordered in two cases where rents were in dispute.
The new owner reached settlements with the others.


Week of Benefits and Honors
Brooke Astor was honored for her work for the Lenox Hill Neighborhood Association at a dinner-dance on Thursday on the St.
Regis Roof.
The party for 43 guests was given by the Lenox Hill group.
On Wednesday, the 21 Club recaptured its past with an evening of gambling, dining and dancing to benefit the Henry Street Settlement.
The agency has been serving New York City social services and arts programs since 1893.


Kenya's President Is Tightening His Grip
UNTIL the last few years, - Kenya was perceived as a refreshing exception in Africa: the economy worked and the political freedoms, while far from perfect, were better than in many places on the continent.
Now the tables have turned.
As nations in much of Africa, including such previously hard-line Marxist states as Mozambique and Angola, relax the rigidity of one-party rule, Kenya is becoming increasingly authoritarian.
In Zambia, President Kenneth Kaunda has agreed to end his political party's 19-year monopoly of power and to compete in elections scheduled for Oct. 31.
In Zaire, Mobutu Seke Seso still appears to hold absolute power after the worst riots in the country's history, but he is at least talking to the opposition and has agreed to share power.


Fair Offers a Chance To Learn as Well as Buy
THERE'S no denying it: people go to craft fairs for the fun of looking, learning and buying handmade things that might be the heirlooms of the future.
At least 15,000 visitors are expected at the 15th annual Morristown Craftmarket next weekend.
Collectors, inveterate shoppers and a good number of hesitant first-time buyers, they will all be there, wandering among the booths of 154 crafts people from across the country, including a jewelry maker from Hawaii.


Former Censors Bow Coldly to Apartheid Chronicler
When Nadine Gordimer published her novel "Burger's Daughter" in 1979, the South African Government predictably banned it.
The novel, about a white girl coming to terms with the radical activities of her doctor father, was denounced as "a pad from which to launch a blistering and full-scale attack on the Republic of South Africa." Miss Gordimer, the censors alleged, "often adopts the literary technique of presenting what are in truth personal opinions as statements of fact" and "uses known facts in a one-sided matter to propagate Communist opinions."


Let's Kill All The Copy Editors
HERE I AM, THE Rip Van Winkle of the world of words," writes Suzanne Garment of Washington, author of "Scandal: The Culture of Mistrust in American Politics," being published this week by Times Books. "Having finished the manuscript of my book, I sent it off to a very good copy editor, confident that he would find little to change in such a grammatically conscientious text as mine."
Every writer knows the feeling, and what happens next: "But it came back to me all marked up and translated into a strange dialect," Mrs.
Garment continues.
And when she confided her consternation to her publishers?
"They assured me that the editor had merely modernized my usage, which was twenty years out of date."


Cynthia Denham and James G. Smith 3d Marry
Cynthia Denham, a tour coordinator for the Winterthur Museum, and James Gordon Smith 3d, a marketing and governmental affairs consultant for the Delaware State Chamber of Commerce, both in Wilmington, Del., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Adam Lewis performed the Episcopal ceremony in Christ Church Christiana Hundred in Greenville, Del.
Mrs.
Smith, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Willard A. S. Denham of Wilmington.
Mr.
Smith, 31, graduated from the University of Delaware.
He is the son of Mrs.
Pearson Sunderland Jr. of Henlopen Acres, Del., and the late Mr.
Smith Jr.


Shore Communities Assess Implications Of L.I. Sound Study
UNTIL recently, 1991 looked as if it would be a good year for the Long Island Sound.
In August, Hurricane Bob wreaked havoc on land but was seen as a blessing for the 1,300-square-mile estuary.
The storm stirred up the normally stratified layers in the narrow body of water, infusing them with oxygen and preventing the algae blooms, fish kills and other problems of previous summers.
But now there are disturbing reports from divers who are discovering lobsters and blue crabs dying on the Sound's floor off the Westchester shoreline.
Their findings have scientists wondering whether these recent marine-life deaths are yet another symptom of the severe degradation of water quality in the Sound, or merely a separate and less-serious problem, perhaps just the aftereffects of an unusually long period of warm weather.


Wall Street; Would U.S. Companies' Old Claims Be Paid?
Among the potential Cuba plays are American companies with claims against Cuba that could yet pay off.
One company is the Boise Cascade Corporation.
When it acquired Ebasco in 1969, it inherited an $11 million claim against Cuba and it stood to gain indirectly from a $267 million claim belonging to Ebasco's majority-owned Cuban Electric Company.
Those claims arose because Castro never paid the utility's owners for seizing its assets.
Technically, Boise Cascade would also be entitled to receive 6 percent compounded interest since 1960.
But since a settlement could trigger adverse tax consequences, Herb Pellinen, a company lawyer, said it was unclear whether the claim is, in fact, "a potential liability or a potential asset."


Gambling's Spread: Gold Rush or Fool's Gold?
Hoping to breathe some life into this colorful but withering Old West town in its storied gulch, South Dakota voters approved casino gambling in Deadwood two years ago.
The promoters said they expected betting of $4 million a year.
They were way off.
In the first two years, gamblers have bet $400 million on Deadwood's slot machines and blackjack and poker tables.


An Exhibition in New Haven Celebrates Caribbean Diversity
THE Creative Arts Workshop in New Haven presents "Contemporary Caribbean Artists" with the assurance that it is a representative survey.
But this observer would like a second opinion.
Organized by Benjamin Ortiz and Joy Scott, the show features 50 artists from 7 countries -- 9 if you count the 2 born outside the Caribbean (in the Bahamas and Yorkshire, respectively).
Mr.
Ortiz brings to bear expertise gained from mounting exhibitions of Latin American art.
He is curator at the Housatonic Museum of Art, assistant curator and registrar at the Barnum Museum and has acted as guest curator for the Discovery Museum, all in Bridgeport, and more recently he has been a guest curator for the Aetna Gallery in Hartford.
Ms.
Scott has assisted in the planning of exhibitions of Caribbean art for galleries in New York City and for the Jamaica Cultural Development Commission.


Mapping the Block and the World
THE chief operating officer for the second largest map- making company in the country was giving directions to his plant in Maspeth.
"You make a right at the red traffic light," said Stuart Dolgins, who runs Hagstrom and American Maps.
What if the light is green, Mr. Dolgins was asked. "It's usually red," he said.


Can Computer Viruses Be Domesticated to Serve Mankind?
Biologists have learned to harness viruses to create vaccines and, in recent years, to reprogram faulty chromosomes by using viruses to smuggle new genes into cells.
Now a small but growing group of computer scientists is examining the possibility of designing computer viruses and similar programs called worms to burrow into computer networks and set in motion a whole range of beneficial activities.
Many computer users have been the victims of malicious virus programs propagating through networks and erasing data or causing the whole system to fail.
But now some researchers are suggesting that it is possible to harness the subtle power of computer viruses to perform useful tasks.


Focus: du Pont Mansions; Fixing a Showcase's Flaws
WHEN Henry Francis du Pont inherited the Winterthur estate here in 1927, he saw the house and rolling countryside not only as a gentleman's home but also as a setting for his growing collection of American antiques.
Without wasting time, he began the first expansion of what was to become, in 1951, the Henry Francis du Pont Winterthur Museum and Gardens.
While the museum grew to 196 rooms and settings during du Pont's lifetime, the design he created has not held up, the trustees have discovered.


Protecting the Faucets From Winter's Freeze
ORDINARY outdoor faucets, technically called sillcocks, are prone to freezing and bursting in winter.
As a result, they have received much attention from plumbing designers and gadget inventors.
One device that solves the problem is a freeze-proof sillcock.
A specially designed faucet that replaces an ordinary sillcock, it can be installed by soldering.


Topics of The Times; Blasts From the Past
As the seemingly endless season draws to a dreary close this afternoon, New York's baseball fans can only hope that past is prologue.
The once proud Yankees and the recently proud Mets find themselves closer to last place than first.
The Mets fired their manager and their general manager fired himself.
The Yankees haven't fired anyone but probably will.
The only thing either team leads the league in is scapegoats.
New York's anguish has been compounded by the attention devoted all summer to two of the most glorious chapters in its baseball history.
The summer of 1991 was the 50th anniversary of Joe DiMaggio's record 56-game hitting streak; newspapers ran daily features on Joe's exploits for the Yankees which, when combined with Ted Williams's hitting for the Red Sox (he batted .406, the last player to hit more than .400), made 1941 what The Times called "The Unmatchable Summer."


The Debate Over Electronic Bidding Reaches Washington
Steven Wunsch is proprietor of the nation's first electronic stock-trading network to be designated a bona fide stock exchange by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
In a mere six months, he has signed up dozens of well-heeled institutional investors.
But for his efforts, Mr.
Wunsch finds himself at the center of a heated industry and regulatory debate over whether some small investors might eventually be priced out of the stock market.
Wunsch Auction Systems offers two auctions a day -- a half-hour before the New York Stock Exchange opens and a half-hour after it closes -- that allow large institutional investors to submit orders electronically to buy or sell stock.
Bids to buy that match offers to sell result in trades, and the institutions pay commissions of perhaps a penny a share, compared with 3 cents to 6 cents a share on the floor of an established exchange.
If there is no match, the institutions can always turn to the Big Board or a regional stock market.


CAMPUS LIFE: Vermont; Arrests at Protests Provoke Debates On Campus Codes
A debate over the pace at which the University of Vermont is diversifying its staff and curriculum has evolved into a campuswide dispute over what constitutes dissent as opposed to disruptive behavior.
Last week, in a letter to the university, President George H. Davis drew the line between the two at his office door.
He wrote that "demonstrations cannot be permitted in the president's wing" because they disrupted the normal functioning of his office.
Protest Over Expulsions
Mr.
Davis had already warned protesters that recent demonstrations on the diversity issue were disruptive and that university and the Burlington police could arrest them.
His warning came after protesters occupied hallways in the university's adminstrative suites and the president's wing of the Waterman Building.


Modernized Menus at the Old Elk Hotel
THE month-old Harrington's Cafe Americain in the old Elk Hotel in Port Jefferson is a Jekyll and Hyde restaurant.
The bar area is a warm congenial showcase for local artists and musicians.
Watercolors and sketches of Long Island scenes fill the snug, woody, plant-studded room.
But far from the live jazz and merriment, both in location and spirit, is an undistinguished barren dining room.
This Siberia for nonsmokers, decorated with a lone poster, is reminiscent of the old hotel's Coffee Shop.


Working Out At the Hotel
HEALTH clubs in hotels are on the rise: the American Hotel and Motel Association says that 40 percent of hotels now have them.
But there are wide variations in the quality of the installations.
A mirror on one wall, one stationary bicyle in a small room with dirty shag carpeting and a coed sauna may be represented as a hotel spa, but these days this will not satisfy those interested in a serious workout.
They want step machines, muscle-training equipment, exercise bicycles with resistance programming and space for workouts in a general atmosphere of light and airiness.
A whirlpool and sauna, good showers, a lap pool and a running track are pluses, as is a masseuse or masseur.
"It can't be in the basement anymore," said Michael Motta, president of Plus One Fitness, which operates the centers at the Waldorf-Astoria and the New York Hilton, as well as two independent clubs in New York.
"That's our first consideration -- a place with natural light, open and airy."


Ann Whitman, Mystery Writer, Wed
Ann Hamilton Whitman, who is the mystery writer Kate Morgan, was married yesterday to David Palmer Hurd, a vice president of Cigna International Investment Advisers in Hartford.
The Rev.
Dr.
William N. McKeachie, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at Old St.
Paul's Church in Baltimore.
Mrs.
Hurd, 36 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of M. Hamilton and Josephine Whitman of Baltimore.
Her father, who is retired, was an editor of The Evening Sun and The Sunday Sun in Baltimore and later a media relations executive for Bethlehem Steel in Baltimore.


A 'Pied Piper for Art' Is Moving On
IT is no great exaggeration to say that Robert J. Koenig is as much an ornament of the Montclair Art Museum as its director.
With his snappy tailoring and haberdashery, his military mustache and gold-rimmed spectacles, Mr.
Koenig has the look of a televison character from "Masterpiece Theater," perhaps in a drama by W. Somerset Maugham.
But this is the least of Mr.
Koenig's accomplishments.
Under the Koenig administration, the museum, in the words of a past board president, James Vanderwade, "has gone from tight to broad."


Bridge
At the NEC World Junior Championships in Ann Arbor, Mich., in August, John Spooner, a member of the Australian squad, was described by a commentator as a pood glayer.
That was a nod to the celebrated William Archibald Spooner, who was the warden of New College, Oxford University.
One of the don's reported spoonerisms, interchanging the beginning of key words, was this request to a maid after he arrived during a storm: "Will you please hush my brat; it's roaring with pain outside." That, of course, is: "Will you please brush my hat; it's pouring with rain outside."
The Australian Spooner did not appear to confuse anything in the bidding or play.
His handling of the diagramed deal in six spades featured one of the best plays of the championship.
The two no-trump response promised a spade fit, and four clubs showed a strong five-card side suit.
North cue-bid his ace of diamonds, a bid that East might well have doubled, and eventually drove on to slam.


Sunday Outing; In Upstate New York, Rolling Hills and History
Leaf-peeping aficionados can only hope that scarlets, yellows and oranges will be at their peak.
But given the uncertainties of nature, it is reassuring to have a historical tour to fall back on.
Luckily the township of Pittstown, about a 3 1/2-hour ride from New York City in the rolling hills of Rensselaer County, is ready to oblige.
And it is only a leaf's peep away from New York Route 7, one of the Empire State's most legendary trade routes for foliage-seekers.


Dina Razzetti Has Wedding
Dina Antoinette Razzetti, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Razzetti of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Ronald Michael Clemmer Jr., a son of Mr.
Clemmer of Paeonian Springs, Va., and Ellen Bernstein of Oxford, Md.
The Rev.
Lawrence Inzeo, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye.
Mrs.
Razzetti, 24 years old, graduated from the University of Richmond, as did her husband.
Her father is a senior vice president of Kidder, Peabody in New York.


Political Talk
Matter of Mental Health
For the New York City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, it may have been some kind of Freudian slip.
On the other hand, maybe it was just a slip.


REPORT IS CRITICAL OF MENTAL CLINICS
Nearly half of the community mental health centers that are required to provide basic services under Federal contracts have failed to do so, a Government report asserts.
Officials of the National Institute of Mental Health, the agency in charge of the community mental health program, disputed the figure issued Thursday in the report by the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services.
But they acknowledged that 10 to 15 percent of the community mental health centers under contract with the Government were failing to provide basic services.


Will Bush Support the Chinese People?
When Beijing's hardliners look to Moscow, they face their worst nightmare.
The crumbling of the party and purging of the police and army, the ascendancy of Yeltsins, the flowering of freedom, the splintering of empire, and ethnic tensions along the northern border can only be hellish to those who cling to power by silencing and shooting citizens.
Will this mean resurgent demonstrations?
The demise of the Government?
The collapse of Communism?
While only a fool would hazard firm predictions, it is likely that the impact of Soviet events on China, though huge, will take time to emerge.
Certainly, progressives are greatly heartened, and even more officials will adjust to the prevailing winds.
But the paranoid autocrats will continue to crush the slightest dissent, and leading reformers will remain in jail, limbo or exile.


Labels Less Known Give French Touch In the Little Things
You know you're in a French store when you see signs reading Le Bar Tous Parfums, Bijouterie, Ceintures, Bas Collants and Chapeaux.
Even the cash registers carry signs saying Bienvenue aux Galeries Lafayette.
Otherwise, the main floor of the new Galleries Lafayette in Trump Tower looks like that of any other department store, with cosmetic counters circled by areas for jewelry, handbags, scarfs, hats, hosiery and other accessories.
Some labels are familiar, including Lancome and Estee Lauder cosmetics, Christian Dior jewelry and Givenchy hosiery.
There is a boutique for Sonia Rykiel accessories and counters devoted to La Bagagerie and Lancel handbags and Agatha's costume jewelry.
But there are also names not as widely known or available here that give the store a special quality.


Seminoles Flatten Syracuse
To think that the rain-soaked Seminole fans in the stands at Doak Campbell Stadium were wearing concern on their faces along with that garnet and gold paint.
Florida State was
losing
to Syracuse, the first time the Seminoles had trailed in a game since last October.
Its tomahawk chop chant was little more than background music for the brilliance of Qadry Ismail.
The Orangemen had yelled toward Renegade, the proud Florida State horse, and now they were backing up their words.


Directorial Tyranny
To the Editor:
Thank God Joe Papp is retiring from the theater scene.


Data Bank/October 6, 1991
Index of Leading Indicators
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
0.0
1.2
0.6
Construction Spending
Monthly percent change
0.3
1.7
--0.2
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
--1.9
6.1
--1.2
New-Home Sales
Monthly percent change
6.7
--2.7
2.6
Employment
Sept.
Aug.
July
In thousands
117,165
116,416
116,712
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
8,442 (6.7)
8,488 (6.8)
8,501 (6.8)
Economic Activity
Purchasing Managers' Index
55.0
54.8
51.8
Auto Sales
In units
674,790
695,332
778,668


Michael Goodwin, a Writer, Wed To Jennifer Jaye Raab, a Lawyer
Jennifer Jaye Raab, an associate with the New York law firm of Paul Weiss Rifkind Wharton &amp; Garrison, and Michael Goodwin, a writer and member of the editorial board of The New York Daily News, were married yesterday in New York.
Dr.
Robert Berson, a leader in the Ethical Culture Society, officiated at the home of Michael and Michi Raab, the bride's brother and sister-in-law.
Ms.
Raab, 35 years old, graduated from Cornell University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She also received a master's degree in public and international affairs from Princeton University and graduated cum laude from Harvard Law School.
She is a daughter of Lillian Raab of New York, a retired teaching assistant in New York public schools, and the late Harry Raab.


A Bumpier Ride for New York Taxis
In the overheated 1980's, New York City's taxi business reflected the decade.
As the economy soared, so did hands on every streetcorner, making it nearly impossible to flag a ride.
Medallion prices jumped, other kinds of cabs burgeoned and calls for reform rose.
Now cabbies say there are fewer passengers, more inspectors and more unregulated competition.
And the subways are cleaner.
But are the cabs better?
Who's the man -- it's probably not a woman -- behind the wheel?
What's the story with those yellow-bumpered cabs?
And why are they yellow anyway?
It might not be noticeable, but when you hail a taxi or call a car service these days, the cabs should be safer, cleaner and operated by more qualified drivers than ever before -- in theory at least.
The reason is that over the last five years, the Taxi and Limousine Commission has grown vastly, enacting scores of new rules intended to improve service and bring order to a chaotic industry.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
Giving In to Hope
Diane Johnson argues that what moves us most strongly in the tales of Edgar Allan Poe isn't terror or pity but, unexpectedly, hope.
This is from her introduction to Poe's "Selected Tales" (Library of America/Vintage, paper).
To a neglected extent his stories are also about a special aspect of anxiety: hope.
They often detail the moment during an unfolding tragedy or danger when the human mind gives in to hope, only to be the more bitterly disappointed.
Over and over, a despairing hero is tempted, by a blush on the bosom of the supposedly dead loved one, or by a momentary respite in some torture, to hope -- especially that the dead will come back to life, but also that the narrator is not after all guilty of causing death, or will obtain mercy and reprieve.
It is a vein to be worked later and more successfully by Kafka, and it explains the quasi-mystical quality of Poe's stories, and their similarity to, and use as, myths.
The Art of the Actual
In Venice, Henry James writes, art and the life of the city are more like complementary parts of a whole than two distinct worlds.
This is from his essay "Venice," reprinted in "The Venetian Hours of Henry James, Whistler and Sargent" by Hugh Honour and John Fleming (Bulfinch/Little, Brown).
The whole Venetian art-world is so near, so familiar, so much an extension and adjunct of the spreading actual, that it seems almost invidious to say one owes more to one of them than to the other.
Nowhere, not even in Holland, where the correspondence between the real aspects and the little polished canvases is so constant and so exquisite, do art and life seem so interfused and, as it were, so consanguineous.
All the splendour of light and colour, all the Venetian air and the Venetian history are on the walls and ceilings of the palaces; and all the genius of the masters, all the images and visions they have left upon canvas, seem to tremble in the sunbeams and dance upon the waves. . . .
You don't go into the churches and galleries by way of a change from the streets; you go into them because they offer you an exquisite reproduction of the things that surround you.
Tradition's Dwindling Current
As America loses its small towns, its Prairies and Crow Creeks, Richard Critchfield asserts, a critical link to the essential, nourishing traditions of human history is being severed.
This is from "Trees, Why Do You Wait?" (Island Press, paper).
The world's villagers and ourselves all exist in the same continuum stretching unbroken through time.
Elisabeth Bumiller describes an Indian village: "The ways of the 1,000 people of Khajuron are the ways of most of humanity." We stand at the farthest end of this continuum, the most technologically advanced society ever.
But what we find most culturally meaningful is deeply rooted in the distant past.
Remember F. Scott Fitzgerald's famous ending to
The Great Gatsby
. . . ?
"So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into the past." This is how culture works, making us captives of our history.
If we let America's Prairies and Crow Creeks go under, leaving most of us in decaying cities or the probably failed experiment of suburbia, Fitzgerald's current becomes shallower, slower, it loses its force.
If our cities are to stay healthy, the Prairies and Crow Creeks must survive and thrive.
Delicate, Feverish Sensibilities
The Victorians carried prudery to new heights of unintentional absurdity, as Bill Bryson demonstrates in this passage from "Mother Tongue: English &amp; How It Got That Way" (Avon, paper).
The greatest outburst of prudery came in the nineteenth century when it swept through the world like a fever.
It was an age when sensibilities grew so delicate that one lady was reported to have dressed her goldfish in miniature suits for the sake of propriety and a certain Madame de la Bresse left her fortune to provide clothing for the snowmen of Paris. . . .
It was an age in which the most innocuous words became unacceptable at a rate that must have been dizzying.
Stomach
became a euphemism for
belly
and in its turn was considered too graphic and was replaced by
tummy, midriff,
and even
breadbasket.
. . . The names for male animals, such as
buck
and
stallion,
were never used in mixed company. Bulls were called
sires, male animals
, and, in a truly inspired burst of ridiculousness,
gentleman cows.
The Endangered Authentic Self
An unfortunate side effect of the almost constant presence of the media in our lives, the psychologist Kenneth J. Gergen suggests, is a loss of the small, subtle, authentic responses to life that compose a personality.
This is from "The Saturated Self: Dilemmas of Identity in Contemporary Life" (Basic Books).
The media expose society to a massive array of self-representations.
Our manners of friendship, family relationships, romance, and animosity are documented, scrutinized, rhapsodized, and satirized.
We see how the lips are pursed in moments of quiet anger, the fingers move to the mouth as expressions of serious thought, and the tongue flicks backward in moments of cautious reflection.
As these images are exposed increasingly to the culture, they become the standards for expression, a subtle Miss Manners for the world of informal relations.
They inform the culture, for example, as to how sadness is done -- its duration, its modes of expression, and its proper intensity on various occasions.
Indeed, in failing to meet these commonly recognized standards, one cannot properly define oneself as "being sad" -- either to others or oneself. . . .
Our actions are suffused with the sense of metaphor, and we ourselves lose the ability to differentiate between their authenticity and their artifice.


If Heaven Can Wait, Saints Can Take a Week Off
There are a lot of running backs in the National Football League who are happy that New Orleans has the day off today.
Thanks to a bye week for the teams in the Western Division of the National Football Conference, the Saints won't be beating up on anybody.
The Saints are off to a 5-0 start -- the best in the team's history -- thanks in large part to a bruising defense that is ranked No. 1 over all in the N.F.L., as well as No. 1 against the run and No. 7 against the pass.


In Carter's String Quartets, Difficulty Can Hold Delight
Since Joseph Haydn in the 18th century, the string quartet has been a medium for connoisseurs, in which composers articulated their most subtle, intimate and intricate thoughts.
For more than four decades, the leading American ensemble devoted to this literature has been the Juilliard String Quartet.
And since Bartok's six quartets and Schoenberg's four, in the first half of this century, the most admired contributions to the canon of this revered genre have been the four of Elliott Carter.
These three singularities will coincide on Friday, at a concert in the Juilliard Theater: to celebrate its 45th anniversary, the Juilliard Quartet will play all the Carter string quartets in sequence. (The Juilliard's recording of the cycle is due for release the same day by Sony Classical.) The occasion may also be regarded as an affirmation of a still-living tradition, an assertion of the importance of esoteric as well as popular, immediately accessible art.


Autumn's O.K., But Hold The Leaves
I LIKE autumn.
The crisp air and the faint smell of wood smoke invigorate me.
Though I left school years ago, I still seem to live life on the semester plan, which makes fall the beginning of a new year, a clean start, a blank slate.
But as I've learned from my few years of living in Vermont, each season exacts its toll.
In winter, the joy of cross-country skiing is tempered by the agony of cars with dead batteries buried in snow.
Spring brings warmth and new growth -- and acres of mud.
With summer's bounty come black flies and mosquitoes.
The downside of autumn, to my mind, is autumn leaves.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
East Hartland, Conn. 135,000
75 Mountain Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 17-year-old raised ranch; kitchen with breakfast bar, fireplace in living room, 1 acre; taxes $2,026.
Farmington, Conn. 247,000
8 Virginia Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; formal dining room, pantry, walk-in closet in master bedroom, 1/2 acre; taxes $2,670.
Hartford, Conn. 75,000
81 Granby Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old ranch; unfinished basement, needs work, 1/4 acre; taxes $1,640.
Armonk, N.Y. 350,000
1 Spruce Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, dining room, family room, underground sprinkler; taxes $4,480.
Larchmont, N.Y. 436,355
6 Byron Lane
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 51-year-old colonial; center hall, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, den, screened porch; taxes $8,838.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 365,000
318 High Ridge
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 159-year-old colonial; fireplace, terrace,breakfast room, new kitchen, den, 2 acres; taxes $4,754.
OTHER AREAS Freehold, N.J. 64,900
113 E. Pilatus Platz
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 17-year-old ranch-style condominium; c/a, patio, porch; monthly maintenance $118; taxes $1,749.
Howell, N.J. 138,500
548 Laurelwood Court
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2-year-old condominium town house; family room, fireplace, patio; monthly maintenance $94; taxes $2,996.
Glen Head,L.I. 175,000
13 McCouns Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 63-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace; taxes $1,500.


A BUMPIER RIDE FOR NEW YORK TAXIS: Hertz Was No. 1; Cabs Are Yellow Because . . .
Cabs are yellow because John D. Hertz said they should be.
Mr.
Hertz is now better known for the rental car company he founded in 1924, but he first got wealthy revolutionizing the taxi business in turn-of-the-century Chicago.
A runaway, a boxing manager and sportswriter who was never in a car until he was 26 years old, he got into the taxi business in 1907 and had the world's largest fleet by the time he sold out in 1925.


GORBACHEV MATCHES U.S. ON NUCLEAR CUTS AND GOES FURTHER ON STRATEGIC WARHEADS
Matching President Bush's arms initiative last week and going beyond it in some respects, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today announced the elimination or reduction of a range of tactical nuclear weapons based on land and at sea.
Mr.
Gorbachev also announced that the Soviet Union would exceed the requirements of the latest strategic arms agreement, pledging to cut the number of Soviet strategic warheads within seven years to 5,000, instead of the 6,000 required by the new treaty.


Topics of The Times; He-Men in the House
House Speaker Thomas Foley surely hopes he has dispensed with the bounced-check scandal by tossing it to the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct.
Its duty is to monitor behavior in accordance with House rules, like Rule 43: "A member . . . shall conduct himself at all times in a manner which shall reflect creditably on the House of Representatives."
Himself?
Mr.
Foley may have a gender scandal on his hands.
The House now has 29 herselves.
They even have a caucus to promote women's issues.
But no one seems to have protested the exclusive masculinity of the House's own rules.


With Baby Seats, Safety Comes of Age
TIME was, safety didn't sell.
That was the wisdom in Detroit, and it was right.
Buyers wanted zoom.
They wanted fins and three-toned paint and radios whose volume control was hooked to the accelerator to overcome engine noise on the open road.
But that road has become more and more choked, and people seem generally less adventurous.
Put nicely, they are more serious, and buyers are walking away from salesmen today if the vehicle lacks an airbag or antilock brakes or what- have-you.
People have quit smoking and they drink Perrier and they worry about . . . well, crashing.


F.L. MAGEE, 95, ALCOA PRESIDENT AND CHAIRMAN
Frank L. Magee, a retired chairman and president of the Aluminum Company of America, the world's largest producer of aluminum, died on Friday at Latrobe Hospital in Latrobe, Pa.
He was 95 years old and lived in Stahlstown, Pa.
Mr. Magee died of heart failure, said A. T. Posti, a spokesman for Alcoa.


THIS WEEK


Special Today: Good Health/Magazine Part 2
* Plain talk about eating right. By Marian Burros
*
Can a mental workout keep your brain fit?
By Gina Kolata.
In France they call it "le brainjogging." By Marlise Simons.


MENTAL GYMNASTICS
AT age 55, Ronald L. Graham, a leading mathematician and an administrator at A.T.&amp;T.
Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, N.J., is taking up Japanese and golf.
He juggles, does handstands and works out on a trampoline in his backyard.
He has learned to speak Chinese, throw a boomerang, play the piano and beat most comers at table tennis.
When you ask Graham what possesses him to master one skill after another, he says he wants to keep his brain active and capable of finding solutions to thorny mathematical problems.
His belief is that the more he uses his brain, the better it will perform, and the more he develops diverse mental skills, the more likely it is that he will have a flash of intuition that links seemingly disparate findings.
Learning Chinese, he says, "stretches your brain in dramatically different directions." Even his latest juggling challenge -- simultaneously juggling four or five balls at three different heights -- "is really amazingly tough mentally," he says.
It makes him concentrate at every second, which is the sort of mental stimulation he is after.


The Country Husband
THE JOURNALS OF JOHN CHEEVER
By John Cheever. 399 pp. New York: Knopf. $25.


Union 66, Norwich 0
Senior quarterback Brett Russ completed 19 passes in the first half as Union had its biggest scoring game in 42 years.
Russ, in compiling 188 yards with just 3 incompletions, led Union (4-0) to a 42-0 halftime lead.
He sat out the second half.
Nowrich fell to 1-4.


Nederlander Mum on Future
Robert Nederlander watched the Yankees lose to the Indians, 7-5, in 12 innings yesterday on a rainy afternoon at Yankee Stadium and he may have been witnessing one of the club's final losses while he is still managing general partner.
Citing unnamed sources, recent newspaper reports have said Nederlander will resign because he is weary of the job and of being criticized by George Steinbrenner.
Nederlander refused to comment.
In the game, Steve Sax had 2 hits and needs 2 more in today's final game to reach 200.


Backing Up the Safer Way
Mark Gottlieb is a man with a mission.
As a child, playing behind the family car, he was run over when his father put the vehicle into reverse and began to back up.
As an adult, he began pondering such dangers to children, and he spent four years developing a simple warning device.


Two Objects of Derision Celebrated
A quarter-century ago, the Metropolitan Opera celebrated the move to its new house in Lincoln Center by giving the premiere of Samuel Barber's "Antony and Cleopatra." It was one of the great disasters of operatic history.
At rehearsals, the extravagant production by Franco Zeffirelli had already broken the virgin stage's turntable under its weight.
Opening night reviews were torn between panning the hall and panning the opera.
The week before last, by one of those strange coincidences only God or Shakespeare could have devised, the two objects of derision were once again celebrated.
The Met opened its season by honoring the silver anniversary of the hall, and two nights later at Chicago's Lyric Opera came the premiere of the first opera-house "Antony" since the commissioned debacle at the Met.
This conjunction revealed some suggestive reasons for the two disasters.


The Ebony Fashion Fair Mixes Style and Charity
In 1958 Eunice W. Johnson, the wife of the publisher of Ebony magazine, John H. Johnson, agreed to help a friend in New Orleans raise money for a local charity by staging a fashion benefit.
What began 33 years ago as a simple favor to a friend has evolved into the Ebony Fashion Fair, the world's largest traveling fashion show.
Besides disseminating the latest styles from the runways of Europe and New York, the fashion extravaganza has raised more than $38 million for various charities.


Eye of Newt? Try Scalp Of Woodpecker
A reminder of the Brooklyn Museum's importance to the cultural life of New York City and beyond has arrived in the form of "Objects of Myth and Memory." By turning to its storerooms, the museum has put together a sweeping survey of American Indian art.
The show, which remains on view through Dec. 29 before traveling to Oakland and Phoenix, presents 250 of the 9,000 artifacts accumulated by R. Stewart Culin, the institution's first curator of ethnology.
Born in Philadelphia in 1858 and educated only through high school, Culin came to what was then called the Brooklyn Institute of Arts and Sciences from the Museum of the University of Pennsylvania, where as director, he had established his credentials collecting Indian materials.
Shortly after Culin's appointment to Brooklyn in 1903, Franz Boas, the American Museum of Natural History's legendary explorer and curator of anthropology, drew up a list of the great ethnological collections in the country that included "the Brooklyn Institute to be," on the basis of Culin's record in Philadelphia.


For Mormons, Respectability Preceded Wealth
To the Editor:
"Despite Growth, Mormons Find New Hurdles" (front page, Sept. 15) casts a bland light on Mormon origins and values -- an "old-fashioned American success story." You mute the radical change in the Mormon church from a frontier communal sect driven by mysticism and millennialism (hence "Latter-day Saints") to an international missionary and business empire.


Miles Davis: The Alchemist And the Terrorist
Since Miles Davis died, on Sept. 28, jazz radio stations have been playing his music almost continuously, and they haven't come close to exhausting the supply.
From the end of World War II to just last year, Davis recorded an ocean of music, in tempos from barn burners to slow freezes, in forms from 12-bar blues to album-length suites to one-chord funk vamps, touching every mood known or dreamed of by human beings.
Very little of it was run-of-the-mill; some was good, most was remarkable.
To the eternal benefit of American music, Davis's career coincided with the era of long-playing, high-fidelity recordings, a medium that was as sympathetic to his art as any stage or bandstand.
He understood that, especially in recordings, he could make listeners approach him if he hung back and played a little hard to get.
That, not any sense of fashion or style of swing, was his kind of cool; there was never any lack of emotion.


Bush Calls Gorbachev's Announcement Good News for the World
President Bush today welcomed President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's announcement on cutting back nuclear weapons as "good news for the whole world," but he said some details needed to be ironed out before the two leaders could hold a summit meeting.
"I think they're on the right track," Mr.
Bush told reporters several hours after the Soviet leader called him to inform him of the proposals he was about to make in response to Mr.
Bush's own sweeping initiative of eight days before.
"I think the world will view it as very positive."


Multiculturalism Divides More Than It Unites; The Case of Dumas
To the Editor:
Arguing for a multicultural curriculum, Hugh B. Price notes (Op-Ed, Sept. 23) his belated personal discovery that Alexandre Dumas was partly black.
Was it the black part or the white part of Dumas that wrote "The Three Musketeers"?
Obviously, the book was the product of the whole man, not of some part.
The inspiration and popularity of the book derive from Dumas's ability to distill and appeal to the European culture in which he lived.


World Markets; Japan's Half-Step Toward Expansion
Japan, the land of tight money and tumbling stock prices, is no longer the land of tight money.
Now, what will happen to its stock prices?
The central bank moved last week to release a surge of cash into the banking system.
Reserve requirements, the percentage of deposits that banks must keep on reserve with the central bank, were lowered sharply.
The move freed about $15 billion of cash, which the banks can use for making loans.
It was like a rush of water to a parched field, ending two years of tight money.


INSURERS OF AUTOS AGREE TO REFUNDS
About one million New Yorkers are expected to receive refunds of up to $225 each from five auto insurance companies that failed to pay discounts for cars equipped with safety and anti-theft devices, according to a settlement reached last week with the New York State Attorney General's Office.
The five companies -- State Farm Mutual, Allstate, Travelers, General Accident and Metropolitan -- account for about one-fifth of New York State's auto-insurance business.


Woody Plants Need a Jump on Spring
KEEP planting.
And not just hardy spring-flowering bulbs.
There is ample time until the middle of October to set out woody plants, particularly new landscaping shrubs, perennials, grass seed and even trees.
Of course, hardy bulbs can be planted as well, but too many gardeners forget about the fall planting season and believe they have to wait until spring to set out anything else.
The chief reason for setting out woody plants now is to allow the plants time to form a strong root system.
Then when spring does come, the plants will be ready for the big push and flowering.


Diane Hull Wed To David Hertz
Diane Carol Hull, an associate with the law firm of Marks Murase &amp; White, and David N. Hertz, an assistant general counsel of the Bank Leumi Trust Company, both in New York, were married yesterday evening at the Wilton (Conn.) Congregational Church.
The Rev.
Dudne Breeze performed the ceremony, with Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman attending.
Mrs.
Hertz, 26 years old and a Denison University graduate, received a law degree from George Washington University, as did the bridegroom.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Hull of Wilton.
Her father, now semi-retired, was president and chief executive of Moulinex, a household goods manufacturer.
Her mother, Carol Hull, is the office manager of the Montrose Chemical Corporation in Westport, Conn.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BETTE DAVIS
In the summer of 1985 Bette Davis came to dinner at Elizabeth Fuller's house in Weston and stayed for a month.
Mrs.
Fuller wrote a one-woman play and a book about the incident, and she will perform the play, called "Jezebel and Me: When Bette Davis Came to Dinner and Stayed and Stayed . . ." on Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. in the Westport Arts Center, 17 Morningside Drive South.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FANTASY IN CROTON FALLS
"Prelude to a Kiss," Craig Lucas's fantasy about love transcending gender, will open the season at the Schoolhouse in Croton Falls with nine performances beginning Friday and ending Oct. 27.


Defense Summations Given in Racketeering Case
Defense lawyers attacked the integrity of the prosecution and its witnesses in four days of spirited summations last week in a trial about racketeering charges in the window-installation industry.
"The thieves got away with murder and money and freedom," one of the lawyers, Bruce Cutler, told the jury in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
He said the prosecution "resurrected" a bid-rigging scheme with crooks to create a fictitious Mafia case.


STRANGERS AT THE GATE
After scrutinizing your photographs of thousands of refugees struggling to find a home in Western Europe, I was struck by the fact that only two of them were female.
What happens to the women left behind in poverty and squalor while their husbands, sons, brothers and fathers seek a better life elsewhere?
That must be an even crueler story and should be told.
ROSALIND ELLIS
Baltimore
ILS&gt;Photo of refugees (Photograph by Ettore Malanca/Sipa)


CAMPUS LIFE: James Madison; Fraternity Row To Face Penalties On Drunkenness
Students at James Madison University who are arrested and charged with being drunk in public will no longer suffer alone.
The university will also punish the fraternity that supplied the beer.
The new penalty procedure is one of several changes in party policies for Madison's 11 Interfraternity Council-recognized fraternities.
The changes, which were approved by the council last Tuesday, "now provide for some accountability and that is what I was looking for," said Michael Way, the assistant to the associate vice president for student affairs who requested them.
In the past, Mr.
Way said, "we had no way of determining where the students were served."


Looking for Love


Warnings by U.S. On Ecuador
Citing street crime in Quito and Guayaquil and a substantial number of cases of cholera, the United States State Department recommends that Americans take safety and health precautions when traveling in Ecuador.
In an advisory dated Sept. 24, the department said it was replacing a caution given in an advisory last March 23 with a warning.
The new notice refers to the "high level of street crime" in Quito, the capital, and Guayaquil, and said visitors to Quito should be aware that pickpockets and muggings were common in the area around the landmark known as the Virgin of Panecillo.
Thieves are often armed with guns or knives, the advisory says.
On the other hand, the department adds, travelers on organized tours to standard tourist destinations, including Quito and jungle and beach resorts have not experienced unusual problems.


Susan L. Smith Has Wedding
Susan Linley Smith, a daughter of Carroll E. Smith and Marilyn M. Smith, both of Fredericksburg, Va., was married last night to Andrew Charles Karp, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester G. Karp of Marblehead, Mass.
Rabbi Rolando Matalon officiated at the St.
Moritz Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Karp, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia.
Until recently, she was a marketing manager of children's books at Random House in New York.
Her father is a lawyer in Fredericksburg, where her mother is an office manager at the Pratt Medical Center.


In Flux


Judith Buckley Wed
Judith Marie Buckley, an associate at Parker, Coulter, Daly &amp; White, and Thomas Henry Hayman, an associate at Peabody &amp; Arnold, both law firms in Boston, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Peter Doody officiated at Our Lady Star of the Sea Roman Catholic Church in Marblehead, Mass.
Mrs.
Hayman, 27 years old, graduated from Boston College, where she and her husband received law degrees.
She is a daughter of Dorothy N. Buckley of Peabody, Mass., and the late Raymond A. Buckley.
Mr.
Hayman, 26, graduated from the University of Notre Dame.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry D. Hayman of Wyckoff, N.J.


Speculation and Salomon
To the Editor:
"When the Regulators Stood Still," (Sept. 22) only partly accounts for Salomon's problems.
John Gutfreund was responsible for inculcating in his young traders -- at Phillip Brothers and Salomon -- that to trade successfully one must take enormous speculative positions.
For Phillip Brothers, once the largest commodity company in the world, this philosophy led to its demise because of heavy trading losses.
For Salomon, taking huge positions in the Treasury auctions led to the present tarnishing of its reputation and a Government investigation.


Ann B. Siegel Weds Michael Fischer
Ann Barbara Siegel, the assistant commissioner in charge of planning and program development in New York City's Department of Juvenile Justice, was married last evening to Michael Walter Frederick Fischer, a project designer with Ehrenkrantz &amp; Eckstut Architects in New York.
Milton Mollen, New York's Deputy Mayor for Public Safety, officiated at the home of Jamie Bernstein Thomas, a friend of the bride, in New York.
The bride, who is keeping her name, graduated from the University of Colorado and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elwood Siegel of New York.
Her father, who is retired, headed Telic Productions, a film production company, in New York.
Her mother, Shirley Adelson Siegel, is a member of the city's Conflicts of Interest Board and a former New York State solicitor general.


Swedish Coalition Plans Overhaul of Policies
The new conservative Government of Sweden has pledged to cut taxes, permit private medicine, crack down on drug abusers and cut off aid to Cuba, but to keep the policy of neutrality pursued by its predecessors.
"The age of collectivism is at an end now," Prime Minister Carl Bildt told Parliament on Friday.
Mr.
Bildt, 42 years old, is the head of a coalition of four conservative parties that ousted the Social Democrats from power in elections on Sept. 15 for only the second time in 60 years.


Sports of The Times; In Baseball, The Race Is the Thing
THE World Series is acted out on a big stage as if the games belong in a time capsule.
The two L.C.S.'s, alias the National League and American League championship series, provide an audition for that big stage.
But baseball is at its best in a pennant race.
In the World Series or the L.C.S., a team has already won something.
But if a team doesn't win its divisional pennant race, it hasn't won anything.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Summit, N.J., misidentified a restaurant at 327 Springfield Avenue and described its menu incorrectly.
The restaurant is The Lite Gourmet; its owners say it serves "light, healthy gourmet" food.


Russian Court Backs Lubavitchers on Documents
In a defeat for the entrenched culture bureaucracy, the Russian Supreme Court has ruled in favor of the Lubavitch Jewish movement and ordered the release of 12,000 volumes sacred to the Hasidic sect, which has long been fighting to free the books from 70 years under lock and key in the Lenin Library.
The ruling on Friday delighted the Lubavitchers, a determined branch of the Hasidic movement that is fast replanting its roots here.
But it still left them with the task of getting the court order enforced in the legal terra incognita of the post-coup Soviet Union, so they can get the books back to their headquarters on Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn.


Page Giddings, Buyer, Is Wed
Elizabeth Page Giddings, a couture buyer for Saks Fifth Avenue in New York, and Michael Andrew Frohling, the regional sales manager of Thomson Financial Network in New York, an investment advisory concern, were married yesterday in New York.
Msgr.
George Bardes performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More.
The bride, 28 years old and known as Page, graduated from Tulane University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Giddings of New York.
Her father is a vice president of Kurt Salmon Associates, management consultants in New York.
Her mother is the principal in Kathryn Giddings Inc., a New York marketing research firm.


CAMPUS LIFE: Bard; Student Critics Confront Authors in New Course
Bard College's fiction course "The New Gothic" sounds like the contemporary author's worst nightmare: There sit the students, all 30 of them.
And there sits the author, listening while a member of the class analyzes his work and while the rest of the class discusses his work, then facing this jury of readers to defend what he has written.
"You get a vague sense of embarrassment when you see copies of your book in every hand," said Patrick McGrath, author of "The Grotesque" and the forthcoming "Dorian Vaughn," fresh from his ordeal last week.
"And you wonder, 'What do these people make of you?' "


Lisa H. Greene Has Wedding
Lisa Hilary Greene, a teaching assistant at the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, and Eric Charles Mirsky, a fourth-year medical student at New York University, were married last evening in New York.
Rabbi Ely Pilchik officiated at the Rainbow Room.
Mrs.
Mirsky, 25 years old, graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen A. Greene of Short Hills, N.J.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel.
Her mother, Marilyn Greene, is the associate director of the J. Cacciola art gallery in New York.


Venezuelan Indians Have Known Far Too Much Civilization
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 11 report from Ashidowa-Teri, Venezuela, calls the Yanomami Indians a "Stone-Age people," "the hemisphere's last major tribe untouched by modern civilization." Venezuela's new Upper Orinoco Casiquiare Biosphere Reserve, an area the size of Maine set aside as a permanent homeland for the Yanomami, is then described.


Panel Dispute Said to Delay Report on Prison Uprising
The release of a report on the causes of an inmate uprising at New York State's high-security prison in May has been delayed in large part because of a dispute over portions that are highly critical of the state's top prison official, officials say.
The report by the Commission on Correction, which has the responsibility for monitoring state prisons, on the circumstances and implications of the uprising at the Southport Correctional Facility has been held up by wrangling between its two members, the chairman, William G. McMahon, and Deborah A. Reyes.


Stretching Lobster for Out-of-Season Dishes
A CHANGE of seasons does not necessarily mean a new list of ingredients.
Often only the preparation is revised.
Consider lobster: in midsummer, it is wonderful to indulge in a shore dinner at a seaside restaurant, with steamed lobsters, corn on the cob, plates of coleslaw and a bib around the neck.
Or, more informally, lobster might be diced in a mayonnaise salad and served on a bun as a lobster roll at a roadside stand.
Also, the lobster club sandwich has become a favorite of young American chefs.


Life Without Intourist
I knew that a trip to Moscow and Leningrad promised no luxury.
I was ready for mass-produced meals drowned in gelatinous gravy, and gloomy hotels patrolled by personnel as friendly as wardens at the state pen.
What I could not take was the price in the Intourist brochure: an off-season minimum of $1,375, or $2,179 with the flight from New York, for an advertised 10-day tour of Moscow and Leningrad, now St.
Petersburg, that amounted to only eight nights in the Soviet Union.
And so, last fall, I decided to test the Soviet Union's new openness by trying to circumvent Intourist.


Alexa Pollack Wed in Georgia
Alexa Carlin Pollack, the media marketing coordinator of Reuters Information Services, and Stuart Becherer Smith, a broker at Goldman Sachs, both in New York, were married yesterday on St.
Simons Island, Ga.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Law officiated at St.
Simons Presbyterian Church, assisted by the Rev.
Margaret S. Mahaney, an aunt of the bridegroom.
The bride, 24 years old, graduated from Barnard College.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
Robert E. Reilly of St.
Simons Island and the late Henry Clinton Pollack Jr., who was the founding president of Sentinel Securities, a New York stock brokerage.


For Families, French and Otherwise
THIS year my wife and I vowed to have a relaxing summer vacation.
We were looking for a place where we could get 5-year-old Emily and her 2-year-old brother, Jeremy, out of our hair for a few hours a day without spending a fortune.
French friends told us about a network of vacation villages throughout France that have elaborate child-care facilities.
We should have guessed that France had such a system.
As Americans living in Paris, we had observed the French attitude toward parenting: children should be neither seen nor heard so that Mommy and Daddy can sunbathe in peace.
The network of 185 family-oriented resorts (168 of them in France) is called Villages Vacances Familles, or V.V.F.'s; some are groups of cottages, some are clusters of semi-detached apartments, and others are situated in hotels.
They are part of an association that is owned in part by the communities where the villages are situated.
We chose to spend a week at one in Grasse, the perfume-making center just north of Cannes. (For a July or August stay in a village such as this in southern France, reservations should be made at least three months ahead; December or January would not be too soon to book for summer.) We took a train from Paris to the Riviera, and a taxi to the V.V.F., where we joined friends, an American couple who drove down from Paris with their two young children.
The village turned out to be an excellent place to meet French people and to take a vacation the way many French do.


Alabama Governor on Spot Over Flying to His Sermons
Guy Hunt says he was just doing what he has been doing for 33 years when he traveled around the South, preaching at Primitive Baptist churches and pocketing the donations, or "love offerings," that came his way.
The only difference is that for four years he has been making the trips as Governor of Alabama and traveling in a state airplane.
He is now desperately trying to derail a possible grand jury inquiry after a state ethics board found that he may have committed a felony by illegally using state resources for personal gain.


Diplomats Press Haitian's Return
International efforts to restore the presidency of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide continued today amid indications that the army, which deposed him and forced him into exile on Monday, continued to rule out his return to Haiti.
According to reports filtering out of the closed-door meetings Friday evening between a high-level delegation of the Organization of American States and Haitian officers led by Brig.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, the military said instead that it would be willing to relinquish power to an interim administration headed by the chief justice of the Haitian Supreme Court, Andre G. Cherilus.


Corrections
The Fairs and Festivals listing last Sunday in the special Autumn Times section (distributed in Manhattan) misstated the date for the lighting of the Rockefeller Center Christmas tree.
It will be at 5:30 P.M. on Dec. 3, not Dec. 2.
The Parades listing in Autumn Times misstated the hour for the Greenwich Village Halloween Parade on Oct. 31.
It begins at 7 P.M., not 6.


Mutual Funds; What's Happening With Windsor?
One of the largest stock funds in the United States has announced a plan to bring in new managers for part of its portfolio, and in light of the fund's excellent record, it is worth asking whether holders should be worried about the changes.
The $3.2 billion Vanguard Windsor II Fund -- the 15th largest of the nation's 1,000-plus stock funds -- has been managed by Barrow, Hanley, Mewhinney &amp; Strauss, a firm that handles roughly three-quarters of the fund's assets, and Invesco Capital Management.


Mennonite Crafts Go on Display
A new museum dedicated to the life and art of the Mennonites, who fled 17th- and 18th-century Europe at the urging of William Penn to pioneer the farm land of eastern Pennsylvania, has opened in Harleysville, 30 miles north of Philadelphia in Montgomery County.
The small museum, built in the style of an 18th-century meeting house, with galleries and a library, is set in farmland still tilled by Mennonite families.
The Mennonites were Anabaptist dissenters from Switzerland, the Netherlands and the Rhineland.
They brought with them a tradition of colorful folk decoration, which they applied to household articles, documents and manuscripts.
Some of this folk art is on display along with handcrafted furniture, quilts and farm tools.
A visit to the museum, called the Meeting House, begins with a short video history of the sect in Pennsylvania and abroad.
A shop, the profits of which go to the Mennonite Historians of Eastern Pennsylvania, sells reproductions of art and household items, books and illuminated birth and marriage certificates and family trees to be filled in by the buyer.


Answering The Mail
Q.
A metal shed in my backyard has been there for many years.
The inside of the metal is in good condition, but the exterior is rusted and mildewed.
How can I prepare this metal for painting?
A.
Scrape off the loose and flaking rust, using a scraper and wire brush.
Wash with 1 part bleach to 4 parts water to clean the mildew and then rinse with plain water.
After it dries, apply a liquid rust converter, special liquids that convert rust on the metal into a coating that forms an excellent foundation for paint.
In addition, the new coating helps prevent further rusting.
When it dries, apply a coat of rust-resistant metal primer and finish with two coats of exterior house or trim paint.


Two More Candidates Join the Race
AND now there are five.
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska bounded onto the stage in Lincoln last week, to the Bruce Springsteen anthem "Born to Run," and promised to lead his country on "its fearless, restless voyage of generational progress." Republican policies of "malignant neglect" had led the country adrift, said Mr.
Kerrey, a former governor who won the Medal of Honor in Vietnam.


Protecting the Faucets From Winter's Freeze
ORDINARY outdoor faucets, technically called sillcocks, are prone to freezing and bursting in winter.
As a result, they have received much attention from plumbing designers and gadget inventors.
One device that solves the problem is a freeze-proof sillcock.
A specially designed faucet that replaces an ordinary sillcock, it can be installed by soldering.


POSTINGS: Breezy Baedeker; City Zoning From A to Z
If you already know that CEQR is pronounced "seeker" and that ulurp is not a sound one makes while eating soup, you may have no need for a new guide to New York City zoning policy and practice published by the Civitas Citizens group.
If, however, you are still bewildered by land-use issues, you may want to consult "The ABC (and C2 and M3 and R10A) of Zoning," written and illustrated by Jack Huberman for Civitas, which is based on the Upper East Side.


The Wrong Villain
To the Editor:
Ronald Bryden's review of Hume Cronyn's memoir "A Terrible Liar" (Sept. 15) implies that Mr.
Cronyn was the villain of Alfred Hitchcock's "Shadow of a Doubt," when in fact the villain was Joseph Cotten.
Judging from Mr.
Cronyn's performance in that film as the amateur sleuth neighbor, Hitchcock may have been more taken by Mr.
Cronyn's potential for playing lovable eccentrics.
For an example of Mr.
Cronyn at his villainous best, one should check out his performance as the sadistic guard captain in Jules Dassin's 1947 prison drama, "Brute Force."  RICHARD E. RISTAINO  Silver Spring, Md.


Poetry Is Different
To the Editor:
As a laborer in the gnarled field of education (teaching interpretive courses in poetry, the short story, drama and music appreciation), I receive Mark Strand's essay "Slow Down for Poetry" (Sept. 15) as a long-sought and badly needed "grace before plowing." I give a ringing Amen to his offering and a true nod of thanks before the sweet naked wonder of his purpose.
JOE WRIGHT  Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LA TOYA  Growing Up in the Jackson Family.
By La Toya Jackson with Patricia Romanowski.
Dutton, $19.95.


Abusing A Privilege
To the Editor:
As a professional classical musician, I can well understand the artistic and emotional urgency felt by John Adams to create an opera on a subject that has inspired him  [ "Stay Tuned for the Opera at 11," Sept. 1 ] .
But it seems to me terribly insensitive of Mr.
Adams and his producers to present this work when the family of Leon Klinghoffer is still grieving from the destruction of this innocent man at the hands of a band of thugs.


A Change of Pace for Lunch in Stamford
THE Assemblage, on a small one-way street between Summer and Bedford Streets (reached from Summer) in Stamford, is easy to overlook.
We have driven past it and admired its facade, done in the manner of a German or English inn, but thought it was a private dining club.
Now we know it isn't.
The Assemblage is a lunch-only restaurant, run by Robustelli Corporate Services.
As you enter the white building, with its dark wood half-timbering, you pass a dining room, on the left, that is used by corporate groups.
Straight ahead is a dining room open to the public, separated into two sections by room dividers.
The larger room has well-spaced tables, an upright piano in one corner and a dignified air.
The other space is long and narrow, with just a few tables that have high-back peacock chairs facing the open door of a small clothes shop (another Robustelli enterprise).
If you like natural light at lunchtime, opt for the second area, since its skylight allows sunlight to cascade in. (When making reservations, be sure to specify the skylight area if you want it; it fills up first.)


A Friend in Need
To the Editor:
In Frank Rich's long article on Joe Papp he barely mentions Joe's great affection for and support of his actors.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Book Review today with a review of "Damon Runyon" misstates the date.
The picture was made in 1936.


The Kevin Costner Of Country Music
Garth Brooks counts Dan Fogelberg and James Taylor among his heroes, and in concert he often performs "Please Come to Boston," a wimpy 70's hit.
These are not the normal earmarks of a country singer -- one who supposedly lives and breathes Hank Williams -- but then, Mr.
Brooks isn't truly a country singer.
Sure, he wears a cowboy hat on the cover of his third album, "Ropin' the Wind" (Capitol 7 96330 2; CD and cassette), and the songs mention mom, the rodeo and truckers.
But deep down, Mr.
Brooks is an old-fashioned and sensitive singer-songwriter, and his success says more about the state of country music than it does about Mr.
Brooks.
That success is formidable.
In September, Capitol shipped 2.6 million copies of his new album, "Ropin' the Wind." It entered the pop charts at No. 1, making it the first country album ever to do so (and the first to scale that pinnacle in 11 years), although it slipped to third place last week behind Guns 'n' Roses' two new records.
Part of the reason for Mr.
Brooks's success is marketing: with his meat-and-potatoes image, goony grin and virtuous all-American values, he is the Kevin Costner of country.


Jazz and Gospel in a Rose Garden
ONE might consider spending this afternoon in a park in New Haven, where everything -- including the music -- will be coming up roses at the Pardee Sunday Potpourri, an event to celebrate the second blooming of the roses.
"A garden is a living piece of artwork," said Alain Dols, who tends to the climbers, hybrids, floribundas and dozens of other varieties in the Pardee Rose Garden, "and so is music. They need to be experienced, they need people to keep them alive, and today the roses will serve as a natural stage to showcase the performances."


Lawmakers Tell 40,000 at Rally Connecticut Income Tax Will Die
State lawmakers told a crowd of more than 40,000, who gathered outside the Capitol today to rage against the state's new income tax, that they had enough votes to repeal the tax in a special session they planned to call within weeks.
The protest is believed to be the state's largest and angriest poltical rally in decades, if not ever.
Speakers called on the crowd to transform their anger into pressure on lawmakers to win over the votes that would be needed to override Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s certain veto of any bill overturning the new law.


Manhattan for Under $100 a Night
MANHATTAN has hundreds of hotels, but they tend to be expensive.
Even hotels that say they are economically priced can easily cost $150 a night for a double room.
And that's before little extras like room service, tips and taxes, which are currently 16 1/4 percent for rooms under $100 and 21 1/4 percent for rooms over $100, plus $2 a room.
But Manhattan is a big place, and it's still possible to get a room for two for less than $100 without checking into a youth hostel.
You shouldn't set your sights too high, of course.
Expect an elevator, a private bathroom and sturdy locks.
Expect fresh sheets, clean towels and daily maid service.
Room service is usually too much to ask for, though there should be vending machines and perhaps coin-operated washing machines.
And if your room has recently been renovated, there may even be a bit of style.


Canadian Taxes
To the Editor:
I want to clarify points relating to the Practical Traveler column about the Canadian Goods and Services Tax (July 7).
The National Tour Association has worked closely with the Canadian government to streamline G.S.T. procedures for our 600 tour-company members.
As G.S.T. regulations were revised, we informed our members so that they were aware of the changes.
We felt a special obligation to insure that our 600 tour-company members possessed the latest word on the G.S.T.


BEST SELLERS: October 6, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
2
2
4
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate a balloon accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force.
3
3
5
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $22.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his older brother.
4
5
30
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5
4
5
FLOWERS IN THE RAIN, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $20.) A collection of short stories, many of them set in Scotland and dealing with family relationships.
6
6
2
THE DECEIVER, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $22.50.) To escape forced early retirement, Sam McCready recalls his years in the British secret service.
7 *
1
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on the Pan American Clipper's last trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
8
8
4
RUSSKA, by Edward Rutherfurd. (Crown, $25.) Eighteen centuries in the lives of four families of different cultures residing in a Russian village.
9
7
15
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life, from Asia to San Francisco.
10
9
2
THE DUCHESS, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $21.) An American woman, in Scotland to marry a duke, finds a mysterious stranger more attractive.
11
1
THE DRAGON REBORN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor, $22.95.) The fate of a man doomed to save and then destroy the world: part of the "Wheel of Time" fantasy series.
12
10
11
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
13
12
80
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
14
15
2
IMAJICA, by Clive Barker. (HarperCollins, $23.) A fantasy in which three residents of Earth seek to improve its lot by reuniting it with four other Dominions.
15
11
22
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two Manhattan women, doing research into personal ads, get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
2
3
3
LA TOYA, by La Toya Jackson with Patricia Romanowski. (Dutton, $19.95.) Growing up in a leading show business family, as experienced by Michael Jackson's sister.
3
2
6
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies. (LP)
4
12
4
HARD COURTS, by John Feinstein. (Villard, $22.50.) A journalist's behind-the-scenes look at a year of professional tennis.
5
4
16
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the workings of the Federal Government.
6
8
21
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
7
5
46
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures through the centuries.
8
13
2
J.
EDGAR HOOVER, by Curt Gentry. (Norton, $29.95.) The career of the longtime director of the F.B.I.
9
11
16
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America, past, present and future.
10
9
14
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
11 *
7
11
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
12
6
2
EXPOSING MYSELF, by Geraldo Rivera with Daniel Paisner. (Bantam, $21.50.) The autobiography of the television personality.
13
10
5
ANNE SEXTON, by Diane Wood Middlebrook. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) The life of a gifted poet who was hampered by mental illness.
14
1
THREE BLIND MICE, by Ken Auletta. (Random House, $25.) How ABC, CBS and NBC lost their dominance of the television world during the 1980's.
15
14
14
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
8
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
4
47
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
3
3
51
HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $18.95.) How to find the child you once were that lives within you and use it to deal with today's problems.
4
126
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's financial advice about how to make a personal fortune.
5 *
2
13
DO IT!
LET'S GET OFF OUR BUTS, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $20.) How to cope with the human condition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
HARLOT'S GHOST, by Norman Mailer. (Random House, $30.) Mr.
Mailer's whopping (1,328 pages) novel, full of real as well as imaginary people, takes an epic-size look at world and national events over the last few decades from the point of view of three aristocratic Yankees who work for the C.I.A.
JUMP: And Other Stories, by Nadine Gordimer. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) Stories full of Ms.
Gordimer's usual moral and political intelligence, her painstaking eye for detail, her commitment to social redemption.
STALIN: Triumph and Tragedy, by Dmitri Volkogonov. (Grove Weidenfeld, $29.95.) The author, once head of the Soviet Army's Institute of Military History, renders Stalin much as Western scholars have, but elaborated by previously unavailable detail.
COMANDOS: The CIA and Nicaragua's Contra Rebels, by Sam Dillon. (Holt, $27.50.) Mr.
Dillon, who covered the Nicaraguan rebels for five years for The Miami Herald, offers a devastating report on the contras' abuses and American acquiescence in them.
THE LADY AND THE MONK: Four Seasons in Kyoto, by Pico Iyer. (Knopf, $22.) An affectionate, beautifully written book, arising from curiosity about a land at once so high-tech and so traditional; the author encountered many surprises, love not the least of them.
MATING, by Norman Rush. (Knopf, $23.) Mr.
Rush's first novel builds its sprawling comedy of manners around its female narrator's successful search for the absolutely perfect man.
THE SWEET HEREAFTER, by Russell Banks. (HarperCollins, $20.) The author of "Continental Drift" coolly but generously engages an appalling theme: a town's need to fix the blame for a dreadful school bus accident so the world will make sense again.


Big Screens Catch The Eye
Even in hard times, luxury doesn't languish.
Fred Duesenberg and James Packard, who built splendiferous cars during the Great Depression, didn't lack customers.
Yachts did well, too.
Today, despite the cloudy economic climate, sybaritism of a similar sort flourishes.
According to trade reports, big-screen video installations are hot items.


LE BRAIN JOGGING
What do a ship and a broom have in common?
What synonyms are there for poet?
And what antonyms for reality?
How many heads of government do you know?
There are no right or wrong answers, for the questions are designed solely to prod the mind, and they are plucked from the repertoire of a new French interest nicknamed "le brain jogging."
France has long had a special infatuation with the intellect, so it seems fitting that the French are quickly taking to new programs that exercise the brain and stimulate imagination and memory.
The techniques may vary, but they are all anchored in the growing conviction that the more you oblige the brain to work as you age, the better your chances of staying alert and keeping or even creating an efficient memory.
The different brain-jogging options, developed in the past three years, are all ways of stretching and otherwise provoking and stimulating the minds of the elderly and the middle-aged who want to stay in peak form.
French gerontologists say that people are particularly bothered by what they see as one main result of aging: a failing memory.
But specialists say that memory gaps appear to be as much a result of anxiety, depression or just slackening off as people retire.


Saroyan, Through a Glass Darkly
As Liviu Ciulei has directed it at Arena Stage, you could almost conclude that "The Time of Your Life" was written by Eugene O'Neill.
It wasn't, needless to say.
It was written by William Saroyan in 1939, ran for 185 performances on Broadway and won its author the Pulitzer Prize (which, for his art's sake, he refused).
The oddballs and misfits who've found a home in Nick's Pacific Street Saloon on the San Francisco waterfront were, in Saroyan's mind, representative of the country's glorious diversity, and he considered their willingness to live and let live the very lifeblood of democracy.


Family Matters


AIDS Battle Reverting to 'Us Against Them'
SINCE the early days of the epidemic, people who have AIDS have too often been reviled and ostracized, but as attitudes slowly evolved, something of a consensus seemed to be developing that everyone has a stake in finding a cure.
Beneath this uneasy coalition, however, has been the lingering resentment of those who cannot help blaming the homosexuals and drug users they hold responsible for incubating the disease.


Correction
A picture caption with the Managing column last Sunday about mergers of rival companies reversed the identities of two men.
Albert F. Barber, president of the Consumer News and Business Channel, was at the left; Michael C. Wheeler, former president of the Financial News Network, was next to him, at the right.


Washington Irving Returns to New York
HE was born in the place he described as "the ancient and renowned city of Manhattan, formerly called New Amsterdam, and vulgarly called New York." It became, thanks to him, the home of the fictitious Diedrich Knickerbocker, whose name became a symbol for the city.
He lived his later years and died amid the "drowsy shades of Sleepy Hollow," in the region he peopled with ferocious ghosts and mischievous elves who cavorted and caroused amid "haunted fields, haunted brooks, haunted bridges and haunted houses" and an assuredly haunted Tarrytown churchyard.


Williams Streak Is Stopped
The nation's longest collegiate winning streak came to an end after 23 games 59 minutes 59 seconds yesterday when Williams College, last beaten in 1988, succumbed to a last-second touchdown by Trinity College in Williamstown, Mass.
The touchdown, on a 5-yard pass by Bantam quarterback James Lane to John Mullaney as time expired, brought the final score to 30-27 and capped a furious finish in which four touchdowns were scored in the game's final 2 minutes 47 seconds, three in the last 51 seconds.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 8 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the play "Beau Jest" misidentifies the actor shown at the right.
He is Tom Hewitt.


Free the Government's Plantation
Washington, D.C., with a population of 607,000, has more people than Alaska, Wyoming or Vermont.
But its elected officials have no real power and the city is denied a voting representative in Congress.
The Federal Government treats the District as a colony, controlling local policy on issues ranging from sanitation to abortion and undermining the city's ability to raise revenues.
Washingtonians deserve self-government no less than other Americans.
A bill pending in Congress, H.R. 2482, would admit Washington to the union as New Columbia, the 51st state.
The bill deserves attention and a vote of approval in the House.
But that won't happen until languid Democrats schedule hearings.
The legislators need to provide more than the lip service they've given to statehood in recent years.
Even if statehood fails, debate could suggest intermediate solutions.
The current arrangement is more suited to a dictatorship than a democracy.


To Our Readers
Because of missing data, the charts on New York's Weather in September are not available today.
They will appear next Sunday.


For the Democrats, The Trick Is to Change Concerns Into Votes
EVERYONE knows what America's problems are.
For Maryland state troopers, it's government layoffs.
For Colorado real estate developers, it's savings and loan losses.
For New Yorkers trying to bring civil suits in Manhattan it's logjammed courts.
Of course, it would be difficult to build a Presidential campaign on such narrow issues.
But the five Democrats now running for the Presidential nomination might face the same problem with other issues as well, including education, racial tension, poverty and homelessness.


Miss Burr Wed To C. P. Goss 2d
Allison Joy Burr, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank W. Burr of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., was married yesterday to Chauncey Porter Goss 2d, a son of Representative and Mrs.
Porter J. Goss of Sanibel Island, Fla., and Washington.
The Rev.
John Guest officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church on Fishers Island, N.Y.
Mrs.
Goss, 24 years old, graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father is an executive vice president at Alliance Capital Management in New York.


Padres Ask Riddoch To Stick Around
Padres Manager GREG RIDDOCH has been told the club wants him to stay another year and he seems amenable, at least enough that he and San Diego General Manager JOE MCILVAINE have been holding contract talks.
Riddoch, who took over from JACK MCKEON in July 1990 and led San Diego to a fourth-place tie with Houston, did a little better in the National League West this year.
The Padres clinched third place. (AP)


Woman Held in Stabbing Death
A woman carrying 47 vials of crack was stabbed to death in midtown Manhattan yesterday morning and another woman was charged with the murder, the police said.
The stabbing, at West 42d Street and Eighth Avenue, occurred just after 2 A.M., said Officer Kim Royster, a police spokeswoman.


Aviva Shrock, Executive, Wed
Aviva Shrock, a vice president of Oppenheimer Capital, and Louis Pinto, a vice president of Lehman Brothers, both in New York, were married last evening in the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Justice Harold Silverman of State Supreme Court in the Bronx officiated.
Mrs.
Pinto, 32 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan and received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.
She is the daughter of Drs.
Peter and Pamela Shrock of Roslyn Harbor, L.I.
Her father is a pediatric surgeon at Schneider Children's Hospital of the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park.


Jesuits Won't Reject Amnesty in Salvador Killings
The Jesuit order has made known that it will not oppose an amnesty or other legal reduction of the sentences for two military officers convicted by a Salvadoran court last week in the country's most notorious human rights case, the murders of six Jesuit priests, their cook and her daughter.
While criticizing the failure to convict the actual gunmen and calling for the investigation to go higher than Col.
Guillermo Alfredo Benavides Moreno, who was found guilty of ordering the massacre, the Jesuits said their interest was in eliminating "the culture of death" in El Salvador.


Correction
Because of a transcription error, a sentence in the Garden Q. &amp; A. column last Sunday, about growing cleomes from seed, omitted a word.
The sentence should have read, "But keep in mind that seeds from hybrid plants may revert to the less showy color of one of the parents."


Nothing Ghoulish About Study of Brain
To the Editor:
Regarding "Moscow Saving Great Brains," a Sept. 9 news item about the Moscow Brain Institute, and "Stalin's Brain" (editorial, Sept. 16): The institute's existence was not "revealed" (as if it were a dark secret) in the CBS-TV program "60 Minutes" on Sept. 8, nor was the institute set up by Stalin.
Also wrong is the implication that no scientific results ever came out of the institute.


Social Events
Hospital Fund Campaign  Oct. 7 -- The 113th campaign of the United Hospital Fund for the city's nonprofit hospitals opens with a black tie dinner at the Plaza to honor Suzanne T. Karpas, a trustee of Beth Israel Hospital.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 645-2500.
Theatrical Salute


Woody Plants Need a Jump on Spring
KEEP planting.
And not just hardy spring-flowering bulbs.
There is ample time until the middle of October to set out woody plants, particularly new landscaping shrubs, perennials, grass seed and even trees.
Of course, hardy bulbs can be planted as well, but too many gardeners forget about the fall planting season and believe they have to wait until spring to set out anything else.
The chief reason for setting out woody plants now is to allow the plants time to form a strong root system.
Then when spring does come, the plants will be ready for the big push and flowering.


Confessions of a Nutrition Fanatic
I've given up Eggs Benedict, Eggs Rossini, Eggs Miroir And every omelette Known to man (folded or not).
I've given up grilled Kipper on toast and Kizartma, A Turkish meat stew.
And when I cut an Octopus into Pieces, I don't roll These in flour and slip them into boiling fat!
I take orange peel for Cataracks, For Nervousness passionflower tea.
I take cayenne pepper for Seasickness Even when I'm not on a boat, Blackstrap molasses for Graying Hair, Oranges for Prickly Heat.
And though I would like drink the Water The concentrations of Radium 226 Ranged from 3 to 36 picocuries In well waters in Illinois ...
My sugar's natural My carbohydrates complex I avoid any additive, even when it's been subtracted; Stick to Red #40, Blue #1, and Yellow #5 and #6.
I sip muscat for iron.
I eat rabbit for phosphorus, and shad.
And when I gnaw on chicken bones for calcium before bed,  I wonder it it's true That Captain Cook was saved from a Dangerous Illness By dog bouillon.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about a town house at 19 East 54th Street in Manhattan misstated the construction date.
It was completed in 1900.
The article also misstated the year in which Albert Young, husband of the building's owner, died.
He died in 1895.


Streetscapes: Bryant Park Studios/Beaux Arts Building; Restoring the City's Oldest High-Rise Artists' Studios
FOR decades, the Bryant Park Studios building on the southeast corner of 40th Street and Sixth Avenue has had that gritty midtown look.
But the owner has been carrying on a restoration for several years and soon will start cleaning the facade of this 1901 high-rise artists studio structure, the oldest of its kind to survive in New York.
The movement for common artists studios is usually considered to date to 1856, when the Tenth Street studios went up at 51 West 10th Street.
But buildings put up for studios stayed low until 1879, when the seven-story Sherwood Studios went up at the southeast corner of 57th Street and Sixth Avenue.
It was the first tall building for such a tenancy.


Review/Philharmonic; Temirkanov Conducts
More than any other musician, the conductor is meant to be seen.
Shoulders and arms, hands and eyes, head and hips create a visual model of the music's inner life, a literal embodiment of the score.
The players read the score, but they also rely on the live model standing before them.
In a more limited way, so can an audience, and watching Yuri Temirkanov conduct the New York Philharmonic on Thursday night provided pleasures in itself as well as insight into the music.
Mr.
Temirkanov has been the conductor of the Leningrad Philharmonic Orchestra since 1988, but one doesn't think of him as a Russian stylist; he is too idiosyncratic to be considered a stylist at all.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Endangered Bulbs
Q.
I want to order some spring bulbs, but I've heard there are many endangered species being collected in the wild.
What are they, and how can I be sure that I am not buying them?-- Ruth Hawkins, Baltimore.
A.
You can start by buying from dealers who state that their bulbs are not collected in the wild.
Two such mail-order suppliers are Smith &amp; Hawken, (415) 383-2000, and White Flower Farm, (800) 888-7756).


Who pulls the strings?
LIKE ANY FASHION CAPITAL WORTHY OF THE name, Milan has its share of outsize personalities towering behind the scenes.
Though few have actually had a hand in designing the spring collections that will make their debut in the next few days, all have played a powerful role in shaping Italian style.
One to watch as this week's spectacle unfolds is Donatella Girombelli, the force behind the company called Genny Holding, a one-woman conglomerate that produces the collections of Genny Moda, Byblos and Complice.
Girombelli's steely drive and commercial savvy (her company is worth about $300 million) have placed her in a league with female tycoons like the Fendi sisters and Rosita Missoni.
Last spring, Girombelli's determination to put the sizzle back into her Complice line, which was designed in the past by Claude Montana among others, led her to recruit Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana.
Under their own names, the design team is best known for their kinky contributions to Madonna's wardrobe.


When the Market Sags Under a Big Developer
TO all of the ex's in Jerome Kretchmer's busy life -- ex-assemblyman, ex-city commissioner, ex-political hot-shot -- he can now add one more: ex-developer, at least for the time being.
After building more than 1,400 apartments in New York City and Westchester County, Mr.
Kretchmer has hit the same housing slump that has stymied a lot of other builders and made them contemplate the meaning of life with no new projects to pursue.


Sympathy for Wanton Murder
To the Editor:
I was shocked and dismayed by the immoral viewpoint of the opera "The Death of Klinghoffer." While civilized societies have always condemned wanton murder and shown sympathy for innocent victims, in this opera the reverse is true.


Gorbachev Signs an Accord For Limited Role in I.M.F.
Opening the way for the Soviet Union to receive large-scale Western technical aid to help its transition to a market economy, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev signed an agreement today that grants this country special association status with the International Monetary Fund.
Under the agreement, the I.M.F. will advise the Soviet Union on combating its high inflation, setting up a Western-style banking system, gathering accurate economic statistics, and establishing a social safety net for those hurt most by economic reform.


In Search Of the Foundation Of Youth
On the day after his Philadelphia concert, Tom Petty's brown suede jacket, the same one he wore on stage, hangs on the back of a chair in his hotel room.
When Mr.
Petty himself walks in, his outfit, too, matches that of the previous night: blue jeans, a white shirt, a dark vest.
This is appropriate, because the Tom Petty you get in person is not all that different from the one you get on stage.
Up close, you can see that his blond hair is thinning, his face a bit worn.
Like his music, Mr.
Petty is direct, unpretentious.
He's not too keen on publicity: "Being on the cover of Rolling Stone terrifies me," he says.
But once he gets going, he's a thorough talker; when he hits on a subject, he likes to get to the bottom of it.
And his conversation, like his songs, communicates a sense of conviction.
He's easy to believe in.


The Evolution of Occupational Health
DR.
MARK R. CULLEN, director of the Center for Occupational and Environmental Medicine at Yale University, is also the author or co-author of more than 50 articles and editorials on the effects of job-related stress and exposure to asbestos, lead, oil and solvents.
These occupational diseases have received wider attention recently because of the publication of a study by the State Workers Compensation Commission that concluded that between 750 and 1,700 workers in Connecticut died of such diseases in 1988, the most recent year for which data could be compiled.
In a recent interview at his office in New Haven, Dr.
Cullen discussed occupational health.
Here are some excerpts from the conversation.


Poetry Is Different
To the Editor:
Mark Strand's essay "Slow Down for Poetry" has its points: poetry must be read differently from other forms in print; poetry addresses -- is even borne on -- those human perceptions most difficult to articulate, such as loneliness, pain, joy and art making.
And yet he goes no further; into the public role of the poet, for example, when the particular poet occupies a lofty position as Poet Laureate of the United States.
He never, in fact, used that position to anyone's benefit, unless "take the money and run" is an ethic.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Redding
REDDING lies in Fairfield County just south of Danbury, but it has the rugged terrain of upper New England and a community of residents who fight to maintain its rural character.
"We don't want to see widening of roads," said Henry W. Bielawa, the First Selectman of the 32.2-square-mile town.
"We'd rather have the bumps and turns."


Answering The Mail
Q.
A metal shed in my backyard has been there for many years.
The inside of the metal is in good condition, but the exterior is rusted and mildewed.
How can I prepare this metal for painting?
A.
Scrape off the loose and flaking rust, using a scraper and wire brush.
Wash with 1 part bleach to 4 parts water to clean the mildew and then rinse with plain water.
After it dries, apply a liquid rust converter, special liquids that convert rust on the metal into a coating that forms an excellent foundation for paint.
In addition, the new coating helps prevent further rusting.
When it dries, apply a coat of rust-resistant metal primer and finish with two coats of exterior house or trim paint.


Christopher Hunte, Fashion Designer
Christopher Hunte, a self-taught designer, developed an interest in sewing when he was 7 years old.
He was inspired by his mother and five sisters who are seamstresses.
"Sewing was fun," he said.
Mr.
Hunte, who is 38 years old, moved with his family from Barbados to New York in 1968.
He was in his junior year at La Guardia Community College in Manhattan when he decided to switch from fashion photography to a career in fashion design.
After graduation, he worked for Saks Fifth Avenue and attended Pratt University in Brooklyn, graduating in 1979.


Barns, Symbols of the Past, Are Preserved for the Future
CONNECTICUT'S barns have been put on the endangered-species list.
As fewer people in the state operate farms, the barns that have long dotted the landscape are being torn down.
Some just fall down.
The barns are "symbols of what we used to be," said Mary Neustadter, director of real estate services for the Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation, which recently called the state's barns "threatened sites."


Wall Street; Starting to Count On Castro's Fall
Talk about planning ahead.
It seems that half the world -- certainly half of Southern Florida -- is frantically preparing for the day when Fidel Castro, one of the world's last military dictators, falls or otherwise surrenders power.
Some Cuban-Americans are reserving boats they can use to ship desperately needed supplies to Havana.
Others are selling their homes to raise cash they can use to start businesses there, or are negotiating with American companies to sell their products in Cuba once the market opens up.


Technology; What Packers and Builders Can Learn From the Bees
In recent years, engineers and product designers have increasingly realized something that bees apparently have always known: configuring even a very thin material into a six-sided honeycomb pattern makes it much stronger than it would be in some other shape.
This has become important as companies try to minimize their use of materials that are difficult to recycle and to increase their use of recycled paper products.
As a result, companies have recently been promoting paper honeycomb, which is made of recycled products and is easy to recycle itself, for a variety of uses.


Top East German Spy To Be Released on Bail
A German court removed a detention order for Markus Wolf on Friday, but set an unusually high bail of $150,000 for the release of the former East German espionage chief.
Mr.
Wolf, who planted hundreds of agents in Bonn and other Western capitals during 34 years as head of East Germany's foreign intelligence service, was arrested by German officials last week after he failed to obtain political asylum in Austria.


AFTERMATH OF AN EMERGENCY
I was moved by the story of Angela and Robert Leeds ("Aftermath of an Emergency," by Michael Winerip, Sept. 15).
My first child, a son, fell backward out of my arms at 6 months of age, down the steps of the old Federal house we were restoring.
He did not require hospitalization and was fine, as he is today at age 12 1/2.
At the time, I told my husband, who is a physician, "If this could happen to me, it could happen to anyone."
Your story rights a wrong. LESLIE ROUSELL
Greenwich, Conn.


Karen Strauss Has Wedding
Karen Lilo Strauss, a public relations consultant in Stamford, Conn., and Daniel Edward Nienhauser, a senior manager at Coach Leatherware in New York, were married yesterday at the Young Men's Philanthropic League in New York.
Judith Wank of the Ethical Culture Society performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Nienhauser, 30 years old, graduated from Grinnell College.
She is the daughter of Peter Strauss and Susan Strauss, both of New York.
Her father is the founding president of Pilgrim Press, a Long Island City printing plant.
She is the stepdaughter of Carol Kahn Strauss.


Protecting the Faucets From Winter's Freeze
ORDINARY outdoor faucets, technically called sillcocks, are prone to freezing and bursting in winter.
As a result, they have received much attention from plumbing designers and gadget inventors.
One device that solves the problem is a freeze-proof sillcock.
A specially designed faucet that replaces an ordinary sillcock, it can be installed by soldering.


Blair Nichols Weds Peter Chandler
Stephanne Blair Nichols, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Nichols 3d of Katonah, N.Y., was married yesterday to Peter Cromwell Chandler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen C. Chandler of Bethel, Me.
The Rev.
Richard Ringenwald performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Manchester, Vt.
Mrs.
Chandler, 30 years old and known as Blair, graduated from Connecticut College.
She and the bridegroom founded Metal Mates, a company that sells customized magnets in Boston.
Her father is a vice president at Morgan Guaranty Trust in New York.


Lindsey Plexico Has a Wedding
Anne Lindsey Plexico, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jon L. Plexico of Wellesley Hills, Mass., was married yesterday to Robert Elias Ford Jr., the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Ford of Rochester.
The Rev.
Jerry R. Anderson officiated at St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church in Wellesley Hills.
The bride, who is 26 years old and is known as Lindsey, is a program officer at the Morris and Gwendolyn Cafritz Foundation in Washington.
The organization provides grants for educational, cultural and health purposes.
She graduated cum laude from Colgate University.
Her father is the president of Herbert V. Shuster, a Quincy, Mass., food and drug testing company.


That New Device For Catching Speeders
I have two major problems with the implementation of the photo-radar system.
The first, which was mentioned only briefly in the article, is that summonses have to be issued to a person: in this case, the operator of the vehicle.
Taking a photograph of the license plate will identify the owner, not the operator.
I believe that the supporters of photo-radar seriously underestimate the confusion that will arise when a corporate-owned vehicle is targeted and the summons sent to the company president.
Likewise, when dad gets a summons because junior was speeding in the family car.
Upon whom is the burden of responsibility to sort out who gets the points and fine?


Miss Angilletta Weds
Maryann Rita Angilletta, a financial examiner for the New York Stock Exchange, was married yesterday to John Patrick Hughes Jr., a sales-practice examiner at the exchange.
Msgr.
Dino Zeni officiated at Regina Pacis Roman Catholic Church in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Hughes, 24 years old, graduated from Pace University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Angilletta of Brooklyn.
Mr.
Hughes, 24, graduated cum laude from St.
Joseph's University.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Hughes of Waldwick, N.J.


Al Pacino: Regular Guy Among Ordinary Joes
Al Pacino has at least one peculiarity.
Before agreeing to talk, he insists that interviewers attend a screening of "The Local Stigmatic," a 1985 film based on an obscure one-act play in which he plays a cockney thug so obsessed with celebrity that he brutalizes a minor actor.
Mr.
Pacino's insistence, on this occasion, seems all the more strange since his new movie, "Frankie and Johnny," is opening on Friday, and actors usually appreciate these opportunities to gush about the work at hand.
After the screening, Mr.
Pacino -- good as his word -- shows up for a late dinner at the Ginger Man near Lincoln Center.
He is wearing a black shirt and brown coat, whose unnaturally wide collar lends it the air of a costume.
He seems tired and a little distracted, hardly in the mood to gush.
Upon hearing that the interviewer considered "The Local Stigmatic" very good indeed, in fact, "enlivening," he brightens.
"The reason I wanted you to see it," he says in that familiar rasp, "is because that is what I
do
."


A BUMPIER RIDE FOR NEW YORK TAXIS: Rarities; One Job Women Don't Want
Why are there so few women among New York City's 40,000 yellow cab drivers?
And why is the number dropping so quickly?
The Taxi and Limousine Commission says the number driving medallion cabs fell from 708 in 1989 to 520 in 1991 -- or 1.3 percent of all drivers.
And fewer are on the way.
In 1984, nearly 3 percent of all applicants to the Taxi Drivers Institute were women.
This year, the number may not even hit 1 percent.


Why the Rich Get Smarter
SAVAGE INEQUALITIES
Children in America's Schools.
By Jonathan Kozol. 262 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $20.


The Case of the Game-Show Ploy
The audience screams and claps when signs overhead flash "applause." A boyishly handsome host asks an array of questions, sandwiched between stunts and wisecracks.Three contestants rack up points as they vie for a grand prize: a free trip anywhere in the continental United States.
The game-show format, however, is merely a disguise.
"Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego?," which made its debut on public television last week, is actually a geography lesson.
But please, don't mention that to anyone under the age of 14.
It might ruin the fun.


Business Diary/September 29-October 4
ECONOMY The Family Leave Feud, Part 2


Miracle Is Now Official: The Braves Win It!
The Atlanta Braves stood massed on the infield grass just to the first-base side of the pitcher's mound.
For four minutes, they stood crammed together and watched the television screen high above the center-field seats.
When the San Francisco Giants recorded the last out in their game with the Los Angeles Dodgers, the Braves leaped in the air, ran excitedly toward the dugout and joyously tossed their caps into the stands.
The upstart Braves, the so-called America's team that fell into disrepute by finishing last for three successive seasons, had snatched baseball's sole unclaimed division championship out of the clutches of the Dodgers.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
WHERE ROBBERY IS RIFE
THE Radisson Hotel in Islandia did not have an armed robbery last week.
That needs to be stated because the Radisson was the site of an armed-robbery conference.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Moscow in the days of Konstantin Chernenko, just before Mikhail Gorbachev assumed power, is the subject of THE RUSSIAN SINGER by Leif Davidsen (Random House, $19).
It is an unusually sensitive and trenchant novel, by a Dane who served as a broadcast correspondent in Moscow for four years, about the good and the bad of life in Russia.
In Jorgen Schiott's translation, it is also a well-written suspense story about a Danish diplomat and his affair with a Russian (or, more accurately, Estonian) singer.
It starts with the murder of two women in a hotel room.
One of them was a prostitute, the other a clerk in the Danish Embassy.
Apparently they were part of a pornographic ring.
But was the clerk giving away Danish or NATO secrets to the K.G.B.?
A diplomat in the Danish Embassy is assigned to look into the case.


Festin Charges to Victory in Jockey Club Gold Cup
Festin, the Argentine horse who has earned more than $2 million by charging from last place to first, did it again yesterday when he charged through the homestretch at Belmont Park and snatched the $850,000 Jockey Club Gold Cup from Chief Honcho and Strike the Gold.
It was a classic performance in a classic race for the 5-year-old traveler, who seems to thrive in New York.
He has raced 10 times this year, from California to Massachusetts, but he hadn't won in three starts in four months since he zoomed from last to first to win the Nassau County Handicap at Belmont in June.
And with the same style and the same result on the same track, he repeated the performance in the Gold Cup.


Stretching Lobster for Out-of-Season Dishes
A CHANGE of seasons does not necessarily mean a new list of ingredients.
Often only the preparation is revised.
Consider lobster: in midsummer, it is wonderful to indulge in a shore dinner at a seaside restaurant, with steamed lobsters, corn on the cob, plates of coleslaw and a bib around the neck.
Or, more informally, lobster might be diced in a mayonnaise salad and served on a bun as a lobster roll at a roadside stand.
Also, the lobster club sandwich has become a favorite of young American chefs.


Q and A
Interest on Advance Rent  Question: After taking early retirement I sold a home and moved to Manhattan.
I rented an apartment in a co-op building before I had a new job.
Because I was not employed when I signed the lease, the only way I could get the apartment was to pay the entire year's rent of $21,000, in advance.
Does the management owe me interest earned on the lump-sum payment? . . .
Shirley Granahan, Manhattan  Answer: Yes.
Theodore L. Marks, a lawyer specializing in real estate, said Sec. 7103 of the New York State General Obligations law requires that money given as security or advance rent, if it is in excess of one month, be kept for the benefit of the tenant.
It also requires that in rental properties of six or more units, security or advance rent must be put in interest-bearing accounts.
The tenant has the right to the interest, less 1 percent for administrative costs.
Replacing Appliances  Question: I live in a rent-stabilized apartment in a building converted to a co-op.
I had an old, leaking refrigerator, an oven with a split door and an unrepairable dishwasher.
The landlord was indifferent to my requests for replacement.
I arranged with the superintendent to install replacements at my expense.
Do I have a right to recover my expenses in exchange for a rental increase? . . .Patricia Goodman, Manhatttan Answer: No.
Your landlord is under no obligation to reimburse you.
The laws that cover rent-regulated tenants give them the right to working kitchen appliances.
But landlords can repair appliances or replace them with used ones.
If landlords supply new appliances, however, they may add 1/40th of the cost to the rent and the rent increase becomes permanent.
The leverage that tenants have when faced with owners who will not replace broken appliances is to file complaints with the State Division of Housing and Community Renewal, which can order rent reductions in cases where owners do not provide full services.
You may be able to get your landlord to pay for the appliances if you can show that raising your rent would give him a financial advantage.
The division's rent administration office is at Gertz Plaza, 93-31 Union Hall St., Jamaica, N.Y. 11433 Liability for Lease  Question: Four years ago my husband put his mother into a studio apartment closer to us.
She was able to live alone and pay all her own expenses, but the owner would not rent to her because of her age, 84 years.
My husband signed the lease.
Recently she became ill and had to be moved to a nursing home.
She will not return to the apartment.
We feel his mother may have been the victim of age discrimination in not being able to sign the lease herself.
Will my husband be responsible for the lease?  . .
Judith Lavanga, Randolph, N.J.
Answer As a general rule of law, the person who signs a lease is legally bound by its terms.
But according to Richard Kahn, a Hackensack, N.J., lawyer specializing in real estate, under New Jersey law, if rent is not paid the landlord has the duty to mitigate damages by making a good-faith attempt to find a new tenant who would pay comparable rent.
If a new tenant's rent is lower than what the current lease calls for, or if it takes several months to find a new tenant, the owner may make a claim for the losses.
Mr.
Kahn said the age-discrimination claim would be problematic.
New Jersey statutes do not specifically address age discrimination with regard to public accommodations or real property.
"While clearly the mother-in-law is a member of a protected class," Mr.
Kahn said, "it would be very difficult for her to prove that she was denied the privilege or benefit since she was, in fact, not refused the opportunity to reside in the apartment."
Other factors may have included her financial circumstances at the time.
Moreover, because she lived in the apartment for four years, a claim would be too late.
The New Jersey Division of Civil Rights requires that discrimination claims be brought within 300 days of a claimant's notice of a discriminatory act.


Philadelphia On $4 a Day
Philadelphia's new Daypass allows travelers unlimited rides on the city's public transportation system for one price -- $4.
The pass, introduced by the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority in June, is used on all of the authority's transit routes by bus, streetcar, subway-elevated trains and on the Airport Line, a surface train, the latter limited to one ride either to or from the airport.
Normally a one-way ride on the Airport Line costs $4.75.
All other rides on the system are $1.50.
The Daypass is not predated and the traveler can choose the day on which to use it.
It is valid anywhere within the city for 26 hours -- from 12:01 A.M. on one day through 2 A.M. the next.
The pass is a small folder with see-through sticker on the inside.
The first time the bearer presents it to pay a fare, the sticker is affixed to a paper transfer which shows the date.
The traveler need only show the transfer when boarding vehicles.


Dobbs Ferry Festival Starts Winter Series
"AFTER four years of joyous music making at the Dobbs Ferry Chamber Festival in June," said its founder-director, Ruth Glasser Sommers, "the artists, along with the Masters School, invite you to join us as the celebration continues with our inaugural winter series."
While it isn't quite winter yet, Beethoven's "Kakadu" Variations, Stravinsky's "Histoire du Soldat" (in the composer's own abridgement for clarinet, violin and piano) and Brahms's G minor Piano Quartet are coming to the school next Sunday at 3 P.M.


Soviet Wealth, and Commonwealth
Some Bush Administration officials argue that America should press for a new Soviet confederation or commonwealth, and use as leverage economic aid that the Soviets badly need.
Other strategists would instead use the same leverage to promote Soviet disunion.
Neither approach serves America's best interests.
A new look at those interests seems warranted given the tenuous economic accord reached by the 12 Soviet republics, an accord the U.S.
Ambassador, Robert Strauss, calls vital for getting substantial Western aid.


The Executive Life; Getting Help for Cases For 'Telephonophobia'
After 25 years in the finance industry -- including a decade as senior vice president of a major bank -- a graying, distinguished-looking New Yorker recently found himself out of work, the victim of a corporate "downsizing." Now he spends his days reading trade periodicals, revising his resume and writing letters to potential employers.
He doesn't mind such job-hunting activities, with one exception: making his daily round of phone calls.
"It's awkward to call somebody you've been out of touch with for a long time and explain your situation," said the banker, who asked that he not be identified.
"You think, 'maybe I should have called three months ago, when this first happened.' You don't know how to talk about it with former colleagues; you want help, not sympathy."


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
Consumer credit, in billions
-$0.8
-$0.7
Tuesday
Wholesale trade, percent change
1.0
1.0
Intital jobless claims, in thousands
420
415
Friday
Producer price index, percent change
0.2
0.2
Retail sales, percent change
-0.7
0.2
Wednesday
Treasury seven-year auction
This Week's Developments Thursday: Summary of second-quarter international transactions *
World agriculture supply and demand estimates *
Crop production  Friday: World agriculture production (Sosurce: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Nothing Ghoulish About Study of Brain; Cranial Preoccupations
To the Editor:
"Stalin's Brain" (editorial, Sept. 16) states that "the belief that the shape of a skull determines character was the specious premise of phrenology, a pseudo-science that flourished a century ago."


Letting Youths Go to Night Movies
FOR some parents, going to the movies can be a horror show.
Under state law, people younger than 16 have to be accompanied by an adult guardian after 6 P.M.
That can force parents to sit through movies that they would otherwise choose not to attend.
In Glen Cove, Mayor Donald DeRiggi said that, as a result of many parental complaints, the city passed an ordinance last month allowing children 8 to 16 years old to go to theaters unaccompanied.
Under the law, Mr.
DeRiggi said, a section of the theater has to be made available to the young customers, and a matron available to oversee them.
"Also, the movies must be specifically approved by the State Education Department," Mr.
DeRiggi said.


Food; All-Star Fan Fare
IF BASEBALL IS America's religion, its sacramental feast is peanuts and Cracker Jack, hot dogs and fries.
No statistics are kept on the tonnage of each that are sold in major league parks every season.
But the fans tend to respond to the first bars of the pregame "Star-Spangled Banner" like a congregation to the chime of bells: they rise, inevitably and irrevocably drawn to the stadium's concession stand.
There are many ways of looking at this reflex.
The simplest is that first pitches are thrown at about dinner time.
Physiological hunger should not be underestimated.


...and He Wants To Bury
To the Sports Editor:
I was as offended at William C. Rhoden's naivete as I was with Lawrence Taylor's phony, self-serving remarks on racial tensions that prompted the column.


Seeing Beauty or Problems
INTRODUCING "Traffic Jam," the current show at the New Jersey Center for Visual Arts here, Nancy Cohen identifies two kinds of people: those who see the automobile as an "object of beauty, romance and independence" and those who regard it as the "cause of environmental problems." Ms.
Cohen, who is the show's co-curator with Perijane Zarembok, does not mention another, probably much larger group, which holds both opinions.
The show itself tends toward the positive -- how could it not with the A.A.A.
New Jersey Automobile Club, De Franco Limousine Service and the Summit Car Wash among its sponsors?
Besides, without the internal combustion engine, there would be no United States, much less art shows.


Bag Inspection
To the Editor: In late July, I returned to the U.S. at San Francisco airport, only to experience obnoxious and racist behavior by Customs officers.
Immigration officers directed some passengers to a special Customs line, with an X-ray scanner.
In line for some 45 minutes, I noted that only one person in line was white.
Most were Orientals, many elderly, with a mix of U.S. and foreign citizens.
The X-ray scanner, like those used to scan hand baggage at airports, has conveyor belt about three feet off the ground.
Many passengers were hard put to get the bags up, but the Customs man was impatient, rude, unhelpful and forbade others to help.


Tech Notes; Power From the Sunroof
The Mazda Motor Company is offering the auto industry's first solar-powered appliance available on a production vehicle: a fan to cool a car's interior on sunny days.
The option is offered on Mazda's new 929 luxury sedan.
Besides making the interior more comfortable to enter after a car has been parked in the sun, the device allows the air conditioner to cool the cabin in 30 percent less time than normal, the company said.
While the car is operating, the driver may activate the system to ventilate smoke or dust.


Police Shoot Man on Street in Upper Manhattan
A police officer shot a man to death yesterday morning in upper Manhattan after the man reached for a gun, the police said.
At least two witnesses, however, disputed the police account of the shooting.
The police said that two uniformed officers, Chris McCormack and Mark Saidel, were investigating a complaint of gunshots near the corner of West 188th Street and Amsterdam Avenue at 3:05 A.M. in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan when they saw Thomas Vizeuta walking toward them and called out to him to stop.


Robin E. Osler, Architect, Wed
Robin Elmslie Osler, an architect, and Bruce Allen Matthews, a research fellow at Yale Divinity School, were married yesterday in Phippsburg, Me.
The Rev.
Mary Swanson Pappas, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Phippsburg Congregational Church.
Ms.
Osler, 37 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Virginia, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in architecture from Yale University.
She works as an architectural designer at Lee H. Skolnick Architecture and Design in New York.
She is the daughter of Constance and David W. Osler of Ann Arbor, Mich.
Her father founded David W. Osler Associates, architects in Ann Arbor.
Her grandfather Emil Lorch was the founding dean of the University of Michigan School of Architecture.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Providence, R.I.; Convention Center Project
THE State of Rhode Island is the prime mover and investor in a $290 million convention center project now under construction in downtown Providence.
The state is not only financing the project but it will be the owner of a new hotel and of the landmark Biltmore Hotel, which it is buying from The Providence Journal Company.
Managed by the quasi-public Convention Center Authority, the project is being financed with tax-free revenue bonds.
The authority, arguing that the recession had made it impossible to find a private hotel developer able to finance construction of a needed new hotel, got permission from the General Assembly this year to include the two hotels in the project.


Nancy H. Citrin Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Harold L. Citrin of Kings Point, L.I., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter, Nancy Hope Citrin, and Kenneth Gary Lane, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Lane of New York.
Miss Citrin, 27 years old, was until recently a second vice president of Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a managing director of the financial concern Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in New York.


Rome's Offer to Yugoslavs Sets Off Protests
An unexpected offer by Italy's President to allow Yugoslav federal troops to retreat from Slovenia across Italian territory today set off protests that showed how much this Western-looking land wants to avoid even the smallest infection by Yugoslavia's chaos.
At a news conference Friday in Trieste, a city close to Yugoslavia,President Francesco Cossiga said Rome had agreed to a request by the Serbian-dominated remnants of federal authority in Belgrade to allow federal tanks to cross Italian territory and avoid transiting war-torn Croatia if the army chose to withdraw them from Slovenia, which has pulled out of Yugoslavia.


In the Nation; A Court of Mediocrity
Senate head-counters believe Clarence Thomas will be confirmed this week as the ninth Justice of the Supreme Court.
That may result in a strengthened conservative majority.
It certainly will strengthen the Rehnquist Court's position as one of the least distinguished of modern times.
The current Justice who achieved the highest position in pre-Court life is Byron White, who was Deputy Attorney General when he became the only high court appointee of John F. Kennedy.
That slightly outranks Chief Justice William Rehnquist, who was an Assistant Attorney General in the Nixon Administration.


Carrie Blessing Has a Wedding
Carrie Lynn Blessing, a public relations associate at the New York Public Library, was married yesterday to Robert Cameron Keith, a sales representative for the Winans-McShane Paper and Packaging Company in Bernardsville, N.J.
The Rev.
Dana Fearon, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Edith Memorial Chapel at the Lawrenceville (N.J) School.
Mrs.
Keith, 27 years old, graduated from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norbert J. Blessing of Belle Mead, N.J.
Her father is a founder and retired president of Blessing/White, a management training and development company in Princeton, N.J.
Her mother, Joan Blessing, is the Mayor of Montgomery Township, N.J.


WORRIES ABOUT WOOD SMOKE
EVEN IN AN AGE when so much that is fun is bad for your health, there would seem to be no harm in taking a deep breath of crisp country air.
But a growing number of local governments are trying to curb the very thing that gives country air a romantic aura: wood smoke.
Wood smoke is a major cause of air pollution in dozens of towns, primarily in the West, where local weather conditions prevent the smoke from dissipating.
Burning wood produces carbon monoxide and other noxious compounds, which, in concentrations commonly found indoors and out, can aggravate conditions such as asthma and bronchitis and cause headaches and allergies.
Recent studies suggest that wood smoke may also contribute to chronic lung disease and cancer.
"A lot of areas have trouble meeting Federal clean-air standards because of wood smoke," says John Calcagni, a director of the Environmental Protection Agency's Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards.


Why Emergency Rooms Are on the Critical List
A YOUNG man dies of an overlooked stab wound.
A pregnant woman in the final stages of labor is refused admittance to a hospital.
To many health care professionals, these incidents are the shocking but not surprising results of the chaos in New York City's system of emergency medical care.
The death of Yankel Rosenbaum at Kings County Hospital Center in Brooklyn last August and the birth of a son to Charlesetta Brown in the admissions room of Harlem Hospital are described by some doctors and administrators as the unforgivable but inevitable fault lines in an overstressed system.


Review/Film Festival; Police Duty and Racism In Mamet Melodrama
Having written and directed "House of Games" and "Things Change," two dark, exquisitely controlled comedies, David Mamet has now made "Homicide," a police melodrama that means to be far more than a police melodrama, which is its problem.
Somewhere along the way, the movie loses its identity and becomes -- like Bobby Gold (Joe Mantegna), its central character -- a victim of its own imperfectly realized longings.


Bambi Boom May Soften Princeton Gun Ban
In one of the latest skirmishes here between deer and people, a kamikaze buck stormed through the window of Jordan's gift shop on Sept. 21, sending glass, fur and merchandise flying.
To many residents, it was another piece of evidence that for too long, the town had fought its deer problem with one hand tied behind its back.
That may change soon.
Last Monday, the Township Committee unanimously voted to introduce an ordinance that would again allow hunting with firearms here.


Filling a Niche and Making It French
Galeries Lafayette, the famous French department store that opened a branch in Trump Tower last week, is aiming to make its mark in a tough retail environment by filling a niche the major stores have abandoned: a European viewpoint on fashion for a youthful customer.
The opening attracted throngs of curious shoppers.
Some loved the store.
Others were left cold.
But all agreed that it was different.


Quotation of the Day
"It's exciting now -- like a constant carnival. But it's completely changed the face of the town. A lot of the older people feel badly about it. We have a lot of good restaurants now. But you have to go out of town to buy clothes, or just about anything else. And we don't recognize the faces in town anymore." -- Bob Harlan of Deadwood, S.D., where casino gambling was approved two years ago.  [ 1:2. ]


STARMAN
I assume William Grimes had his tongue firmly in cheek while writing his admiring profile of astrologer Patric Walker ("Starman," Sept. 15).
But polls indicate that millions of Americans actually do believe what Walker asserts -- that the motions of the planets against the sky influence their lives and that astrologers can divine these influences.
So I think it worth mentioning, as your article did not, that astrology has failed every competent empirical test to which it has been put.
Horoscopes may be fun to read, and may fulfill an oracular function of ancient interest, but the idea that their pronouncements gain authenticity by virtue of their having been derived from star charts is the purest moonshine.
TIMOTHY FERRIS
San Francisco


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19
Broad cuts in Soviet nuclear arms, including the elimination or reduction of a range of tactical weapons based on land, sea and air, were outlined by President Gorbachev in response to President Bush's earlier announcement on weapons cuts.
Page 1


Chess
What happens so much of the time happened again in this year's United States invitational championship, held July 28 to Aug. 9 in Los Angeles: the winner, the 17-year-old Brooklyn grandmaster Gata Kamsky, did not take any of the special prizes.
These awards, established by Dr.
Craig Crenshaw, reward different types of artistry in individual games.
Thus, the "most interesting combination" prize was taken by International Master Igor Ivanov of Dominguez Hills, Calif., for his defeat of Yasser Seirawan, a Seattle grandmaster.
The "best swindle" prize was won by Grandmaster John Fedorowicz of New York for turning a lost game into a victory against Grandmaster Patrick Wolff of Somerville, Mass.


Now a Prince Among Men
In 1984, Prince may have thought he could do no wrong.
His soundtrack album for the movie "Purple Rain" was on its way to selling 13.5 million copies worldwide, and he had crossed genre and color lines in multifarious directions.
Less than a decade later, after numerous hits and misses (including "Graffiti Bridge," the 1990 sequel to "Purple Rain"), Prince has become an outsider.
He has been blind-sided by hip-hop; the rise of rap suddenly made him feel old-fashioned and on "Diamonds and Pearls" (Paisley Park/ Warner Brothers 25379; cassette and CD) he scrambles to catch up.
As a musician, Prince comes from the era before hip-hop.
He plays instruments (guitars, keyboards, drums) rather than turntables; he thinks like a band rather than a sonic collagist.
To assimilate a style, he learns its structure instead of electronically sampling it.


Gretchen Kaimer and Randolph Boone Marry
Gretchen Anne Kaimer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Karl Kaimer of Warren, N.J., was married yesterday to Randolph Frederick Boone, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Boone of Grosse Pointe Woods, Mich.
The Rev.
Dr.
James E. Morris officiated at the Presbyterian Church of Basking Ridge, N.J.
Mrs.
Boone, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia.
She works in the accounting department of R. S. Crum &amp; Company, a distributor of valves and fittings in Mountainside, N.J.
Her father is the president of R. S. Crum, and her husband, 26, is a sales representative there.
Mr.
Boone graduated from Montclair State College.
His mother teaches at the Cathedral School in Detroit.
His father heads Pioneer Consulting, a marketing consulting concern in Grosse Pointe Woods.


TriBeCa West
To the Editor:
Alan Oser's article in the Sept. 22nd Real Estate section about Freddie Mac's multifamily workouts in New York gave a good assessment of the situation.
He was able to weave together the complexities of the secondary market's participation in apartment lending in the Bronx.


The Wisconsin Arrives in Philadelphia to Begin Its Retirement


Talking: Asbestos; Hazardous To a Sale? Maybe Not
ALTHOUGH the American Medical Association assured the public as recently as August that asbestos in the home is not hazardous unless it is frayed or crumbling, permitting the particles to spin off into the air, it can still become a significant factor at the time of sale, brokers say.
The seller may worry that its presence could frighten a potential buyer.
Or a potential buyer may stay potential unless the asbestos is removed.
Or the lender may insist on removal or encapsulation before providing a mortgage loan.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Navratilova Earns a Record Victory


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 6, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
2
6
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
3
2
Q-IN-LAW, by Peter David. (Pocket, $4.99.) The marriage of members of rival spacefaring families is menaced by a powerful force: a "Star Trek" story.
4
7
THE WOMEN IN HIS LIFE, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The rise of a tycoon and his relationships with five women.
5
4
HARVEST, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $5.99.) Turmoil in a Jewish family during the turbulent 1960's.
6
5
BATTLEGROUND, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.95.) The Marines' struggle for Guadalcanal.
7
2
BUFFALO GIRLS, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $5.99.) Calamity Jane and her friends seek to recapture the excitement of the old Wild West by joining Buffalo Bill's show in London.
8
37
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their immigrant mothers.
9 *
6
UNDER SIEGE, by Stephen Coonts. (Pocket, $5.95.) Chaos in Washington when the kingpin of the Medellin drug cartel is brought there for trial.
10
7
TIME BOMB, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $5.99.) A child psychologist tracks down the perpetrators of crimes spawned by hatemongers.
11 *
1
QUESTION QUEST, by Piers Anthony. (Avon, $4.99.) A woman is sent to hell to rescue a missing sorcerer: part of the "Xanth" fantasy series.
12 *
11
THE MUMMY, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Ramses the Great and Cleopatra return to life in Edwardian England.
13
2
SWEET FORTUNE, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) A freewheeling young woman has problems: should she marry the man chosen for her by her dictatorial father?
14
4
THE ROWAN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Ace, $4.95.) The coming of age of a young woman in a universe governed by telepathy.
15
10
SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.95.) The ordeals of a female cop on the trail of a Florida con man.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
15
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents and from them learns the ways of mountain men and the Indians.
2
21
WHEN RABBIT HOWLS, by the Troops for Truddi Chase. (Jove, $4.95.) A woman voices the 92 personalities that live within her.
3
20
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
4
12
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
5
2
GET TO THE HEART, by Barbara Mandrell with George Vecsey. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of the country-music singer.
6 *
98
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.
7
413
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
8
13
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
9 *
29
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
10
1
FRIDAY NIGHT LIGHTS, by H. G. Bissinger. (Harper Perennial, $10.) A high school football season in Odessa, Tex., and what it reveals about contemporary culture.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
1
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
62
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
8
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
42
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
5
21
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Amy Mendillo Weds
Amy Coxe Mendillo, a food editor at Gourmet magazine, and Donal Carl Fox Mastrangelo, an account manager for Xerox, both in New York, were married yesterday in Branford, Conn.
The Rev.
Richardson A. Libby Jr., an Episcopal priest, and the Rev.
Donal R. Fox, a Roman Catholic priest and an uncle of the bridegroom, officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Mastrangelo, 30 years old, graduated from Vassar College.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John J. Mendillo of Naples, Fla.
Mr.
Mastrangelo, 29, graduated from Hamilton College.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Angelo A. Mastrangelo of New Vernon, N.J.


Multiculturalism Divides More Than It Unites; Everyone's Heritage
To the Editor:
My feelings about multiculturalism mirror those of Hugh B. Price (Op-Ed, Sept. 23).
When I was growing up in Queens in the 1940's and early 50's, my public education never taught me that Jews played more than a shadowy role in world and American history.
At home, we quietly swelled with pride at the sight of an occasional Jewish ballplayer or political candidate on our new television.


Shooting Puts Focus on Korean-Black Frictions in Los Angeles
The grainy videotape, in pantomime, shows an angry tussle over a $1.79 bottle of orange juice at the counter of a Korean grocery.
It shows the customer, a 15-year-old black girl, turning as if to walk away, then it shows a woman raising a pistol and firing a single, fatal shot into the back of the girl's head.
The videotaped shooting, which has been shown repeatedly on television, has become the focus of rising tensions between Koreans and blacks in this city, where increasing ethnic diversity is bringing with it increasing frictions.


In Southern India, a Glimpse of Asia's High-Tech Future
Most people here still travel by bicycle, bus, motor scooter or on foot, and power outages are frequent.
But with a growth rate surpassing any other major Indian city, Bangalore has achieved a reputation as the Silicon Valley of India -- turning what was once a sleepy community into a bustling center of high-tech commerce, replete with traffic jams and honking Mercedes-Benz automobiles.
Several top American computer companies, including Hewlett-Packard, 3M, Texas Instruments and the Digital Equipment Corporation, have set up operations here, vying to supply hardware and software to a technology-hungry Asia.
The companies hope to exploit vast markets in India, which has middle class estimated at more than 120 million people, and in other nations where affluence is growing.


In Knicks' Lineup, Fuzzy's Role Is Clear
The Knicks went south last week, to their camp in Charleston, S.C., leaving behind a small staff to protect the fort and a higher authority to safeguard Andrew (Fuzzy) Levane.
If he had been up to it, Fuzzy Levane would have been on the plane with Dave Checketts, Pat Riley, Ernie Grunfeld, the assistant coaches, the public relations staff, Dr.
Norman Scott and his fellow scouts and close friends, Red Holzman and Dick McGuire.


Jill Fink Is Married
Jill Leslie Fink, an associate at Morrison, Mahoney &amp; Miller, and Joseph Leonard Faber, an associate at Hill &amp; Barlow, both Boston law firms, was married last evening.
Rabbi Eliot Somers officiated at the Four Seasons restaurant in Boston.
Mrs.
Faber, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and received a law degree from Northeastern University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold Fink of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Mr.
Faber, 24, graduated from Harvard University and has a law degree from Boston University.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry Faber of Rockland, Me.


Making a Difference; Getting By on 3 Hours' Sleep
A little more than a week ago, Jack Berdy closed a door on one part of his life: He completed the sale of On-Line Software International Inc. of Fort Lee, N.J., a company he started more than 20 years ago.
The sale, to Computer Associates International Inc. of Garden City, L.I., for about $130 million in cash, frees Mr.
Berdy to concentrate on the new part of his life: becoming a doctor.


Making It and Faking It at Oxford
DIRTY TRICKS
By Michael Dibdin. 241 pp. New York: Summit Books. $18.


DOWN TO EARTH
EVERYONE SEEMS TO BE FEELING THE RESTRAINED MOOD of the 1990's -- including the folks at the International Home Furnishings Market in High Point, N.C.
At this mecca of mainstream furniture design, the kind of opulent features that flourished in the 80's -- gilt and velvet, shiny lacquers and trompe l'oeil surfaces -- are no longer politically correct.
When the nation's largest wholesale furniture fair opens on Oct. 17, for nine days, the look will be low-key, the feeling earthy.
"There's no question that manufacturers are taking into account a very different set of values than they were a decade ago," says Robert Sonneman, a lighting designer who will introduce his first collection of furniture and fabrics this fall.
"People want solid pieces with intrinsic value, furniture you can put your feet up on."


Yankees and Mets: The Forecast; Michael Must Answer Fans' Cries for Help
If the excitement has been so overwhelming that you forgot to check the calendar, if football on the brain has distracted you from the baseball bunch in the Bronx, then reach for the box of tissues because the Yankees end their season today.
Tears of joy?
You decide.
While the players disperse and carry their tales of frustration home, General Manager Gene Michael is left to ponder an off season that is the most crucial in some time.
He has difficult decisions to make to insure that the weeping will stop.


POSTINGS: Price Cuts in Cos Cob; Bank Cranks Up Stalled Condos
A casualty of the housing slump in New York's suburbs appears to be recovering, but only after two years of struggle and deep price cuts.
The Bank of Boston, which had taken over 39 nearly completed condominium town houses at 453 Putnam Avenue in the Cos Cob section of Greenwich, Conn., reopened sales of the units last month and has sold 12 at prices of $199,000 to $241,000.
The original prices had been $300,000 to $360,000.


Miss Fein Weds D. T. Harmon
Carrie Susan Fein and David Todd Harmon, both lawyers, were married yesterday by Rabbi Joseph P. Sternstein at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Harmon, 29 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Smith College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from New York University.
She was an associate until recently at the law firm of Hall, Dickler, Lawler, Kent &amp; Friedman in New York.
The bride is the daughter of Bernice L. Fein and the late Dr.
Marvin M. Fein of Westfield, N.J.
Her father, who was a senior vice president of Dart Industries in Bloomfield, N.J., founded the Corporation for the Application of Rutgers Research in Piscataway, N.J.
Her mother teaches the fifth grade at the Jefferson School in Westfield, N.J.
The bridegroom, 32, a senior associate in the law firm of Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander &amp; Ferdon in New York, graduated from Tufts University and received a law degree from Syracuse University.
He is a son of Bernard Harmon and the late Judith S. Harmon of East Hills, N.Y.
His father heads the U.S.
Truck Body Company in Deer Park, L.I.
His mother was a kindergarten teacher in East Meadow, L.I.


CAMPUS LIFE: California-Davis; New Phase Begun In Sludge Cleanup At Radiation Site
The University of California at Davis, in conjunction with the United States Department of Energy, has started hauling away radioactive sludge from huge septic tanks at what was the Laboratory for Energy Related Health Research.
Campus officials said the sludge removal is the second phase in a year-old project to clean up the site, which has been leased by the Energy Department since 1956 to test the effects of long-term exposure to low levels of radiation.
The 15-acre site, which is a mile south of the campus and is owned by the university, comprises 16 buildings and a number of outdoor kennels, which housed the beagles used in the laboratory's experiments.


Bambi Boom May Soften Princeton Gun Ban
In one of the latest skirmishes here between deer and people, a kamikaze buck stormed through the window of Jordan's gift shop on Sept. 21, sending glass, fur and merchandise flying.
To many residents, it was another piece of evidence that for too long, the town had fought its deer problem with one hand tied behind its back.
That may change soon.
Last Monday, the Township Committee unanimously voted to introduce an ordinance that would again allow hunting with firearms here.


Yankees and Mets: The Forecast; Harazin Aiming to Put A Stop to the Hurting
Al Harazin, asked recently if he didn't feel he would be dealing from a hurting hand in the great baseball card game of off-season trades, smiled.
"Probably," said Harazin, who will take over as general manager of the Mets on Monday.


Ms. Lief Wed To Hal Thayer
Margaret Ann Lief, the director of special events for Evan Picone Sportswear, and L. Harrison Thayer 3d, a vice president and the director of corporate communications for Financial Guaranty Insurance Company in New York, were married yesterday in Manhattan.
The Rev.
F.
Forrester Church officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls.
Mrs.
Thayer, 34 years old, graduated from Florida State University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis E. Govett of Tallahassee, Fla.
Her father is a retired regional director in north Florida for the United States Department of Labor.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.
Mr.
Thayer, 39, graduated cum laude from Amherst College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Known as Hal, he is a son of E. Sherrill Thayer of Boston and Ponte Vedra, Fla., and the late Mr.
Thayer 2d.
His mother is a consultant in Ponte Vedra for Travel Anywhere, a Bedford, N.H., travel agency.
His father was a senior partner at the Boston law firm of Hale &amp; Dorr.


Haiti Democracy, Such as It Was, Is Ended by A Chaotic Coup
AN indignant world endowed with newly activist reflexes almost immediately began to organize a strong reaction last week after a mutiny by Haitian soldiers turned into a bloody rout of supporters of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
The mutiny quickly forced the elected priest-turned-president into exile on Monday.
While statements of condemnation rained down from all over the hemisphere and as far away as Moscow, the Organization of American States and other international bodies began to seek a strategy for quickly returning the deposed President to power.


Sunday Menu; Mussels With Pasta: Simple but Flavorful
The way mussels are sold now, it's a cinch to prepare them.
They have been cleaned, debearded and packaged in plastic bags.
All that is left to do is the rinsing and cooking.
This simple recipe finds its flavor in the reduction of the liquid in which the mussels have been cooked.
The brininess of the sea combines with the garlic and tomatoes to provide a richness that belies the lack of more than a touch of olive oil.


And Not a Personal Computer in Sight
It is the office of the future that looks like a relic from the past: people working with note pads, blackboards and Post-it Notes, and not a personal computer in sight.
It's a place where nerdy-looking shirt badges are de rigueur.
What makes this scene state-of-the-art-to-be is that the pads, boards, Post-its and badges are all "talking" to each other via tiny infrared light-emitting diodes or radio transmitters.


STRANGERS AT THE GATE
The clamor of immigrants at the various borders of Western Europe reminds me of the mobs at Louis XVI's gates ("Strangers at the Gate," by Judith Miller, Sept. 15).
These people have come to get a piece of the incredible wealth their exploitation has helped build.
Europe has to face the fact that its gleaming citadels were raised with more than just some sort of innate superiority.
It has only to look to its 500 years of imperialism to see the roots of its present problem.
The main chunks of the immigrant population in most of these countries are from former colonies.
SHADI SHEYBANI
New York, N.Y.


Ms. Halloran Has a Wedding
Charlotte Gibson Halloran, the director of research in the Mayor's Office of Drug Abuse Policy, and Phillip Joseph Schemel, a vice president at Societe Generale, both in New York, were married yesterday by the Rev.
Robert Hater at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Lord Christ the King in Cincinnati.
The bride, who is 30 years old and is known as Gibson, graduated from Duke University and has a master's degree in public policy from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Charlotte and James W. Halloran of Cincinnati.
Her father is a partner in the Cincinnati law firm of Cors &amp; Bassett.
Her mother is a postdoctoral fellow in psychology at University Hospital in Cincinnati.


Answering The Mail
Q.
A metal shed in my backyard has been there for many years.
The inside of the metal is in good condition, but the exterior is rusted and mildewed.
How can I prepare this metal for painting?
A.
Scrape off the loose and flaking rust, using a scraper and wire brush.
Wash with 1 part bleach to 4 parts water to clean the mildew and then rinse with plain water.
After it dries, apply a liquid rust converter, special liquids that convert rust on the metal into a coating that forms an excellent foundation for paint.
In addition, the new coating helps prevent further rusting.
When it dries, apply a coat of rust-resistant metal primer and finish with two coats of exterior house or trim paint.


Ms. Wood Weds R. J. Siracusa
Sarah Jane Wood, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Wood of Franklin Lakes, N.J., was married Sept. 15 to Ronald John Siracusa, a son of Joseph J. Siracusa of San Diego and the late Patricia Siracusa, in Franklin Lakes.
Msgr.
Carl D. Hinrichsen officiated at Most Blessed Sacrament Church.
The bride, 24 years old, graduated from James Madison University.
She is an account executive at Leslie Fay Petites Collection, a New York women's dress manufacturer.
Her father is chairman, president and chief executive of the Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Company in Montvale, N.J.


Ms. Lynch Wed To O. P. Burden
Jean Elizabeth Poor Lynch, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George R. Poor of Marblehead, Mass., was married yesterday to Ordway Partridge Burden, a son of Margaret L. Burden of New York and the late Ambassador William A. M. Burden.
The Rev.
John Andrew, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Church in New York.
Mrs.
Burden graduated from Boston University and is a singer and songwriter.
Her father is a yachtsman.
She is a granddaughter of the late Walter E. Poor, a founder and chairman of the Sylvania Electric Company.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.


Rx for a System in Crisis
For half an hour, Edward Dillon has been watching television in a small basement room at the V.A.
Medical Center in White River Junction, Vt., where he is an outpatient.
It's not a talk show or movie that holds his attention, but a video in which patients and physicians speak in stark terms about prostate surgery.
Dillon, a 74-year-old retired building inspector, has an enlarged prostate, a condition affecting more than 300,000 American men over age 50 each year.
It is not life threatening, but causes such unpleasant symptoms as abdominal pain and difficulty urinating.
Dillon's doctor asked him to watch the video to get a broad range of opinions about the benefits and drawbacks of the operation.
Some patients in the video say they are glad they had the surgery because they no longer experience pain and frustration trying to urinate.
But others plainly regret it.
Prostate surgery can damage the sphincter muscle, causing retrograde ejaculation, or dry orgasms.
One man said that he was stunned at the effect the operation had on his sex life.


Headliners; Language Barrier
What could be worse for an overachiever than under-recognition?
Justin Dangler, a Yorktown High School junior with an impressive 3.93 grade point average and a fine list of extracurricular activities, feared it would all have been for naught without membership in the National Honor Society.
So when a faculty selection committee turned down his application, Justin's parents sued for $2 million, charging that he was being barred from the society in retaliation for his parents' many complaints about Yorktown High over the years.
Last week, the court ruled against the Danglers, saying that the main reason Justin was turned down was that 9 of his 20 teachers gave him mediocre scores on character.
In particular, they disliked his use of obscene language.
Justin took it hard.
"When colleges take a look at my application," he said, "they're going to see an incredible record, and they're going to say, 'Why isn't this kid in the National Honor Society -- what's wrong with him?' "


Services: A Boom Area Goes Bust
It WAS the boom area of the economy in the 1980's, and the bust area in the current recession.
Now the economic statistics show that the service sector is once again starting to hire workers.
But the catch may be that hiring is still at a low level in the precise area that this economy depends on to provide a push.
"This really undermines the growth in purchasing power that consumers need to sustain recovery," said Stephen S. Roach, an economist at Morgan Stanley.


Rangers Close In On Richter Contract
Rangers General Manager Neil Smith was close today to signing Mike Richter to a novel one-year contract that could be quickly extended at a substantial pay increase.
The deal would allow the free-agent goaltender to start Monday night in the Rangers' home opener at Madison Square Garden against Boston, and would officially kick off the next round of trade talks involving John Vanbiesbrouck, the backup.
After speaking by telephone today with Herb Pinder, the agent for Richter, Smith said he was very optimistic that the contract could be agreed upon Sunday.
Although Smith would not indicate the length or terms of the proposed deal, one person involved in the negotiations said the two sides were close to agreement on a one-year contract in the $500,000-to-$600,000 range.


Mommy Oldest
SHE'S BEING called "the mother of all mothers." Leontina Albina is 65 years old and claims to be the mother of 64 children.
A year ago, the Chilean woman was included in the Guinness Book of Records, with 55 documented births.
Leontina Albina is pregnant again, and is expected to deliver in January.
She may give birth to twins or triplets, as she often has in the past.
Her fecundity is a medical mystery.
How can a woman be so fertile?
Why has she never gone into menopause?
Is she riding some riptide of hormone?
The answer could unlock a Pandora's box of new reproductive information.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the wedding of Lauren Andersen and Jonathan Lintott rendered the bridegroom's surname incorrectly and misstated the address of the bride's parents, Drs.
H.
Willids and Shirley R. Andersen.
They live in Locust Valley, L.I.


Review/Film; A Space Warrior Learns Suburban Ways
"I spend more time saving worlds than living in them; sometimes I wonder why," says Shep Ramsey, a space warrior played by the wrestling star Hulk Hogan in "Suburban Commando." It is the only moment of reflection for the gruff but kindly character whom Mr.
Hogan, with his twinkly eyes and shoulder-length locks, plays like a macho Santa Claus
"Suburban Commando," which opened yesterday at local theaters, finds Shep temporarily marooned on earth while his spacecraft is being recharged.
While waiting to return to combat, he rents a room from Charlie Wilcox (Christopher Lloyd), a mild-mannered architect who lives with his wife, Jenny (Shelley Duvall), and two children in a southern California town.


POSTINGS: 1880's Victorian; Restoration, Not Razing For Burned Rowhouse
One of the few surviving rowhouses on Central Park West was gutted by fire last December, and although the building, No. 245, between 84th and 85th streets, was damaged enough to justify demolition despite its inclusion in the Upper West Side Historic District, work is under way to save its exuberant brick and sandstone facade.
The five-story house, once one of seven high-Victorian confections on the block, was built in the 1880's to a design by Edward L. Angell, who also designed Columbus Avenue's Hotel Endicott.
Although the exterior survived the fire, the top floor and half of the facade was pulled down by fire officials shortly afterward as a safety measure, and must be rebuilt.


Susan Turberg and Scott Bondurant Are Wed
Susan Parsons Turberg, an associate marketing manager at the Pepsi-Cola Company in Itasca, Ill., and Eugene Scott Bondurant, an assistant vice president at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in Chicago, were married yesterday in a Quaker ceremony at Swarthmore Friends Meetinghouse in Swarthmore, Pa.
Mrs.
Bondurant, 30 years old, graduated from Skidmore College and has an M.B.A. from Duke University, as does her husband.
She is a daughter of Phillip A. Turberg of Wallingford, Pa., and the late Ramsay Parsons Turberg.


Stamps
A New Americas Stamp
This year's Americas issue from the United States Postal Service serves as a sharp reminder that, despite the hoopla building up over the 500th anniversary of the first voyage by Columbus to the Western Hemisphere, he did not "discover" America.
The stamp, a 50-cent commemorative airmail, is part of an annual joint issue by the 25 nations of the Postal Union of the Americas, Spain and Portugal.
The stamp is to be released on Saturday in Anchorage.


The Executive Computer; Software to Help Companies Plan Product Introductions
Business insight is a new expert system that purports to help businesses find the best strategies for introducing a product.
Even when it is not used for product introductions, Business Insight is valuable for clarifying a company's goals and for building better understanding among members of a project team.
Expert-system programs are also known as knowledge bases, and they operate on the principle that business knowledge and experience can be collected, codified and made accessible through a computer program.
An executive asks the computer how to solve a problem, and the computer either comes up with a suggestion or, in the process of sifting through variables, helps executives focus and come up with their own solutions.


Michael Norman's Sad Remainders
To the Editor:
I sympathize with Michael Norman's sense of loss upon learning that his book, precious to him in its conception and arduous in its birth, was to be remaindered ("When an Author's Words Are Sold by the Pound," Sept. 15), but I would console him by reminding him that the book is not dying; it is actually being translated to a higher plane of existence where it may well find grateful, loyal, enthusiastic,
true
readers.
I speak, of course, of the remainder tables, whether tucked discreetly in the back of bookstores or pawed over in less dignified emporiums.
Only rarely can I afford new hard-cover books, so I ferret out remainder tables avidly, and feel voluptuously rich to stagger home with 6 or 10 books for the price of one new current title.
I am sorry that my windfall marks the author's loss -- but I swear, savoring a remaindered book is a more intimate experience than chuffing through one still in print: when I read a remaindered book I feel a closer relationship with the author, as though everyone else -- the editors, salesmen, advertisers and even (forgive me, dear writers) the larger public -- has finally gone away and left me alone with an unappreciated treasure.


Beehive-Style Beds at DeGaulle
Airline passengers in transit at airports often yearn for a real bed and a good shower, and at a reasonable price.
This is now possible inside Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris because of the opening last month of a Japanese-inspired beehive hotel called Cocoon on the boutique level of the No. 1 terminal.
In its French version, the beehive is made of 60 soundproof air-conditioned cubicles each containing bed, table, TV and telephone, electric clock, small closet and a tiny adjoining shower room with toilet, washbasin and shower.
Unlike their Japanese counterparts, which are so small that one has to crawl in on hands and knees, these units are more like a reduced version of a hotel room without a window.
A single room, including the shower unit, measures 9 feet 4 inches by 7 feet 8 inches with a height of 7 feet 8 inches.
A double room is 10 feet 4 inches by 7 feet 8 inches.
The cubicles are painted in soft pastel shades of blue, green or pink, and have one mirrored wall.


Manhattan Was for Lovers
To the Editor:
As an old acquaintance of Alfred Chester I read Edward Field's memoir ("Among the Tangerinos: The Life, Madness and Death of Alfred Chester," Sept. 15) with interest and soon found myself back with the young Chester at 4 Jones Street in the late 1950's.
There, in Jean Garrigue's two-room top floor apartment, were a few of her many friends, including a young woman violinist who was invited to meet me.
She was very young, attractive and excited to be in Manhattan; my only contact with her was helping her insert her new contact lenses.
Alfred Chester, with his young pianist companion, held forth on the Europe they had just left, but neither Jean nor I noticed that the young pianist and young violinist had "exchanged secret signals," as Jean later said.
Alfred's pianist friend soon said, "I'm going with her to get some sheet music," and Alfred sternly objected, but soon relented.
And away they went down the stairs and out of his life.


State Officials Draw Fire For Delays On Housing
HOUSING advocates across Connecticut say they are dismayed by the dismantling of the state's housing programs.
Millions of dollars have been cut from the budgets of programs to develop low-cost housing, effectively gutting them, and some programs have been eliminated entirely.
And critics contend that state officials have largely ignored groups that, by statute, are supposed to provide recommendations on housing policy.
A spokeswoman for Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., Michele Sullivan, said the problem is timing.
The Governor has been busy with a budget crisis, she said.
But Lisl Standen of Kent, a member of the state's Central Housing Committee for more than 10 years and its chairwoman for 6 years, recently stepped down, saying that the board -- established to advise the State Housing Department, the legislature and the Governor -- has been ignored.


Bridge Matches Close In Japan Tournament
Most of the quarterfinal matches in the NEC World Team Championships here, played under the auspices of the World Bridge Federation, were closely contested today.
In the Bermuda Bowl for Open Teams, with two-thirds of the 96-deal matches completed, one American team had a small advantage but the other was in deep trouble.
United States I, with Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell leading the attack, were ahead by the modest margin of 5 imps against the defending champions Brazil.
But United States II trailed by 83 against the dark-horse Iceland team and is virtually certain to be defeated.


Golf Refines Rules for 1992
Golfers may ground their clubs in a hazard under limited conditions, but they will no longer be allowed to fix spike marks around a hole under new rules adopted by the United States Golf Association and the Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St.
Andrews, Scotland.
The organizations, which together define the rules of play throughout the world, made the announcement Friday.
The rules changes will go into effect Jan. 1.
Rules prohibiting a player from touching the ground in a hazard were liberalized to remove penalties for grounding a club in order to prevent falling or because of a fall, as long as the golfer isn't testing the hazard or improving the lie of the ball.


Wild Orchids? In Schenectady? Aloha!
Orchids growing wild in New York State?
Yes, within the city limits of Schenectady, as well as in the Adirondack and Catskill Mountains -- hardly the environments conjured up by the popular image of orchids as tropical plants that require careful nurturing.


Sign of the Times: 2-3 Giants vs. 3-2 Cardinals
This has been a stormy week in a stormy season for the Giants.
They hope to get well when they play the Phoenix Cardinals at 4 P.M.
Sunday in Giants Stadium.
The Giants are 10-point favorites in a game to be carried by Channel 2 and WNEW AM 1130.
Even so, they may struggle against a team that often plays well against them.


Mutual Funds; Long-Term Bonds Are Out of Kilter
The returns of funds holding United States Government bonds and investment-grade corporate bonds usually closely parallel each other.
That is not true today.
The current returns of corporate bond funds reflect a traditional yield curve: the longer investors are willing to tie up their money, the greater the return.
By contrast, investors in intermediate-term Government bond funds actually enjoy a greater return than holders of long-term bonds.


Fixing the Flaws of a du Pont Showcase
When Henry Francis du Pont inherited the Winterthur estate here in 1927, he saw the house and rolling countryside not only as a gentleman's home but also as a setting for his growing collection of American antiques.
Without wasting time, he began the first expansion of what was to become, in 1951, the Henry Francis du Pont Winterthur Museum and Gardens.
While the museum grew to 196 rooms and settings during du Pont's lifetime, the design he created has not held up, the trustees have discovered.


Sunday Dining; 3 Places Where Brunchers Can Get a Taste of Dinner
The brisk breezes of fall inevitably bring the hungry brunchers, and this year, because of the slow economy, more restaurants than ever have decide to offer brunch.
Some offer conventional fare like eggs Benedict and French toast, while others supplement that with items from the regular menu.
Here are three spots worth trying, for brunch or Sunday dinner.
La Boheme
24 Minetta Lane, near Avenue of the Americas, in Manhattan, (212) 473-6447 -- This popular Greenwich Village bistro has a country-setting feel with plank floors, wood-and-stucco walls and close tables the size of cutting boards that are draped with Provencal fabric and butcher paper.
Prices are moderate and the kitchen turns out seductive roasts, lovely prepared seafood and thin-crusted pizzas.


A Suburban Family: 'Listen to the Lions'
"ALL I want is for you to be happy, so the Lord can look down and tell me I'm doin' my best," Tessie O'Brien McBride announces to her son, Emmett, a nonachiever, who, at 34 years old has earned the title "Player of the Week" in college football.
When Tessie, an accredited "Catholic Woman of the Year" isn't extolling Emmett as a "true American hero" and "the last of vanishing breed," his father, Dr.
Mac McBride, an aspiring "Surgeon of the Year" is calling him "a dumb lug" and "a powder puff."


Room, Board and Trails in Cornwall
A CENTURY ago, when the coal mines of northern England were booming, and the air was filled with soot, the Rev.
T.
Arthur Leonard, a Lancashire minister, scraped together enough money to purchase a tumbledown country house far enough from the city that the sky above it was still blue instead of gray.
He used the house to offer a vacation in the country to teen-age Lancaster boys who had worked in the mines since childhood.
Mr.
Leonard charged the boys a week's wages, the equivalent of about $2.50 at the time, for a week's walking holiday, which he believed was the best way to appreciate nature.
The Leonard's house in the country grew into H. F. Holidays (formerly Holiday Fellowship Limited), a nonprofit organization that today owns 19 properties in Great Britain and leases a dozen more in both Britain and Western Europe -- including houses in France, Spain and Switzerland.
Even though the operation has expanded considerably, the cost of a week's vacation at an H. F. house is still remarkably reasonable.
We paid just over $400 a person, for a week's stay in Cornwall, including private room and bath, three meals daily and escorted walking tours (prices will go up for next year).


House Battles to Make Parental Leave Veto Proof
House supporters of a bill that would grant many workers unpaid leaves for family emergencies say the Senate's overwhelming approval of the measure this week will strengthen their cause.
But they still foresee an uphill struggle to pass a veto-proof version of their own.
The House proponents say they are sure they can improve on the 237-to-187 vote that passed a similar bill last year, a margin that fell far short of the two-thirds approval necessary to override a veto.
To attract more votes, they say, they will adopt compromises reached in the Senate that decreased the number of part-time workers and senior-level employees covered by the leave benefit.


All About/Musical Instruments; In Search of the High-Tech Chord
Horns and other big-band instruments were the hottest sellers when Manny Goldrich opened his music store in 1933 on West 48th Street in Manhattan, conveniently near Broadway and a still-thriving Tin Pan Alley.
In the 1960's, the public's taste for Elvis Presley and the Beatles drove the shining saxophones into a single corner of the cavernous store, cramming the rest with guitars and amplifiers.
In the 80's, though, Mr.
Goldrich's son Henry and grandsons Ian and Judd have had to change even more radically.
Digital recording technology has revolutionized music-making, so that today's customers are as likely to be interested in ROM -- a computer's read-only memory -- as in reeds for clarinets.


Urban Problems


In Romania, Miners Face Uncertainty
There was no meat today in the two state-run stores in this coal mining town in the heart of the Jiu Valley, and according to shoppers making a perfunctory check of the meager offering of chocolate bars, canned sardines, wine and imported beer, there has not been any for nearly a week.
Returning home from Bucharest, where they went last week to protest low wages and high prices, and ended up on a rampage that led to the resignation of Prime Minister Petre Roman, coal miners from this jagged, wooded valley in central Romania felt perplexed and as anxious about the future as when they left.


Multiculturalism Divides More Than It Unites
To the Editor:


Bambi Boom May Soften Princeton Gun Ban
In one of the latest skirmishes here between deer and people, a kamikaze buck stormed through the window of Jordan's gift shop on Sept. 21, sending glass, fur and merchandise flying.
To many residents, it was another piece of evidence that for too long, the town had fought its deer problem with one hand tied behind its back.
That may change soon.
Last Monday, the Township Committee unanimously voted to introduce an ordinance that would again allow hunting with firearms here.


BMB Compuscience reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Campbell-Mithun to Do 2d Test of Kool Penguin
A second test-advertising campaign for Kool cigarettes has been announced by the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation.
The second test, unlike the first announced last month, is being handled by Kool's agency of record, Campbell-Mithun-Esty, New York.
The second test campaign, appearing in central and southern Virginia, features a penguin character described in press materials as a cousin to Willie, the brand's symbol introduced in 1933.
This penguin, though, far more resembles the hip Joe Camel character in Camel cigarette advertising: He wears sunglasses and sneakers and makes remarks like, "Kool? You're lookin' at it."


The Beasts of the Earth Have Their Day


Rutgers Honors An Impresario
SONNY WERBLIN always liked to describe his occupation, modestly, as "selling tickets." But despite a sports legacy that includes helping to create the Meadowlands complex, salvaging the Jets from bankruptcy and acting as president of the Knicks and the Rangers, the 81-year-old impresario has never had a building named for him -- until now.
On Thursday, despite the fact that he has been seriously ill, Werblin, a graduate of Rutgers, will attend the opening of the Sonny Werblin Recreation Center on the university's Piscataway campus.


Credo Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Knicks and Starks Reach Agreement
John Starks, a 6-foot-5-inch guard who played with the Knicks last season, signed a new contract with the team today.
Terms were not disclosed, but Starks is believed to have signed a two-year contract worth about $350,000 per season.
Starks, who is 26 years old, is expected to back up Gerald Wilkins at shooting guard.
In 61 games last season, Starks averaged 7.6 points and shot 43.9 percent from the field.


Andrea Brook Has a Wedding
Andrea Claire Brook, an associate in the corporate finance group of the Prudential Insurance Company, was married yesterday to Lawrence Marc Kutscher, a senior marketing manager for American Express Travel Related Services, both in New York.
Rabbi Charles J. Davidson performed the ceremony at the Ridgewood (N.J.) Woman's Club.


Advocates for the Disabled Protest at Nursing Home Convention


Underneath Bears' Disguise, Redskins Find a Beatable Foe
Joe Gibbs gathered his posse -- receivers Art Monk, Gary Clark and Ricky Sanders -- on the sideline in the first quarter here today at Soldier Field.
The Chicago Bears secondary was throwing a variety of disguised zone and man-to-man coverages at the receivers and it had led them into making wrong reads and running wrong routes.
Gibbs, the Redskins' coach and offensive wizard, told his receivers to hang in there, to read the coverages quicker, to step up and make big plays because "we're still gonna go at you."


Fans Recollect the 'Eternal Music' of Miles Davis
As several hundred relatives, musicians, politicians, actors and just plain jazz fans gathered to bid farewell to Miles Davis on Saturday, only the music playing in the background was "Kind of Blue."
In a two-hour memorial service at St.
Peter's Lutheran Church in midtown Manhattan, there were tributes to the genius of the trumpeter and composer, fond memories of his orneriness and his wit and sober recollections of his struggles with drug addictions and failing health.
But, finally, there was his music, which the Rev.
Jesse Jackson described as "eternal music that elevated feeling into art and song into prayer."


Washington Talk; Budgeting For Arms Overtaken By Events
The calls in Congress this week for deeper cuts in military spending echoed the familiar cry of disappointed baseball fans: Wait till next year.
Senate and House negotiators met in a conference committee this week to iron out differences in the Pentagon's $291 billion budget bill for the fiscal year that started last Tuesday, only to find themselves falling behind the pace of international events.


Daedalus Enterprises reports earnings for Year to July 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The first deal in the Administration's showcase program to sell billions of dollars of properties seized from failed savings institutions is far more generous for buyers and costly to taxpayers than was originally disclosed, according to Government officials and documents.
The beneficiary is Patriot American Investors, which is represented by a lobbyist with close ties to the Administration and to the Government officials supervising the sale.  [ Page A1. ]
The Fed's next move to trim short-term interest rates is often considered the only thing standing between the U.S. economy and permanent stagnation.
But at this juncture, some economists contend, declines in inflation and long-term interest rates may be even more powerful stimulants for growth.  [ D1. ]
Commercial finance companies report unusually strong demand from business borrowers, even as bankers say they are not making loans because businesses are not applying for them.  [ D1. ]
Officials in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut should stop competing to lure businesses from New York City, a few officials are saying, and forge policies that present a united front.  [ B1. ] Companies
The machine tool industry is once again at the center of a debate that touches on the larger issues of trade policy and national security.
The Bush Administration must soon decide whether to push to extend a five-year-old program of restraints on imported machine tools.
It promises to be a tough choice this time.  [ D1. ]
Manufacturers Hanover and Chemical Bank have been asked by a community group to make a commitment of at least $10 billion for mortgages and other loans for low-income housing in New York City over the next 10 years.
The group, known as Acorn, has threatened to file a protest with banking regulators to oppose the banks' planned merger if they do not cooperate.  [ D1. ] International
Leading telecommunications executives face urgent work as they begin meeting today in Geneva to discuss the global marketplace.
With the vast technological and geo-political changes of the last four years, the market has undergone drastic change.  [ D1. ] The Media Business
New television shows that start out slowly almost never get off the ground, and the pressure to make a decisive call on the fate of a show has never been more intense.
After three weeks of the television season, several new shows have staked their claims in the category of outright flops.
Bill Carter: Television.  [ D1. ]
A new survey of consumer attitudes has some striking findings for magazine publishers, who ordered the study and are meeting in Florida this week at the American Magazine Conference.  [ D10. ]
Home Box Office has a new recipe this season for production of a series of feature-length films: Take a group of acclaimed actors whose careers have not thrust them into the multimillion-dollar range.
Give them provocative subjects bypassed by the major networks.
Add a large audience and a guaranteed instant reaction.
And hold the superstars.  [ D10. ]
A price war among British bookshops may be in the offing as Waterstone &amp; Company begins discounting books this week at its 85 British shops, following the lead of its main rival, Dillons.
The move may seal the fate of a pact among publishers that has fixed book prices in Britain since 1900.  [ D10. ]
Mal MacDougall is closing his consulting firm to join Ally &amp; Gargano as vice chairman and chief creative officer.
In effect, he will become the successor to Amil Gargano on Ally's creative side.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D9. ] Today's Column
Pacificare is being criticized over its agreement late last month to acquire a smaller Southern California health maintenance organization, Health Plan of America.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]


Upside-Down Lives for New York Haitians
When Haiti's military toppled a democratically elected president in a violent gambit to restore an authoritarian past, they also robbed Micheline Cesar of her future.
For most of the last week, Mrs.
Cesar has held an anxious vigil in her sparsely furnished home in Queens Village, awaiting word on the fate of her husband, Camille, a supporter of the ousted President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who was arrested in Port-au-Prince after the coup.
The decor is minimal because Mrs.
Cesar had been slowly shipping her household goods to Haiti in anticipation of joining her husband in December after spending a quarter century of self-imposed exile in the United States.


Review/Music; 2 Centuries Collaborate On a Tale Of Morality
The "Ship of Fools" that set sail at Mannes College on Saturday night was full of colorful 16th-century characters.
There was the shepherdess Marion, who spurned her lover, believing the flirtatious promises of soldiers.
There was the young nun, initiated into the pleasures of her order by a priest with something more than spiritual ecstasy on his mind.
There was the rich merchant who jealously guarded his wife while his own eye wandered widely.
Fools all -- victims of lust and greed who got their just deserts in the end, taken by the hand by Death himself, his skull frozen in a perpetual grin.
But in the meantime, their bawdy adventures were part of a stunningly directed, musically refined sea journey, a model of historical re-creation and invention.
This production by the Mannes Camerata was described as a "16th-century morality play with music," but orthodox devotees of historical form might be put off.
"The Ship of Fools" never existed as it was performed.
During the last decade, Paul C. Echols, who directs the early music program at Mannes, has been widely praised for his work in staging medieval and early Baroque music dramas.
But there are no extant musical scores for morality plays, those medieval dramas that had it both ways, entertaining crowds with dramatizations of the most entertaining sins and then revealing punishments awaiting any who might be tempted to practice what they watch.


Magazine Publishers Get Some Answers
A new marketing survey of consumer attitudes may not solve the problems of dispirited magazine executives, but it will surely cause talk at the annual American Magazine Conference being held here amid the lush mangroves of the Ritz-Carlton hotel.
The report, which will be released on Wednesday, has some striking findings, among them: that readers are less preoccupied with health and fitness; that their idea of status has more to do with being in control of one's life than with having expensive possessions, and that their concern about the environment, which had been intensifying since the mid-1980's, has fallen off somewhat.


Review/Theater; Tearing Down the Master Builder
Was Robert Moses a visionary or the destructive genius characterized in Robert A. Caro's biography "The Power Broker"?
Theodora Skipitares, the creator of "The Radiant City," comes down firmly on the Caro side of the fence.
Her provocative new puppet play at the American Place Theater is an unswerving act of social criticism.
In expressing her point of view as author and director, Ms.
Skipitares calls Moses as self-incriminating witness with such statements as, "Nothing I have ever done has been tinged with legality," and "If the end doesn't justify the means, what does?" His desired end, as described in the play, was to turn New York into a World's Fair-like Futurama, monopolized by skyscrapers and superhighways leading to superparks.


Group Seeks Low-Income Loan Deal
A community group has asked Manufacturers Hanover and Chemical Bank to make a commitment of at least $10 billion for mortgages and other loans for low-income housing in New York City over the next 10 years.
The Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now, a group that seeks to encourage more bank lending in low-income urban areas, is making its demand as the two banks are planning to merge at the end of the year.
The group, known as Acorn, has threatened to file a protest against the merger with banking regulators if the two banking companies do not cooperate.


A Veteran Campaigner To Join Ally
Mal MacDougall, who in 35 years in advertising has specialized in creating catchy campaigns for giants like Coca-Cola, Hearst and Revlon, is closing his consulting firm to join Ally &amp; Gargano Inc. as vice chairman and chief creative officer.
Though the position that Mr.
MacDougall takes is new, he becomes the successor on Ally's creative side to Amil Gargano, the agency's former chairman.
In May, Mr.
Gargano left to open a small shop, Amil Gargano &amp; Partners, which is jointly owned with Ally and uses that agency's services, like media buying.


Help-Wanted Ads Flat
Help-wanted advertising showed little change in August, the Conference Board said Thursday.
The seasonally adjusted index fell to 91 in August, a point below the July reading and 36 points below the figure a year ago.
"The public is becoming more nervous about the fragility of the economy in general and about the prospect that their jobs might be in jeopardy," said Ken Goldstein, economist at the business-sponsored research group based in New York.


A Meeting of Minds to Beat All
Sid Bream called it "a little bit of a meeting." It went a long way.
Baseball teams always seem to be having meetings.
Sometimes the manager calls one and addresses the players.
Other times players decide to meet alone, without the manager or coaches.
No one, not the manager, not the players, ever knows if the meetings really work.
But they meet anyway.


Brazilian, With a Fast Ride in New York, Wins Overall Title
Eike Batista, a 34-year-old gold-mining magnate from Brazil, showed yesterday that he is as fearless on a New York waterway as he once was in the jungles of the Amazon.
Batista and his two-man crew drove their 50-foot Superboat, Spirit of the Amazon, at speeds of more than 120 miles an hour to win offshore powerboating's national Superboat championship by finishing second in New York Offshore Grand Prix.
Twenty-six speedboats, of which 10 were Superboats, raced 151 miles in 18 laps on the Hudson River off Manhattan.
The course, reset at the last minute because of a Coast Guard recommendation, ran from a point south of Battery Park City to 29th Street and back.


Israel Jails Abie Nathan For New Arafat Contact
An Israeli judge sentenced the country's most prominent peace campaigner, Abie Nathan, to a year and a half in prison today for having met Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, in defiance of a law forbidding such contacts.
Mr.
Nathan, who spent four months in jail last year for earlier contact with the P.L.O., made no attempt to deny that he had talked with Mr.
Arafat in Tunis in July.
"The first day I leave prison, I will meet him again," he pledged after being sentenced in Ramla, near Tel Aviv.


Critic's Notebook; Appropriating History to Serve Politics on TV
The television campaign for the re-election of George Bush has made it onto network prime time.
On Wednesday the President saluted the 25th Annual Country Music Association Awards on CBS, and last night he introduced "The Heroes of Desert Storm," an ABC movie.
These doses of positive politicking were enough to stir nostalgia for frankly dishonest negative commercials.
At the awards show, Mr.
Bush was naturally placed up front, among the superstars of country music.
There the scion of New England aristocracy was seen from time to time giving signs of enjoying the laments of the lovelorn, the unlettered, the losers from out there.


Pressing for United Front in Regional Vying for Companies
It has become a familiar scene of seduction: other cities and states trying to lure businesses from New York City, wooing them with promises of lower taxes and a better quality of life.
Now a few officials are trying to make the case that New York City is not the only loser when a company leaves the city but that the economy of the whole region is undermined.
The solution, they say, is for officials in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut to stop competing among themselves and to begin to forge policies that present a united front.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about Yugoslavia misidentified the leadership of rival groups claiming to head the Yugoslav Government.
A Serbian-dominated faction is led by Branko Kostic and an anti-Serbian faction is led by Stipe Mesic.


Gates's Task: Restoring Confidence and Purpose
Robert M. Gates appears close to winning a grueling fight this week to head the Central Intelligence Agency, but the battle has left both the man and the organization weakened, and the rush of history in the Soviet Union and elsewhere threatens to diminish them further.
The C.I.A. was a more vital place only last May, when Mr.
Gates was nominated to become Director of Central Intelligence.
Months later, he stands to inherit an organization whose primary purpose is vanishing, whose innermost conflicts have been aired for three weeks, and whose worst excesses under the former Director, William J. Casey, he has come, rightly or wrongly, to symbolize.


Adequate Court Funds Affect All New Yorkers
To the Editor:
The crisis in New York State courts you refer to in "Wachtler v. Cuomo = Two Losers" (editorial, Sept. 27) is of critical importance to every citizen, not just Chief Judge Sol Wachtler and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
The real losers are all New Yorkers.
By raising the issue of adequate funds for the judiciary, the lawsuit filed by the Chief Judge asks, Do aggrieved New Yorkers have the right to timely justice?


Dr. Margaret Maud Chaplin Weds Dr. M. S. Aronow in Massachusetts
Dr.
Margaret Maud Chaplin, a resident in psychiatry, and Dr.
Michael Steven Aronow, a resident in orthopedic surgery, both at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center in Worcester, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Benjamin Rudavsky performed the ceremony at Wellesley College in Wellesley, Mass.


Linda Gottlieb, TV and Film Producer, Is Wed
Linda Gottlieb, a television and film producer, and Robert Louis Tessler, a partner in the law firm of Toberoff Tessler &amp; Schochet, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Cantor Ellen Math officiated at the Americas Society in New York.


Europe Welcomes Soviet Arms Cuts
Officials in Western Europe today welcomed President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's proposals for sweeping cuts in the Soviet nuclear arsenal and his assurance that the weapons would remain under strict central control as the country continues to come apart.
But neither Britain nor France took up his suggestion that other countries besides the Soviet Union and the United States consider reductions in their nuclear weapons.


Stomach Ailment Slows Gaston
Toronto Blue Jays Manager Cito Gaston may be on the verge of managing his team in its second American League Championship Series appearance in three years, but as far as health goes, it seems he cannot win for losing.
After being on the rebound from back and leg troubles that caused him to miss 33 games this season, Gaston was rushed to a hospital here early this morning, suffering from a stomach ailment that was eventually diagnosed as gastroenteritis.


Wait Till Next Year Or Is it Last Year?
This is the annual confluence of the four seasons -- sporting seasons, that is.
Baseball's playoffs are imminent; football is well into its race; the hockey ice is newly frozen, and basketball training camps are opening.
Will distraught New Yorkers, with seven frustrating teams to choose from now that the Mets' and Yankees' seasons are mercifully over, be able to roar for champions once again?
Well, except in baseball, there's hope.
Following is a listing of the last championships won by the metropolitan New York teams:


Breathtaking Progress on Arms
Exhibiting an impressive willingness to cooperate against a common danger, President Gorbachev responded Saturday to President Bush's remarkable arms initiative of a week ago with an even better one.
The two leaders are now moving with reassuring swiftness to tighten their grip on their countries' excessive nuclear arsenals.
And they're making that task easier by cutting the stockpiles down to more manageable size.
By consigning the least controllable of these arms, short-range or tactical weapons, to the scrap heap, Mr.
Gorbachev joined Mr.
Bush in helping the world breathe a little easier.


Cara Operations reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 15


Metro Matters; 4th Generation Tries to Be Last In Welfare Chain
I told him, 'Look at you -- you was 18 when my mother got pregnant.
How are you going to
get on my case about having a baby?' It's like life repeats itself, you know?
Leticia C. will be 25 years old next month.
She is a high school dropout, former crack addict and fourth generation teen-age mother.


Even Without Judge Thomas
On this first Monday in October, the Supreme Court will convene with a famous member of the cast missing and a cast of mind decidedly different from only a few years ago.
After years of stable membership, the Court has three new members in five years and a fourth, Clarence Thomas, seems on the verge of confirmation.
What most distinguishes the new Court is the energy and abandon with which Chief Justice William Rehnquist and a growing number of justices are pressing to topple precedents.
It's a Supreme Court with an agenda.


Miss Mirante, A Skater, Weds
Claudia Mirante, a professional figure skater, and Thomas O'Reagan, a professional ice hockey player, were married yesterday at the Old Westbury (L.I) Country Club.
The Rev.
Thomas Curran, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; For Shows, a Flop Is a Flop Is a Flop
Television researchers generally concede that predicting anything about television viewers, now armed with remote controls and access to 40 or 50 channels, has become next to impossible.
But in recent years one trend has been relatively easy to spot: rejection.
New shows that start out slowly almost never get off the ground.
And with the line between profit and loss so thin at the networks, the pressure to make a decisive call on the fate of a show has never been more intense.


Lending When Bankers Won't
Earlier this year, John Donovan, chairman of BMI Inc., a Summit, N.J., importer and distributor of door parts for buildings, needed to find a lender.
Security Pacific Bank of Los Angeles, which had been his banker for six years, "made it clear that they did not want our business," he said, "not because of our creditworthiness but because they were cutting back on lots of companies our size."
Mr.
Donovan, whose company has annual sales of about $10 million, tried the local New Jersey banks.
But "they were so involved with the regulators," he said, "that they did not want to hear from me" unless he made a deposit equal to the credit line.


Creative Touch Returns As Hostetler Leads Way
Finally, it worked as it did last season for Jeff Hostetler.
The Giants' quarterback had seen it misfire repeatedly this season: in close, but no kill.
Three losses in the last four games.


Gorbachev Condemns Anti-Semitism, Past and Present
Expressing the strongest condemnation of anti-Semitism to be heard from a Soviet leader, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has acknowledged that hatred of Jews still exists in the nation's "everyday life" and that the nation can only regret the hundreds of thousands of "gifted and enterprising citizens" now emigrating because of it.
"Manifestations of anti-Semitism that exist in our everyday life play into the hands of some reactionary circles," the Soviet leader warned.


Sanders's Touchdown Run Caps Lions' Comeback Over Vikings
Lions 24, Vikings 20
PONTIAC, Mich., Oct. 6 (AP) -- The Minnesota Vikings today learned that no lead is safe when Barry Sanders is on the field.
Sanders, the Detroit Lions' running back, scored on a 15-yard run with 36 seconds remaining to cap a 21-point comeback in the final 6 minutes 50 seconds.
He finished with 116 yards on 25 carries for his fourth consecutive 100-yard game, and caught 9 passes for 76 yards.


American Says Lebanon Captors Predict 'Good News'
Terry A. Anderson, the American journalist held hostage in Lebanon since 1985, said yesterday in a videotaped interview broadcast by the Cable News Network that he had been told by his captors that "we can expect some very good news" soon.
Mr.
Anderson, the Middle East bureau chief for The Associated Press, said his captors had not told him what the news would be.
"I can only hope, of course, that it means some more people would be released on both sides," he said.


Books of The Times; Trying to Learn a River Better Than the Fish Do
Neversink  One Angler's Intense Exploration of a Trout River  By Leonard M. Wright Jr.  191 pages.
The Atlantic Monthly Press. $19.95.
Leonard M. Wright Jr.'s absorbing new book begins with trout fishing, just as his previous 10 books do, among which is the innovative "Fishing the Dry Fly as a Living Insect" (E. P. Dutton, 1972).
But unlike his other books, "Neversink: One Angler's Intense Exploration of a Trout River" so thoroughly explores the environment of trout fishing that by the end of it the reader has almost forgotten that it is a trout book.


REVISION OF DEALS IN S.&amp; L. BAILOUT DRAWING CRITICISM
The first deal in the Bush Administration's showcase program to sell billions of dollars of properties seized from failed savings and loan institutions is turning out to be far more generous for buyers and costly to taxpayers than was originally disclosed, according to Government officials and documents.
The beneficiary is Patriot American Investors, a newly formed partnership of two Canadian and two American businessmen, represented by a lobbyist with close ties to the Bush Administration and to Government officials who are supervising the sale.


Irene Tyroler Weds
Ilene Tyroler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Tyroler of Boca Raton, Fla., was married yesterday to Charles Roy Burg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Burg of Margate, N.J.
Rabbi Gilbert Rosenthal officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride and bridegroom, both 30 years old, graduated from the University of Maryland.
She is a buyer for Steinbach, a department store chain based in White Plains; he is a senior programmer and systems analyst for Telerate, a subsidiary of Dow Jones.


Hong Kong Journal; The Voters Love the Man Who's Loathed by China
Business executives and Government officials here have often portrayed Martin Lee as a quixotic political crackpot, a man leading a tattered parade of one.
"Behind my back they would tell visitors: 'Well, he's not a bad fellow, but his opinions are his own. Most people here do not agree with him,' " the outspoken liberal said.


Merrill Lasts Another Day
The meeting that everyone was waiting for lasted about five minutes and was not even behind a closed door.
Gene Michael and Stump Merrill chatted yesterday after the Yankees concluded the season with a 7-4 victory over the Indians at Yankee Stadium.
They did not discuss the weather.
Merrill was still the manager after the short conversation, but that may only be because the general manager thought the setting and the timing for dismissal was not appropriate.


For 200 in the Tenzer Family, Grandpa's Circle Is Unbroken
In 1883, a 14-year-old youth named Michael Tenzer arrived in New York City from Europe with only $4 in his pocket and, even worse, not a scrap of family.
He soon made up for both, most strikingly with a clan of Biblical proportions, begetting seven children who produced 15 grandchildren, 32 great-grandchildren, and a fifth generation that now numbers 29.


IN POLICY SHIFT, U.S. CRITICIZES HAITIAN ON RIGHTS ABUSES
Administration officials have begun to move away from the unequivocal support they have voiced for the ousted Haitian President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, citing concerns over his human rights record.
After Father Aristide was ousted in a coup last Monday, President Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d both demanded his reinstatement as President with no conditions.
But today, officials said they had concluded that Father Aristide must publicly disavow mob violence and work toward sharing power with the Parliament.
Such acts, Administration officials said, are necessary if he is to gain the Haitian and international support he needs to return to office.


Hyun Jin Choi Has Wedding
Hyun Jin Choi, an associate at Eastdil Realty, a real estate investment bank in New York, was married yesterday to Daniel Adam Rubenstein, an associate in the investment banking division of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
Rabbi Henry Cohen officiated at the Hotel Bel Air in Los Angeles.
Mrs.
Rubenstein, 28 years old, graduated from Pomona College and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nam Yong Choi of Covina, Calif.
Her father is a private investor.


CHRONICLE
The last thing MARVIN S. TRAUB wrote, his senior thesis at Harvard in 1946, landed in the Library of Congress.
Now he has taken pen to paper, or more likely keyboard to computer, and is writing a book that is likely to get a broader readership: the memoirs of his life and times, mostly at Bloomingdale's.


Disabled Athlete To Be Honored
Not too long after her ballyhooed victory over BOBBY RIGGS, BILLIE JEAN KING co-founded the Women Sports Foundation in 1974.
Its biggest bash yet will be tonight at the Marriott Marquis in Manhattan.
And the winner of Amateur Sportswoman of the Year is JEAN DRISCOLL.
The 24-year-old captured this year's wheelchair division of the Boston Marathon, averaging about 4 minutes a mile.
She played on the University of Illinois wheelchair basketball team.
She was born with spina bifida, but could walk with crutches until she was 14.


Michael C. Ballentine, Publicist, 51
Michael C. Ballentine, a publicist and a contributing editor to Town and Country magazine, died Saturday at Stuart Circle Hospital in Richmond.
He was 51 years old and lived in Richmond.
Mr. Ballentine died of cancer, his wife said.


Giants Get a Bye, Tailgaters Don't
The Giants' bye day is Sunday, Oct. 20.
No game.
But fans can tailgate at Giants Stadium anyway.
Linebacker GARY REASONS is helping stage an unusual benefit for the American Lung Association of New Jersey.
He says that 20 teammates will be on hand for demonstrations, and that there will be bands and a pep rally.
Those who wish can also join in a walkathon.
The cost for the day is $22.50, $15 for children under 12 years old, and free to youngsters under 5.
For an additional $10, there will be a tour of the Giants' locker and weight rooms.
For information, call (800) 388-5588. . . .
"Imagine a team of all Michael Jordans," said THELMA BOALBEY of the Westminster Kennel Club.
The effusive Boalbey was referring to club's dog show.
Next February, for the first time, the Madison Square Garden fixture will present only champions, dogs that have earned significant points in competition.
The applications for the 2,500 positions go out Oct. 17.


The Emergency Room's Emergency
Kings County Hospital has the busiest emergency room in New York City.
It's also one of the most troubled.
A Federal survey last January cited nearly a dozen cases where the timeliness and adequacy of patient evaluations and other procedures were deficient.
The stabbing and death of Yankel Rosenbaum has highlighted those deficiencies once again, revealing serious management flaws that require prompt correction by the hospital and the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation.


Rapid Richer Keeps Devils Unbeaten
The Devils played inspiring hockey for the second night in a row and they were righteously rewarded, this time with a 4-2 triumph over the Blackhawks at Chicago Stadium.
Coach Tom McVie used exactly the same lineup that played so impressively in the 7-2 triumph over the St.
Louis Blues 24 hours earlier in New Jersey.
That meant that Patrik Sundstrom, the team's most complete player the last two years, was again a spectator.


Essay; Hail to the House
Observe the stutter-step of political scandal.
First, troubling news breaks.
The charges are brushed aside as trivial by late-waking media or are stonewalled into silence by grim-faced authorities.
Then scandal coverage develops a second wind, whipping up a firestorm that sucks in coverage down to the talk-show level, which sets in motion investigations that bring reform to the political process and sweep out rascals.
Finally, the scandalmongers are derogated by historians as making much fuss over nothing.


Dorothea Dooling, 80, Founder of Magazine
Dorothea Matthews Dooling, founder and editorial director of Parabola, The Magazine of Myth and Tradition, died on Friday at her ranch in Jackson, Mont.
She was 80 years old.
Mrs. Dooling had been diagnosed with acute leukemia last month, her family said.


Nazi Survivors Reunite With Black Liberators
Even now, in Ben Bender's memory, the scene is unreal, "beyond time": the arrival of the American soldiers who liberated Buchenwald.
The soldiers were black, and he remembers them weeping.
To the 17-year-old Polish Jew, sick and weak and emaciated, they looked like "giants" who were "not from this planet." He had never seen a black soldier before.


Police Officer Charged in Village Bar Fight
A New York City police officer was arrested yesterday and charged with assault following a fight in a Greenwich Village bar that began after someone shouted a homosexual slur, the police said.
The 23-year-old officer, David Lopez, was also suspended for not being home while on sick leave, a violation of departmental rules, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.
An officer on sick leave must be at home or have a pass from the department surgeon.


Messier at Center Stage With Broadway Blues
Mark Messier visited the place, before there were lavender seats or a serious notion about the Stanley Cup.
There was just the noise.
"We had some great games at Madison Square Garden, and the fans did not cheer for me," Messier said.
"But they always cheered loud."


Cintas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Poland's Catholic Primate Visits St. Patrick's


The Media Maven And the Manager
TOM KELLY is ready.
His eyes will not dart.
He will look right into the camera and perhaps even smile.
Sweetly.
Kelly, the Minnesota Twins' manager, will have plenty to worry about tomorrow night as he sends his players onto the field for the first game of the American League Championship Series against the Toronto Blue Jays.
And his preparations have included bringing in a media specialist from New York.


New Accusation Against Auburn
Another former Auburn football player has accused his alma mater of breaking National Collegiate Athletic Association rules, according to a report published today.
Vincent Harris, who played fullback for the Tigers from 1986-88 and graduated in 1989, told The Birmingham News that on separate occasions he had received money from assistant coaches Wayne Hall and Bud Casey, once at the direction of the head coach, Pat Dye.


Hollywood Agent to Create A Film Unit at Universal
In a move that surprised the film industry, one of the most prominent agents in town announced today that she was leaving Creative Artists Agency to establish a film-production unit at Universal Pictures.
The agent, Rosalie Swedlin, represents some of the most powerful and prestigious directors and writers in Hollywood, including Martin Scorsese, Barry Levenson, Sydney Pollock, Phil Kaufman, Wesley Strick and Marshall Hershkowitz.


Giants Start Fast, Look Sharp
For the first time since the season opener, the Giants played like Super Bowl champions.
Jeff Hostetler and Rodney Hampton moved the ball smartly and efficiently on offense, and the defense stymied a dangerous running game.
The result was a 20-9 victory today over the Phoenix Cardinals at Giants Stadium.
The Giants dominated the game from the start, scoring two touchdowns in the first quarter on 80-yard drives.


California Journal; Liz Taylor's 8th: Old Role, New Lead
More than two centuries ago, Samuel Johnson observed that a second marriage represented "the triumph of hope over experience."
Today, on the lavish ranch of the never-married pop star Michael Jackson, surrounded by doves, swans, a chimpanzee and 160 invited guests, including at least one former President, Elizabeth Taylor celebrated that triumph with her eighth marriage.


British Book Shops in Price Skirmishes
A price war, an almost unknown occurrence in the British book-selling trade because of a 91-year-old price-fixing pact among publishers, may now be in the offing as Waterstone &amp; Company begins discounting books this week at its 85 British shops.
Richard Barker, Waterstone's operations director, said Friday that the decision to discount about 40 titles by 20 percent to 33 percent as of Oct. 11 was a "very agonizing" one but that the company's hand had been forced by a discounting campaign begun Sept. 27 by Dillons, Waterstone's principal competitor in the specialist book retail market.
Waterstone's, owned partly by the W. H. Smith Group P.L.C., and Dillons, owned by Pentos P.L.C., each claim about 11 percent of the British book market.


That Championship Feeling!
As a hushed crowd sat primly in anticipation of the Southeastern Savoyards Light Opera Company's performance of "H.M.S. Pinafore" Saturday night, the music director, in white tie and tails, turned to the orchestra and raised not a baton, but a tomahawk.
In Atlanta, where gleeful crowds lined Peachtree Street this weekend exchanging Indian war chants and the Braves' signature "tomahawk chop" salute with passing cars, nothing is immune from the giddy euphoria set loose by the Atlanta Braves' unlikely ascent from perennial doormats to National League West champions.


Palestinians Seek U.S. Assurances on Talks
The formation of a Jordanian-Palestinian delegation to a Middle East peace conference is being held up as Palestinians seek United States assurances that the delegation will include a representative from Jerusalem and that Israel will halt new settlements in the occupied territories before the talks begin, a Jordanian official said.
"They are still demanding some satisfactory answers from the American Administration," the Jordanian Prime Minister, Taher al-Masri, said in a telephone interview on Saturday.
He spoke after the conclusion of two days of talks involving a senior Palestine Liberation Organization delegation and King Hussein and other top Jordanian officials.


Agency to Back Colleges' Bonds
A Government-backed corporation says it will begin insuring bonds issued by academic institutions trying to meet a need for new equipment and buildings that could total $100 billion during the next decade.
The College Construction Loan Insurance Association, known as Connie Lee, said that its guarantees for bonds issued by colleges, universities and teaching hospitals should encourage private investment.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; The Jets Are Strutting a New Step
ONCE upon a time there was this football team that always found a way to lose a game in the last quarter.
They were like guys in a parade who strutted down the street only to disappear one by one into an open manhole.
The team was the Jets.
This season, after going into the fourth quarter with leads, they have lost to the Buffalo Bills, a Super Bowl entrant last January, and then the Chicago Bears.
Last season, the Jets lost a handful in the final 15 minutes.


71 Billionaires On Forbes List
The recession hurt some of America's wealthiest people, but most kept getting richer.
A record 71 billionaires populate Forbes magazine's 10th-annual ranking of the richest, up from 66 last year and up from 13 in the magazine's first ranking in 1982.
And the net worth of the 400 wealthiest Americans reached $288 billion -- the highest ever recorded by Forbes.
The list, released yesterday, appears in the magazine's Oct. 21 issue.


More Vision, Please
Mikhail Gorbachev, with Boris Yeltsin's backing, took only a week to match President Bush's cuts in nuclear arms and up the ante.
We should not hesitate to raise the stakes even higher.
Unlike poker, this is a game both sides can win.
For all President Bush's new thinking on short-range nuclear weapons, his proposal reflected a large dose of old thinking about intercontinental missiles and "Star Wars" -- and not enough thinking about a world order free of Armageddon arsenals and third-world nuclear threats.


Miss Handel Marries
Rebecca Handel, a clinical therapist at Methodist Youth Services in Chicago, was married yesterday to Andrew Fano, a doctoral candidate in artificial intelligence at Northwestern University.
Rabbi Michael Panitz performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from Vassar College, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in psychology from American University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Handel of Paramus, N.J.
Mr.
Fano, also 26, is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alberto Fano of Great Neck, L.I.


World Economies


Lisa Albenberg Weds
Lisa Robyn Albenberg, a clinical social worker at St.
Clare's Hospital in Denville, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Craig Ross Barash, a resident in internal medicine at Mt.
Sinai Medical Center in New York.
Rabbis Jehiel Orenstein and Leon Spielman officiated at Congregation Beth El in South Orange, N.J.


CHRONICLE
More than 600 people are expected to gather in the Hotel Pierre on Monday evening when KING JUAN CARLOS of Spain receives the 1991 Humanitarian Award of the Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity.


Miss Char Wed To J. S. Seetoo
Lynette Kuelyn Char, the daughter of Lloyd and Aileen Char of Honolulu, was married yesterday to John Stuart Seetoo, the son of Donald and Florence Seetoo of New York.
Canon W. Eric Potter performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Andrew's Cathedral in Honolulu.


Don't Blame Other Animals for Our Ways
To the Editor:
As an animal rights activist, a woman and a Yalie (class of '75), I can't resist the paradox.


Harlem Woman Accused of Neglecting 4
A 32-year-old East Harlem woman was arrested on Saturday and accused of abandoning four of her seven children.
Her brother said yesterday that she had been forced to give up her children twice before for leaving them unsupervised.
Three of the children, ages 8 to 11, were found sleeping alone in a rodent-infested apartment at 307 East 101st Street in the Metro North Plaza housing project, said Capt.
Nicholas Witkowich of the city's housing police.
The fourth child, a 13-year-old girl, was found in a locked closet in an apartment nearby.


Comprehensive Care reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Dividend Meetings


Sharp Dance Edges Versailles Treaty
The mighty continued to fall yesterday at Belmont Park when Versailles Treaty, the prima donna of the 3-year-old fillies, was nipped by a nose by the 5-year-old mare Sharp Dance after a driving duel through the homestretch of the Beldame Stakes.
It was the first time in five months that Versailles Treaty had finished second to anyone since Meadow Star outran her in the Acorn Stakes.
After that, she spent the summer sizzling.
She won four races in a row, including three Grade I stakes, moved to the front of the class and headed grandly for the Breeders' Cup championships next month.


U.S. Evangelicals Winning Soviet Converts
Decorated with the red slash of the hammer and sickle, and dedicated long ago to the glory of the Communist revolution, the vast Oktyabr movie theater has a new use these days: once a week it is a church to a small band of American evangelicals and their following of born-again Soviet Christians.
Several hundred of the converted and merely curious assemble for services at the theater, now used Sunday mornings by the Moscow Christian Center, where worshipers sing, pray and listen to preachers from the other side of the world proclaim the triumph of Jesus in the Soviet Union.


Nancy Bloom and Alan Cohen Wed
Nancy Ellen Bloom, a senior manager of new product development, and Alan Michael Cohen, a manager of production systems, both at Pfizer in New York, were married yesterday.
Cantor Samuel Rosenbaum. performed the ceremony at the couple's home in Teaneck, N.J.


INSIDE
Gorbachev on Anti-Semitism
President Gorbachev made the strongest condemnation of anti-Semitism in the Soviet Union to be heard from a leader there.
Page A6.
Tape of Hostage Broadcast
Terry A. Anderson, a U.S. hostage in Lebanon, says on videotape that he was told there would be "very good news" for the hostages.
Page A3.
Tax Card Is Risky Play
For Republican lawmakers in Hartford, the question is whether they can ride the tax-repeal tiger they helped create.
News analysis, page B1.
Life's a Peach in Atlanta
Euphoria over the Braves' division championship in baseball is the latest component in Atlanta's positive sense of place.
SportsMonday, C1.


3 IN COUP FEARED U.S. DEPENDENCY
Plotters who tried to overthrow President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in August acted partly because they feared that he was making the Soviet Union dependent on the United States, according to the confession of one plotter published in the German news magazine Spiegel.
"Gorbachev often traveled abroad in recent years, and frequently we had no idea what important issues he discussed there," former Defense Minister Dmitri T. Yazov reportedly told interrogators.


Justices Return to Work
The Supreme Court opens its new term today, short one Justice but not lacking in high-profile cases that will test the dimensions of its conservative counter-revolution.
Page A14.


College to End a 117-Year All-Male Tradition
One of the few all-male private colleges left in the United States, the Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology, has broken 117 years of tradition and decided to admit women.
The highly regarded science and engineering institute in Terre Haute, Ind., will begin admitting women undergraduates in the 1995-96 academic year.
Women have been allowed in graduate programs for 10 years.


Student Group Seeks to Broaden Goals of Environmental Movement
Students from the country this weekend outlined a new agenda for the American environmental movement, one that joins issues of race, class and injustice with the movement's traditional goals of preservation and conservation.
"We're calling for a broader definition of environmentalism," said Jeannette Galanis, a 21-year-old junior at the University of Colorado who helped organize the conference.
"A lot of people of color, poor people, rural people, are victims of environmental degradation and have been ignored."


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Alliance Pharmaceutical Corp., two million shares. Oppenheimer &amp; Co.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt
*
Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport repriced $53.6 million of a $72.3 million bond issue through Lehman Brothers to yield 6.882 percent with a 6 5/8 percent coupon for the 2021 maturity and interest subject to the alternative minimum tax.
The rest of the issue, which is tax exempt, was repriced to yield 6.627 for the comparable maturity.
Insured by the Financial Guaranty Insurance Company, the bonds are rated triple-A by the major rating services.
*
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co.'s subsidary, the Discover Receivables Finanacing Group, has filed for $935 million worth of pass-through certificates to be offered through Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.
The offering is backed by receivables generated by the Sears Discover Card.
*
Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, New York, repriced $561 billion in revenue bonds through Dillon, Read &amp; Co., which cut yields by 2 to 5 basis points on most of the various maturities.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.
Bonds due in 2022 remained at a 6.808 percent yield.
Common Stock
*
Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co., Akron, Ohio, has filed for 10 million common shares with proceeds to be used to retire debt.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. is managing underwriter.
Ratings
*
City of Bellevue, Wash., has had its water and sewer revenue bonds upgraded by Moody's Investors Service Inc. from Aa, to A-1.
*
International Lease Finance Corp.'s $100 million in 7.9 percent notes due in 1996 and $150 million in 7.2 percent notes due in 1994, and $100 million in 8.35 percent notes due in 1998 received an A+ rating from the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
The aircraft leasing company is based in Beverly Hills, Calif.
*
Loral Corp.'s senior unsecured debt rating has been raised to BBB+, from BBB, by S.&amp; P. The military electronics company is based in New York.
*
Maine Yankee Atomic Power Co. and Vermont Nuclear Power Co. have had their combined senior secured debt of $100 million downgraded by S.&amp; P. to A-, from A, but removed from credit watch.


I.B.M. Plan For Employees
The International Business Machines Corporation has announced a new evaluation system to rank and improve workers while weeding out poor performers and rewarding the best, a spokesman said.
Terry Lautenbach, I.B.M.'s United States president, announced the program Thursday in meetings and on an internally distributed videotape, the I.B.M. spokesman, Steve Eames, said on Saturday.


Advance Circuits reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Portugal Leader Wins Majority in Re-election
Having enjoyed rapid economic growth since joining the European Community in 1986, Portugal voted for more of the same today by giving the center-right Prime Minister, Anibal Cavaco Silva, another four years in office with a strong parliamentary majority.
The result was a personal triumph for Mr.
Cavaco Silva, who turned the legislative elections into a referendum on his Government by announcing that he would not stay on as Prime Minister unless his Social Democratic Party was again returned with an absolute majority of seats.


Phone Industries Grapple With the New World Order
Taking stock of breakneck changes in technology and global politics since they last met here four years ago, executives of the world's leading telecommunications companies will open their huge Telecom 91 conference on Monday with an eye on emerging markets and concern about the potential for serious breakdowns.
The collapse of Communism in the last two years has opened up a vast market for new services in the former East Bloc countries and the Soviet Union.
While up to 90 cents of every dollar of the world's telecommunications revenue comes from people talking on the telephone, the remaining dime is where the growth and profits are: from selling and managing telephone services and linking computers and telephones in networks for business.


As Yugoslavia Boils, Serbs Hail a Would-Be King
Heavy artillery shelling and air strikes were reported across Croatia today in continued defiance of a cease-fire while a new figure, Prince Aleksandar Karadjordjevic, heir to the long-vacant Yugoslav throne, offered himself here as a peacemaker.
The Prince addressed a large rally in central Belgrade -- by some estimates exceeding 70,000 people -- and presented himself not only as a conciliator but as an alternative to the authoritarian government of President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia.
The throng responded passionately, shouting, "We want a king!"


Review/Television; Racial Issues of the 1950's, as People Lived Them
"I'll Fly Away" is a fine and in many unexpected ways a powerful new series beginning on NBC tonight at 9 with a special two-hour pilot (its regular hourlong slot will be Tuesdays at 8, starting tomorrow).
Now it's a question of survival.
Can a thoughtful, leisurely paced drama about racial and social issues in the late 1950's compete with the plethora of current network shows marketing little more than zippy, mindless one-liners?
Anyone concerned about the future of television will certainly hope so, despite dismaying odds.
The series arrives with an imposing list of credits.
"I'll Fly Away" -- the title comes from a traditional spiritual -- was created by Joshua Brand and John Falsey, whose outstanding television work ranges from "St. Elsewhere" to the current hit "Northern Exposure." Actually, the new project is closer in mood and tone to their series "A Year in the Life," another painstaking effort to make sense of the world at large by focusing on the microcosms of family units.


American Bank of Connecticut reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-8
Haiti's human rights record during the term of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide is causing the Administration to modify its past unequivocal support for the Haitian President, who was ousted by a coup.
Page A1
National Assembly negotiates return of President Aristide A8


For 'Cats,' Nine Is the One to Celebrate
Happy birthday, Rum Tum Tugger.
Many happy returns of the day, Mungojerrie.
And Macavity.
And Mistoffelees.
And Jennyanydots, and Griddlebone, and the Pekes and the Pollicles.
And of course Grizabella.
The Broadway production of Andrew Lloyd Webber and T. S. Eliot's "Cats," the first of the British megamusicals, is nine years old tonight.
And because cats and the number nine have long had a natural affinity, there will be a special 7 P.M. performance at the Winter Garden Theater before a largely invited audience, followed by a party at the Rockefeller Center restaurants.


Dance in Review
Jody Oberfelder-Riehm and Javier De Frutos  Judson Memorial Church 55 Washington Square South Manhattan
Jody Oberfelder-Riehm and Javier De Frutos concerned themselves with emotions and architecture in the program they presented last Monday night under the auspices of Movement Research.


Dance in Review
San Francisco Ballet  City Center 131 West 55th Street Manhattan
The San Francisco Ballet presented major debuts on Saturday in a one-act excerpt from Helgi Tomasson's lavish 1990 staging of "The Sleeping Beauty," as well as in George Balanchine's "Ballo della Regina."


Finally, Jets Win Close One
Not only did the Jets learn a lot about losing in the first five weeks of the 1991 season, they also learned a lot about how to win.
Today, they put that savvy to work and held on to a fourth-quarter lead to beat the Cleveland Browns, 17-14.
With just over a minute to play this afternoon, the Jets, who were about to give away a lead for the third time in four weeks, instead forced Bernie Kosar to fumble at the Jets' 39.
James Hasty recovered the ball for the Jets (3-3), and they then ran out the clock.


Cupertino National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Whiff! Cone Puts a 19 Next to '91
In the game that ended the season, David Cone turned in a personal performance today to preserve forever.
Indeed, Cone filled Veterans Stadium with so much smoke that, for a couple of precious hours, he was able to fully obscure an otherwise crushingly depressing season for the Mets.
With myriad combinations of merciless pitches, Cone struck out 19 Phillies in a 7-0 victory that finished the season for the Mets with a pitching achievement accomplished just three other times and surpassed just once in the history of baseball.


Joseph Kaplan, 89, a Researcher Of Atmospheric Phenomena, Dies
Joseph Kaplan, a physicist known for his research on atmospheric phenomena and for his leadership in international work in geophysics, died Thursday in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 89.
Dr. Kaplan died of a heart attack, The Associated Press reported.


Miss Maiers Weds S. M. Wiseman
Susan Marla Maiers, a senior corporate counsel for Metallgesellschaft in New York, a metals and petroleum company, was married yesterday to Stephen Michael Wiseman, an associate at the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.
Rabbi Burt Siegel and the Rev.
John Wade Payne, a Disciples of Christ minister, officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill, a caterer in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Quotation of the Day
"Manifestations of anti-Semitism that exist in our everyday life play into the hands of some reactionary circles." -- President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union.  [ A6:3. ]


Israeli Slain on Upper East Side
An Israeli man was shot and killed on a busy Upper East Side street late Saturday by a masked gunman who fired from close range, the police said.
The man, Uri Mizraci, 38 years old, was shot three times in the torso around 9:15 P.M. as he stood with friends in front of the building at 301 East 79th Street, where he had been living in recent weeks.
Mr.
Mizraci was pronounced dead at New York Hospital at 10:40 P.M.


Volvo's New Agency Sticking to Safety Theme
Those who expected Volvo Cars of North America to abandon its traditional selling point of safety in the wake of the monster-truck advertising scandal will be surprised by the first campaign from Messner Vetere Berger Carey Schmetterer, New York.
The eagerly anticipated campaign, to begin appearing a week from today, introduces a theme, "Drive safely," to replace the long-running theme, "A car you can believe in." Television commercials and print advertisements for Volvo's 1992 models present stories about a test crash, an accident investigator and children who are not allowed in "dad's car," but ride only in "mommy's car," a Volvo.


Law Professor Accuses Thomas Of Sexual Harassment in 1980's
Two days before the Senate is scheduled to vote on his nomination to the Supreme Court, Judge Clarence Thomas was publicly accused today of sexually harassing a law professor at the University of Oklahoma Law Center during the two years she served as his personal assistant in the Federal Government.
Anita F. Hill, a tenured professor of law at Oklahoma, maintained in an affidavit submitted to the Senate Judiciary Committee last month that when she worked for Judge Thomas over a two-year period beginning in 1981, he frequently asked her out and when she refused he spoke to her in detail about pornographic films he had seen.


Homosexuality, Not an Illness, Can't Be Cured; Proudly They Served
To the Editor:
Those gay men who, like me, are old enough to be historic artifacts must find arguments about our suitability for military service a source of bitter amusement.
In the immediate post-World War II period I had many gay friends and acquaintances in their 20's or early 30's.


Treasury to Auction Bills and 7-Year Notes
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings this week consists of offerings of three- and six-month bills totaling $21.6 billion today, the same amount as a week ago.
In addition the Treasury will offer $9.25 billion worth of seven-year notes on Wednesday.
By late on Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.02 percent, and the six-month bill was at 5.07 percent.
The currently traded seven-year note, with a 1998 maturity, yielded 7.13 percent.


Room for Differences; Amid Accord Over Tactical Nuclear Arms, Less Progress to Cut Long-Range Weapons
The American and Soviet arms control initiatives have left the superpowers in agreement on eliminating their battlefield nuclear weapons, but the two sides still have major differences about how to cut their long-range, intercontinental nuclear arms.
In responding to President Bush's arms control initiative, the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, said he would match the American move to destroy or withdraw from service most tactical nuclear weapons on land and at sea.


HBO Tries a New Film Recipe
Take a group of acclaimed actors whose careers have not thrust them into the multimillion-dollar range.
Give them provocative subjects bypassed by the major television networks.
Add a large audience and a guaranteed instant reaction.
The result is a quiet but powerful effort by Home Box Office this season to produce a series of full-length films designed to compete not only with cable and network television, but also with film companies.
"What we find is that we don't need superstars for success," said Robert Cooper, senior vice president at HBO Pictures.
The result, he added, is "big, unusual and not your ordinary television fare."


To Avoid Deficit, Michigan Ends Welfare to Some Adults
For Ruth Williams, a middle-age grandmother who says she has asthma, high blood pressure and phlebitis, the welfare check for $87.50 she received twice a month from the State of Michigan "was like a life raft."
"I'm poor, very poor" she said.
"The check wasn't much, but it gave me a chance to feel like a human being."


Texas A&amp;M Cadets Charge Sex Abuse
Texas A&amp;M University has opened an investigation into the treatment of women in its Corps of Cadets, one of the largest military training programs in the country, after repeated complaints by female cadets that they suffer harassment and abuse at the hands of men who are resentful of their presence in the corps.
One elite cavalry unit has already been disbanded temporarily and 20 male cadets are facing disciplinary charges in a widening scandal that has polarized the campus of the nation's seventh-largest university and threatens to tarnish the institution's image.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; The Giants' Marquee Now Features Hampton
BEFORE the Giants' game with the Phoenix Cardinals yesterday, the homemade sign in the Giants Stadium parking lot read, "Handley to Law School." The signmakers were wishing that Ray Handley had entered George Washington University Law School this year, as he planned, instead of succeeding Bill Parcells as coach.
But with a 20-9 victory, Handley has earned at least a week's reprieve.
If only because he finally turned Rodney Hampton loose.
Not that Handley would acknowledge that the Giants' running offense is geared now to Hampton even though the second-year halfback out of Georgia rushed for 137 yards, including a 12-yard touchdown burst, and added 45 yards with four pass receptions.


HAITIANS CONSIDER AN INTERIM LEADER
After a tense week without a government, Haiti's National Assembly moved today toward negotiating the return of President Jean-Bertand Aristide under conditions that would require him to respect human rights and treat other branches of government as equal partners.
The assembly debated naming an interim president who would form a coalition cabinet and negotiate the return of Father Aristide, the nation's first democratically elected President, who was forced into exile by an army rebellion last Monday.
The lawmakers met into the night, and several said that they expected a decision on an interim presidency as soon as talks are completed with representatives of the army, the church, voodoo associations, business leaders and foreign diplomats.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday Consumer Credit . . .
August Tuesday  Wholesale Trade . . .
August Wednesday None  Thursday Housing Completions . . .
August Weekly Jobless Claims Friday Retail Sales . . .
Sept.
Producer Price Index . . .
Sept.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  DETROIT TIGERS -- Announced that Vada Pinson, Alex Grammas and Jim Davenport, coaches, will not be retained for the 1992 season.
Named Gene Ruth coach.


Ghost of Reykjavik; Soviets Are Not Just Shedding Arms, But an Emblem of Superpower Status
Reading his response to President Bush's arms initiative on Saturday, Mikhail S. Gorbachev seemed unusually terse and solemn.
The reason, perhaps, was that he was presiding not only over the dismantling of nuclear weapons, but also of his superpower.
It was, after all, Soviet nuclear arms that had confirmed the nation as a superpower and backed its claim to parity with the United States at the helm of world affairs.


A. D. Levy Wed To Ms. Lewites
Michelle Beth Lewites, a real estate asset manager at the Yarmouth Group in New York, was married last night to Adam Drew Levy, a senior vice president of Stratton, Oakmont Inc., an investment bank in New York.
Rabbi Jeremiah Wohlberg officiated at Temple Emanuel of Great Neck in Kings Point, L.I.


M.I.A. Issue Shouldn't Set U.S.-Vietnam Policy
To the Editor:
Cokie Roberts's "Why the M.I.A.'s Live On" (Op-Ed, Sept. 20) will only provide more ammunition to those for whom the Vietnam War is not over.
The hype and public attention surrounding this issue only mask the chauvinism of reactionaries who wish to extend the Vietnam War into the 1990's, now that the cold war is over.


Rocky Point Journal; Students Are Sidelined By High Cost of Sports
The soccer players are the lucky athletes at Rocky Point High School this fall.
They still have teams -- even if their parents have to pay up to $340 a season so they can play.
But 200 other athletes are on the sidelines, victims of a nasty budget fight that has disrupted after-school routines for hundreds of students and has polarized this blue-collar Suffolk County community that was once generous with money for schools and sports.


Allison Golub Has Wedding
Allison Jill Golub, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald L. Golub of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married last night to Mervyn Tugendhaft, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mattie Tugendhaft of Amstelveen, the Netherlands.
Rabbi Chaim Stern officiated at the Jewish Community Center in Harrison, N.Y.


Homosexuality, Not an Illness, Can't Be Cured
To the Editor:
Contrary to Dr.
Irving Bieber's "important finding," as Dr.
Myron Glucksman alleges (letter, Sept. 19), the claim that "homosexuals who wish to change their sexual orientation can through psychoanalytic treatment" has no scientific merit.


Review/Dance; From Guinea, Ballets Africains
The Ballets Africains knows how to put on a good show.
A palpable excitement was in the air throughout the program the company presented on Saturday night at the Beacon Theater, and that excitement built to a tumultuous standing ovation at the end as the large audience cheered itself hoarse, hooting and stamping for good measure.
The musicians, acrobats and dancers of this national ensemble from Guinea, founded in 1952, perform with an impressive simplicity.
They are highly accomplished practitioners of their arts, with a good deal of international touring behind them. (The company is on a 54-city American tour that ends on Dec. 3 in Gainesville, Fla.) But there is a sweetness and merriment to their performing that is wholly believable.
Dazzling, complicitous smiles to the audience efficiently raised the temperature in the auditorium, but those smiles also served as infectious expressions of delight in the music and dance of Guinea.


CHRONICLE
"I hope I can find my dinner jacket," JOHN V. LINDSAY said the other day as he routed around packed moving cartons.
The former mayor of New York City is to be honored tonight by the Stage Directors and Choreographers Foundation.
Tomorrow he and his wife, MARY, move to a new apartment in the city, and he had mistakenly packed his formal wear.


Challenger International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Abroad at Home; Too Clever by Half
The candor of Robert M. Gates has become a prime issue in his confirmation hearings, and one intelligence episode throws particular light on it: the 1985 C.I.A. report stating "the case for Soviet involvement" in the 1981 attempt on the life of Pope John Paul II.
The character of the still officially secret report is indicated by some of its reasoning.
"The Soviets were reluctant to invade Poland" in 1981, the report said, "so they decided to demoralize  [ the Polish ]  opposition" by killing the Polish Pope.


Bridge
In a dramatic match that hinged on the final deal, Brazil, the defending champions, advanced to the semifinal of the Bermuda Bowl here this afternoon.
They defeated the United States I team by 8 imps, gaining revenge for a memorable occasion in Sao Paulo in 1985 when the circumstances were reversed.
In other quarterfinal matches in the NEC world team championships, Sweden, Iceland and Poland survived.
Sweden had to struggle to beat Argentina by 26, but the other matches were one-sided.
Iceland beat United States II by 87 after dominating the early play, and Poland surged in the second half to beat Britain by the identical margin.
In the semifinal Brazil will play Poland, while Sweden and Iceland will meet, insuring a Scandinavian finalist.


Pastor's Conduct Divides East Side Congregation
A prominent Unitarian church on the Upper East Side is being torn by accusations that actions by its pastor -- one of Manhattan's most admired clergymen -- have undermined the trust essential to congregational life and to his credibility as a spiritual leader.
On Oct. 15, members of All Souls Unitarian Church will vote on whether to reaffirm their confidence in the Rev.
F.
Forrester Church, or to ask him to resign as senior minister of the church that he is credited with revitalizing over the last 14 years.


Homosexuality, Not an Illness, Can't Be Cured; Replication Will Tell
To the Editor:
William M. Byne (letters, Sept. 19) urges caution in accepting my report, published in Science, that described a difference in brain structure between homosexual and heterosexual men.


Susan Markush Weds Millard Zimet
Dr.
Susan Markush and Millard Jeffrey Zimet were married yesterday at the Fifth Avenue Synagogue by Rabbi Sol Roth.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received an M.D. degree from Columbia University.
She is the director of the intensive-care unit at the Aspen (Colo.) Valley Hospital and has a private practice in internal medicine in Aspen.
Dr.
Zimet is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Markush of Birmingham, Ala.
Her father is a psychiatrist and epidemiologist at the University of Alabama-Birmingham Medical Center.


Season Over, Orioles Make Their Move
In an emotional outpouring that was more celebration than wake, Baltimore fans bid an appreciative farewell today to Memorial Stadium, one of the last of America's neighborhood baseball parks and the home of the Orioles since 1954.
Although lacking the intimacy of Fenway Park or Wrigley Field, the stadium helped lure baseball back to this often overlooked working man's city after an absence of 51 seasons.
And it served as an ever-welcoming home to Oriole teams that won six pennants and three World Series -- including a 1966 upset sweep of the Los Angeles Dodgers -- as well as the 1988 crew, which lost its first 21 games and finished last.


Arbor Drugs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Miscellany
*
The NBC Television Stations unit of NBC has assigned spot sales to two national sales representatives instead of continuing to use its in-house department.
Harrington, Righter &amp; Parsons, New York, will represent WNBC-TV, New York; KNBC-TV, Los Angeles, and WMAQ-TV, Chicago.
Petry Television, New York, will represent WRC-TV, Washington; WTVJ-TV, Miami, and KCNC-TV, Denver.  *CBS Broadcast Group, New York, is combining its marketing functions into the communications department -- advertising, promotion and media relations -- headed by George F. Schweitzer, 40 years old, who becomes senior vice president, CBS marketing and communications, from senior vice president of communications.


Miss Rosenberg Has a Wedding
Barbara Ruth Rosenberg, a management analyst for the New York City Department of Finance, was married yesterday to Paul Jeffrey Gottlieb, a research associate in molecular biology at the Public Research Institute in New York.
Rabbi Leonard J. Aronson officiated at the New Hyde Park (L.I.) Jewish Community Center.


Richter Joins The Rangers
Goaltender Mike Richter orally approved a new contract with the Rangers yesterday and was in Montreal for the team's morning practice.
The pact will be for one season at $675,000.
Richter said that he didn't believe that Coach Roger Neilson would start him in goal tonight in the Rangers' home opener, against the Bruins.


G.O.P. Plays Its Tax Card; Hartford Fury Offers Big Payoffs and Risks
They gathered by the tens of thousands because they are enraged about the state's new income tax and mad about much else in Connecticut today.
The question they left behind for the Republicans, who organized what may have been the largest and angriest protest in modern state history, is whether members of Connecticut's all-but-perpetual minority party can ride the tax-repeal tiger they helped create, or whether they will be gobbled up too, along with every other politician.


Rules for Public and Parochial Schools Differ
To the Editor:
"Black Catholics Get Ahead" (Op-Ed, Sept. 14) asks, "what can the public schools, which enroll most American blacks, including the desperately poor, learn from all this?" As a former public-school teacher and administrator, I came up immediately with three possible answers:


Ellen Meshnick, Manager, Weds
Ellen Hope Meshnick and Paul Alan Immerman were married yesterday at the Beekman Tower Hotel in New York by Rabbi Jeffrey Marker.


A Bold Auburn Steps Out of Its Character
After earning the nickname Pat Tie for repeatedly not going for a victory in a deadlock situation at the end of a game, Coach Pat Dye of Auburn played against type against Southern Mississippi on Saturday.
When the Tigers pulled to 10-9 with 1 minute 33 seconds to play, Dye elected to go for a 2-point conversion.
But Brian Woods broke up an Auburn pass and Southern Mississippi held on for the victory.


AM International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sexual Harassment New as a Legal Issue
Sexual harassment has long been recognized as a problem in the work place.
But as a legal issue, it is relatively new.
Legal experts cite the enactment of Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights act as the legal basis for preventing sexual harassment.
The law now views sexual harassment as a kind of employment discrimination.


Daka International reports earnings for Year to June 29


Glemp Pledges Better Interreligious Ties
Jozef Cardinal Glemp, the Roman Catholic Primate of Poland, ended an 18-day visit to the United States yesterday with a Mass at St.
Patrick's Cathedral, an appearance at the Pulaski Day parade, a meeting with Jewish leaders and another brush with protesters who have pursued him with accusations of anti-Semitism.
"Shame on Cardinal Glemp!" some 100 militant Jewish demonstrators chanted at Madison Avenue and 50th Street as Cardinal Glemp, meeting with a dozen Jewish leaders at the residence of John Cardinal O'Connor of New York, pledged to work for better Catholic-Jewish relations after his return to Poland today.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Edberg Beats Gilbert in Straight Sets  Stefan Edberg, playing aggressively from the outset, breezed to a 6-2, 6-2, 6-2 victory over Brad Gilbert yesterday in the final of the Australian Indoor in Sydney.
The top-ranked Edberg, who won the United States Open last month, celebrated his 32d career title by spraying champagne into the air and then taking a drink from the bottle.
Gilbert, seeded ninth, is 0 for 3 in finals this year. (AP) Seles Defeats Navratilova: Monica Seles, ranked No. 1 in the world, won the Milan Indoor in Italy by defeating Martina Navratilova, 6-3, 3-6, 6-4, in the rematch of the United States Open final won by the 17-year-old.
In the ninth game of the third set, Seles broke serve with a series of powerful, precise returns and held service in the 10th game to win the match. (AP) GOLF  Colbert Comes Back for Senior Victory  Jim Colbert came from three strokes back with a 67 and held on for a one-stroke victory yesterday in the Vantage Championship in Clemmons, N.C.
Four others -- Dale Douglass, George Archer, Simon Hobday and Gibby Gilbert -- led or shared the lead over the final 18 holes before Colbert won his second title of the season with a 205 total, 11 under par on the Tanglewood course.
Jim Dent, Gilbert and Archer tied for second at 206. (AP) McCallister Wins in a Playoff: Blaine McCallister birdied the second playoff hole with a 25-foot putt to win the Texas Open in San Antonio and leave Gary Hallberg a runner-up for the second consecutive year.
McCallister shot a final-round 70 while Hallberg had a 69 over the Oak Hills Country Club course.
Both ended regulation with 11-under 269 totals.
Hallberg missed a 20-foot birdie putt that would have kept the playoff alive. (AP) AUTO RACING  Others Stop While Luyendyk Races Ahead  Arie Luyendyk foiled bids by Bobby Rahal and Michael Andretti and won the Bosch Spark Plug Grand Prix yesterday in Nazareth, Pa.
Rahal appeared to have a victory wrapped up when he darted into the pits for a splash of fuel 10 laps from the end of the 200-lap race.
That stop seemed to give the lead and the overall championship title to Andretti, but he, too, had to pit for fuel on Lap 195 on the one-mile Pennsylvania International Raceway tri-oval.
Suddenly, Luyendyk was taking the checkered flag for his second victory this season.
He drove his Lola-Chevrolet across the finish line .71 of a second ahead of Rahal.
Andretti was third. (AP) Bodine Gets Nascar Victory: Geoff Bodine reached the finish line on fumes to take his first Nascar victory of 1991, the Mello Yello 500 in Concord, N.C.
Bodine took over first place when Allison came in for gas on Lap 317.
Although Allison's stop barely reached 4 seconds, it helped Bodine open up a 21-second edge that Allison couldn't close.
Alan Kulwicki was third, followed by Harry Gant. (AP) HOCKEY  Penguins and Flyers Skate to a Tie  The Philadelphia Flyers got first-period goals from Rick Tocchet and Steve Duchesne yesterday, then survived a two-man Pittsburgh advantage in the final four minutes of regulation to tie the Penguins, 2-2.
In their first home game since winning the Stanley Cup, the Penguins tied the game on Joe Mullen's goal midway through the second period, but they went 0 for 8 on the power play, including the two-man advantage that lasted 1:23. (AP) Jets 5, Flames 3: Ed Olczyk scored a pair of power-play goals to lead Winnipeg over the visiting Calgary Flames.
Olczyk, a natural center playing on the wing this season, notched both his first and second goals of the season. (AP) Kings 2, Oilers 2: Los Angeles goalie Kelly Hrudey made back-to-preserve a tie with the Oilers in Edmonton.
The Kings held a 2-1 lead until early in the third period when Murphy tied it at 2:15.
The Kings took the lead at 12:57 of the first while on the power play when Thomas Sandstrom scored.
Edmonton tied the game at 2:37 of the second period when Josef Beranek sent a blistering 25-foot drive past Hrudey.
Los Angeles took a 2-1 lead late in the second period on Luc Robitaille's goal.


Consequential Cases Are Likely to Test the Supreme Court's New Majority
The Supreme Court opens its 1991-92 term on Monday, temporarily short one Justice but not at all lacking in high-profile, consequential cases that will test the dimensions of the conservative counterrevolution that gathered force during the term that ended three months ago.
In the new term, the Court may well redefine the constitutional boundaries between church and state in a case involving prayer at a public school graduation ceremony.
Other cases of potentially great importance and political sensitivity scheduled for decision include disputes about school desegregation, "hate speech," and the authority of Federal judges to maintain access to clinics that anti-abortion protesters seek to blockade.


New Focus On Decline Of Inflation
In fretful economic times, people often talk as if the only thing standing between the United States economy and permanent stagnation is the Federal Reserve's next move to trim short-term interest rates.
But now, some economists contend, declines in inflation and long-term interest rates may be even more powerful stimulants for growth.
Lower long-term rates reduce the debt burdens of businesses and consumers, making it easier for families to buy homes and allowing companies to invest more in new technology.


A Split Over Machine Tool Imports
For decades, machine tools have been regarded as a mundane but crucial industry, often figuring in American military and trade politics.
They are the behind-the-scenes workhorses of an industrial economy, used for cutting, grinding and boring all sorts of products, including armaments.
In both World Wars, machine tools were officially earmarked for hurry-up production, regarded as vital to wartime mobilization.
And in the 1980's, the decline of the domestic machine tool industry was seen as a symbol of both the plight of American manufacturing and Japan's export offensive.


High School Budget Cuts Disrupt After-School Routines


Classical Music in Review
Angela Cheng Pianist Alice Tully Hall
Beethoven's early sonatas, masterly though they are, have been so thoroughly overshadowed by his middle and late works that pianists tend to overlook them.
Indeed, it takes an inventive musician to make a strong impression in one of the early sonatas, but Angela Cheng did just that on Sunday evening, when she opened her recital with the Sonata No. 6 in F (Op. 10, No. 2).


Magazines Urged to Be Aggressive
In a speech he billed as a "call to arms," the chairman of the Magazine Publishers of America today asked for an industrywide effort to halt the shift of magazine advertising dollars to non-traditional advertising like telemarketing and supermarket rebates.
"Promotion alone is where 45 cents out of every advertising dollar goes today," the chairman, Reginald K. Brack Jr., told hundreds of magazine executives gathered here for the American Magazine Conference.
"Promotion is a pot of gold at the end of the rainbow and we should all be chasing that rainbow."


In Ruin of Everglades, Many Share the Blame
To the Editor:
Robert H. Buker and Donald W. Carson, two sugar industry executives, are more than a little disingenuous when they assert in "Everglades Endgame" (Op-Ed, Sept. 23) that agriculture is being made the scapegoat for South Florida's environmental problems.


About Technobabble
COMPUTER people speak a language all their own.
So do plumbers, librarians and accountants, but somehow the jargon of their trades doesn't irritate the rest of us, or infiltrate our own speech, as much as technobabble does.
After all, no one but a police officer calls a criminal a perpetrator.
"Technobabble," by John A. Barry (M.I.T. Press; $22.50 cloth), is a study of computer language that should be invaluable to computer lovers, computer haters and language students alike.
Mr.
Barry traces technical words and usages from the originators, whether denizen of shop and classroom or cognoscente, who generally give the words a precise meaning, to the wider world, where they often suffer in the transition.
And he describes the lamentable application of mechanistic terms to the human condition, as in "I'm not programmed to do that."


A Brisk Workout on a Brisk Day


Sports of The Times; Yanks Drop Other Shoe On Stump
BASEBALL is known to frown upon its clubs making any October transactions that could take away from the glory of post-season play.
The commissioner's office has a good point.
Today would have been a perfect day to bemoan the outdoor game disappearing into a gloomy cavern of a domed stadium just as sunny warm weather arrived in the Twin Cities.


Westport Boy Dies In Shooting Game
A 16-year-old Westport boy died three days after he was shot in the head when he and two friends played a form of Russian roulette after school.
Oliver Slater died on Sunday at Norwalk Hospital, and his friend, Marco Lombardini, also 16, could face manslaughter charges, police officials said yesterday.


Oldest Slab Of Mayans Is Reported
ARCHEOLOGISTS working in the Central American nation of Belize have found what they say may be the oldest known Mayan monument.
The stone slab, or stela, includes severely eroded carvings of Mayan glyphs and numbers indicating that they date to 146 B.C. -- more than a century earlier than any previously discovered monuments.
The discovery was announced last week by archeologists at Southwest Texas State University in San Marcos.
They said that finding such an early inscription alters the traditional scholarly view that Mayan writing and counting systems originated in the highlands to the north, in Guatemala and Mexico, and were introduced later into the lowlands of Guatemala, Honduras and Belize.


Nassau Approves Strict Item-Pricing Law
Nassau County today approved the strictest item-pricing law in the state, requiring supermarkets to mark the price on all but a few products carried in the store.
The law was hailed as a victory for consumers in Nassau County, who will now be able to know the price of an item before it goes through the cashier scanners.


EXECUTIVES
*
Amrep Corp., New York, a subscription fulfillment services company, named James Wall senior vice president. *
Community Lending Corp., Albany, a newly created lending organization to provide financing for affordable housing in upstate New York, named Christopher R. Hooke president and chief executive.


U.S. Investigating National Medical
Shares of National Medical Enterprises Inc. tumbled $4.125, to $16.125, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange today after the company confirmed that its psychiatric hospital operations were the subject of investigations in Florida, Texas and New Jersey.
National Medical, which operates psychiatric hospitals through its Psychiatric Institutes of America subsidiary, said it was cooperating with the investigations.


Philadelphia Police Investigate Cone
David Cone, the pitcher for the Mets, is the subject of a criminal investigation by the sex-crimes unit of the Philadelphia Police Department, according to two members of the department.
The department employees, neither of whom was speaking in an official capacity, said last night that the sex-crimes unit was responding to a complaint concerning an alleged incident last weekend.
Cone has not been arrested, and neither of the people commenting on the matter unofficially was prepared to characterize the incident or speak about how seriously the department was treating the allegation.


RISING PERIL SEEN AT EUROPE A-SITES
New safety problems are piling on top of old ones at the nuclear reactors in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union because of the economic and political upheavals there, the chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said today.
The chairman, Ivan Selin, who recently returned from a trip to visit eight reactors in Eastern and Western Europe, said he was "uneasy" about the situation in the former East bloc.


Twins, Barely
The Blue Jays have dominated the Twins for two seasons.
But Minnesota never takes that regular-season stuff too seriously, and they do have that invaluable Metrodome advantage.
Twins in seven games.


Haiti Legislature Declares the Presidency Vacant
Under pressure from belligerent soldiers, Haiti's legislature tonight voted to apply a constitutional article that declares the presidency vacant and clear the way for the naming of a provisional leader who would be required to call new elections within 90 days.


Outbreak of Polio Alarms Officials
IN a major step toward a goal of eradicating polio from the world by 2000, health workers have virtually stopped the spread of the paralytic infection in the Americas.
But the World Health Organization's campaign to wipe out polio as it did smallpox has recently been threatened by a large and surprising outbreak of polio among an immunized population in the Middle Eastern country of Oman.


U.S. Garment Makers Come Home
The clothing racks at Macy's, Bloomingdale's and Saks Fifth Avenue are more and more often showing off an unfamiliar tag: "Made in the U.S.A."
Apparel industry economists say about 50 percent of the clothing sold in the United States is made abroad, and in some segments, like women's garments, manufacturing is almost exclusively done overseas.


Once Again, Messier Shows He's Extra Special
The new captain found his new teammate in the slot and discovered another way to win a hockey game.
Mark Messier, acquired by the Rangers last Friday and officially knighted as the team's captain before last night's game, fed Mike Gartner neatly from along the right boards, then whooped it up as Gartner beat Boston goalie Matt DelGuidice with a wrist shot 31 seconds into overtime for a 2-1 Ranger victory at Madison Square Garden.


For Blue Jays' Gaston, Joy Mixed With Pain
For Minnesota's Tom Kelly, Atlanta's Bobby Cox, Pittsburgh's Jimmy Leyland, what is about to unfold in baseball's league playoffs will be an exhilarating ride.
For Toronto's Cito Gaston, it will be another week of both agony and ecstasy.
To reach the World Series, to win it all, are dreams he shares with the other three managers of baseball's division-winning teams.
To be able to sit and enjoy is a hope he gave up on long ago.


Review/Fashion; In Milan, the Mood Is Subdued
The curtain opened over the weekend on a somewhat subdued fashion scene here.
Fireworks may come later, but most of the spring shows were modest affairs, introducing designers' second- and even third-string collections.
The clothes were friendly, lighthearted, familiar and less expensive than the main lines, which will be shown toward the end of the week.
Gianni Versace weighed in with two collections.
One, Versus, introduced in his new retail shop on Via San Pietro all'Orto, mixes the wild and romantic prints for which he is famous.
Jeans jackets with soft bouffant party dresses, pale colors with bold black-and-white graphics.
At $400 to $1,200, the prices are half those of his regular collection.
There are other Versus shops in Hong Kong, Japan and Korea.


Law on Sex Harassment Is Recent and Evolving
Experts on sexual harassment say that the description Anita F. Hill gave of Clarence Thomas's advances when she was his personal assistant 10 years ago can almost be a model for some of the sexual harassment cases that have gone to the Federal courts over the last decade.
The experts point to such familiar elements in her description as a pattern of unwelcome advances, graphic accounts of pornography and the implicit threat that if Professor Hill failed to listen to such talk, she would suffer professionally.


Careers; Opportunities Still Abound In Nursing
THE shortage in the nursing profession continues, says Dr.
Joyce J. Fitzpatrick, dean of the Frances Bolton School of Nursing at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, with 1,500 openings in that city alone.
And the Government projects that the nation will need 200,000 more nurses by 2000, Dr.
Fitzpatrick said last week.
Currently, there about two million nurses in the United States, and more than 80 percent of them are in the work force, either full or part time.


Shamir Again Criticizes U.S. on Loan Guarantees
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir today delivered one of his more blistering attacks on the United States' postponement of loan guarantees for resettling Soviet immigrants here, saying the action struck at "the deepest foundations of Jewish and Zionist existence."
Mr.
Shamir and his aides have vacillated repeatedly in their public remarks on the aid battle, swinging back and forth between anger and resignation, with an occasional pause to worry about the direction of Israel's relations with Washington.


Q&amp;A
Flying Upside Down
Q.
Are there any birds that fly upside down?
TXT&gt;
A.
Although hummingbirds do not make a habit of staying upside down in flight, they can do a full circle in the air that has them flying upside down for part of the maneuver, said Tim Dillon, a research aide at the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology in Ithaca, N.Y.
"They go upside down in a loop, like the new attack helicopters," he said.
"Their wings are in a whir of motion."
Because of the way birds' wings are angled for flying and gliding, there are probably no others that can fly upside down, Mr.
Dillon said.
"They are designed to fly right side up."  Sugar and Diabetes
Q.
Does eating too much sugar give you diabetes?
A.
There is no evidence that sugar itself predisposes children or adults to diabetes, said Dr.
Xavier Pi-Sunyer (pronounced PEA-soon-yay), president-elect of the American Diabetes Association.
However, sugar consumption must be considered as part of the total diet, he said, and sugar should be limited in the sense of making sure to consume only the number of calories needed to maintain a normal weight.
"Overweight may predispose a person to a kind of diabetes, called type 2 diabetes, that generally comes on late in life," Dr.
Pi-Sunyer said.
"Type 1 diabetes, the kind children get, occurs not because of dietary indiscretion but because of mechanisms related to the genetic makeup of individuals that predisposes them to develop diabetes," he said.
For people who have that genetic makeup, he said, "if some environmental insult occurs, it seems to cause antibodies to form to tissues in the body." What the insult is is unclear, he said.
These antibodies kill cells in the pancreas, called beta cells, that produce the hormone insulin, Dr.
Pi-Sunyer said.
Insulin helps the blood sugar to be deposited in cells, where the body can use it by oxidizing it, he said.
"High blood sugar means the person cannot dispose of sugar from foods normally, and the fact that one is eating a lot of sugar doesn't mean a normal individual can't dispose of it," Dr.
Pi-Sunyer explained.
Readers are invited to submit questions about science to Questions, Science Times, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Questions of general interest will be answered in this column, but requests for medical advice cannot be honored and unpublished letters cannot be answered individually.
ILS&gt;Drawing


I.B.M. Link With British Telecom Set
BT, formerly known as British Telecommunications, today announced a cooperation agreement with I.B.M. aimed at helping companies cope with the mounting complexities of modern telecommunications.
For BT, the venture is a further attempt to strengthen its ambitious project to build an international network for big business.
The announcement came as Telecom 91, a conference of executives from the world's leading telecommunications companies, opened here today.
The Telecom meetings, begun in 1971 by the International Telecommunications Union, a United Nations agency, are held once every four years for the world's telephone companies to exchange information on the industry.


Another Shift at Top For Morgan Stanley
Joseph G. Fogg 3d, a longtime executive with Morgan Stanley &amp; Company who helped found the firm's mergers and acquisitions department, is stepping down as the head of investment banking a little more than a year after he was appointed to the post, the firm announced yesterday.
Mr.
Fogg, 44 years old, is well known on Wall Street for his acumen on deals and his influence within Morgan Stanley.
He will become an advisory director with the firm, maintaining certain client relationships.


Books of The Times; Two Men, Just One Woman and the Usual Result
Talking It Over  By Julian Barnes 275 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
Two men, who are best friends, and the beautiful woman they both love: as one of the heroes of Julian Barnes's latest novel remarks, it was just "like that French film where they all go bicycling together."


The Death Of Leisure
The evolution, from the simple to the intricate, from casualness to intensity, is visible in almost every contemporary American recreation, whether it's bicycling, roller-skating, cross-country skiing or boating.
Even windsurfing, which started life as a simple and inexpensive alternative to sailing, has succumbed to what appears to be an inevitable tendency to complicate fun with gear and technical gadgetry.
Play, in short, is beginning to look more and more like work.
"There is nothing -- absolutely nothing -- half so much worth doing as simply messing about in boats," said a character in "The Wind in the Willows." But messing about is exactly what's missing from most mock-professional recreations in which so much attention is paid to improving performance and increasing efficiency.
Indeed, it is exactly what seems to be missing from President Bush's headlong leisure-time rush from the horseshoe pit to the golf course to the cigarette boat.


History of Walden Emerges From Its Mud
"TIME is but the stream I go a-fishing in," Henry David Thoreau wrote in the famous account of his two-year experiment in thinking, living and studying nature at Walden Pond.
Now, taking up where Thoreau's nature studies left off and using intellectual tools unavailable in his time, a scientist at the University of Wisconsin has dipped more deeply into the stream of time at Walden than Thoreau could ever have hoped to do.
By analyzing frozen core samples of pond sediments that embody a 600-year-old ecological record, Dr.
Marjorie Winkler has come up with a fascinating profile of the pond's history.
Her samples record changes that took place over the past six centuries in the pond and its environment, showing how they have continuously been altered by humans, including Thoreau himself.


On Men Finding The Issue 'Difficult'
Anita F. Hill, who has said that Judge Clarence Thomas sexually harassed her, was asked at a news conference here today if people who make such complaints face any stigma.
Here is her response:
[ W ] hat I will say is that I think that it is very difficult for a number of males to see that this is a real issue.
And let me tell you about a phone call I had right before I got here.


INSIDE
Phone Companies Win Ruling on Data Services
The seven Bell telephone companies, which have vigorously sought permission to provide information like stock quotations, sports scores and news reports, were authorized by a Federal appeals court to begin the services immediately.
Page D1.
High Court Tax Review
The Supreme Court agreed to reconsider a 24-year-old decision that has barred states from taxing billions of dollars in mail-order sales.
Page D1.
The Court will also decide whether a state may medicate a psychotic criminal defendant against his will to make him competent for trial.
Supreme Court Roundup, page A23.
Nobel for Cell Research
Two German scientists won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for discoveries in basic cell function that have shed light on disease.
Page C1.
Haitian Parliament Acts
Haiti's Parliament declared the presidency vacant so an interim leader could recall President Aristide from exile or call new elections.
Page A10.
Yanks Dismiss Merrill
A day after the Yankees finished in fifth place, Stump Merrill lost his job as the team's manager.
Page B9.
Leo Durocher Dies at 86
Leo Durocher, the paradigm of the win-at-all-costs baseball manager, died in California.
Page D25.


REBEL KURDS KILL 60 UNARMED IRAQIS
Kurdish guerrillas today shot and killed at least 60 unarmed Iraqi soldiers who were kneeling inside a building in Sulaimaniya with their hands on their heads during renewed fighting between the Kurds and Iraqi forces.
The soldiers were shot at point-blank range, a Reuters correspondent, Kurt Schork, who witnessed the killings, reported by satellite telephone.
The troops had apparently been captured in hand-to-hand fighting on the edge of the Kurdish-held city.


Cell Channel Finding Earns Nobel Prize
TWO German scientists were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in Stockholm yesterday for discoveries in basic cell function that have shed light on the causes of several diseases, like diabetes and cystic fibrosis, and that are paving the way to tailor-made drugs.
Dr.
Erwin Neher, 47 years old, and Dr.
Bert Sakmann, 49, will share the $1 million prize for work they began in the 1970's and partly conducted in the United States.
Their research, particularly the development of a technique called patch clamp, which allows the detection of electrical currents of a trillionth of an ampere in the membrane, or surface of a cell, has "revolutionized modern biology and facilitated research" in many areas, the Nobel Committee said.


Vermont City Considers Fate of Hydropower Deal
The people are going to the polls this Tuesday in a bitterly contested election, but no one here in Vermont's largest city is talking about schools or crime or throwing a rascal out of office.
In fact, no one is even running for office.
In a referendum that has citizens debating human rights and analyzing energy-demand forecasts, residents of Burlington will decide a single question: whether to buy hydroelectric power generated in the Canadian subarctic.


Quotation of the Day
"The keg has become a symbol of the free and easy availability of alcohol. The keg ban is just a step, and I hope it will be replaced by better steps." -- Harold T. Shapiro, the president of Princeton University, where beer kegs have been banned.  [ B1:3. ]


In the New Albania, New Varieties of Chaos
When schools reopened the other day after an extended summer pause, Albanian education authorities were horrified to discover that 740 of their buildings had been vandalized -- windows, desks and other furnishings smashed.
It was another symptom of the chaos in this Balkan country, whose 3.5 million people are Europe's poorest.
After a summer in which 20,000 Albanians, most of them young, tried to leave the country, only to be returned by Italy, a wave of robberies and burglaries has swept the land.


Airport Rail Portion of Cuomo Plan Must Offer Travelers More
To the Editor:
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's public-works plan to revive New York City's economy (news article, Sept. 24) includes a light-rail service to La Guardia and Kennedy airports that ignores the lessons of the defunct Train to the Plane.
Most travelers with more than one piece of luggage find subway stairs and multiple transfers too difficult.
The real market for an airport rail system would most likely be the unencumbered business traveler.
They would not be attracted by lower cost, but only by speed.


DARTMOUTH BEGINS $425 MILLION DRIVE
Dartmouth College, the smallest member of the Ivy League, yesterday kicked off a five-year campaign to raise $425 million, joining a growing list of prestigious colleges and universities that are trying to attract record amounts of voluntary support despite a weak economy and bad publicity.
Dartmouth's goal is far lower than the $1.25 billion sought by Cornell University in the highest goal set by any university so far, or the $1.1 billion already raised by Stanford University.
But Dartmouth's goal is ambitious, given its size, 4,500 students as against Stanford's 13,000, and its budget, roughly one-quarter the size of Stanford's.


Yugoslav Jets Attack Croatian Presidential Palace


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
A Federal appeals court gave the Baby Bells permission to begin immediately providing information services like stock quotes, sports scores and news stories.
The ruling overturns part of a July 25 decision by Judge Harold H. Greene that had lifted a longstanding ban prohibiting the companies from owning information services but also delayed lifting the ban pending appeals.  [ Page D1. ]
Westinghouse Electric lost $1.48 billion in the quarter because of real estate problems in its financial-services subsidiary.
It also said it would eliminate 4,000 jobs.  [ D1. ]


Slaying of Soviet Pop Singer Is Laid to Dispute With Rival
The slaying of a popular Soviet singer on Sunday stemmed from a dispute with a rival over who should go on stage first at a concert in St.
Petersburg, the official press agency Tass reported today.
The singer, Igor Talkov, was shot to death at the Palace of Sport by an assistant to the rival singer, known as Aziza, Tass quoted a police officer as saying.
The killer remains at large, the police said.


Family Quarrel Unfolds In a Houston Courtroom
The lesser foibles, the big financial dealings and the most intimate quarrels of one of Houston's most celebrated families are being put on display here in a little courtroom with linoleum floors.
In a city where dynastic battles and business rivalries are followed like major league sports, the case of Wyatt vs.
Sakowitz is a championship match.
It is a courtroom conflict between people who used to be known for their glittering appearances at charity galas.
With the bitterness that can only be generated by a feud among kin, they publicly baited each other in a trial that began last week


The Death Of Leisure
The evolution, from the simple to the intricate, from casualness to intensity, is visible in almost every contemporary American recreation, whether it's bicycling, roller-skating, cross-country skiing or boating.
Even wind-surfing, which started life as a simple and inexpensive alternative to sailing, has succumbed to what appears to be an inevitable tendency to complicate fun with gear and technical gadgetry.
Play, in short, is beginning to look more and more like work.
"There is nothing -- absolutely nothing -- half so much worth doing as simply messing about in boats," said Toad in "The Wind in the Willows." But messing about is exactly what's missing from most mock-professional recreations in which so much attention is paid to improving performance and increasing efficiency.
Indeed, it is exactly what seems to be missing from President Bush's headlong leisure-time rush from the horseshoe pit to the golf course to the cigarette boat.


U.N. AIDES DISCOVER ATOM ARMS CENTER CONCEALED BY IRAQ
United Nations inspectors have discovered a complex of buildings that apparently served as the nerve center of President Saddam Hussein's covert nuclear weapons program but largely escaped allied attack during the Persian Gulf war.
In a report to the Security Council, United Nations inspectors sent to ferret out Mr.
Hussein's nuclear plans said that on their most recent trip to Iraq they had found a top-secret document indicating that the hub of Iraq's weapons-development program was a scientific research installation called Al Atheer, about 40 miles south of Baghdad.


Defiant Enforcer of the Reagan Doctrine
For years, Elliott Abrams was an elusive target for prosecutors in the Iran-contra affair.
Even after the self-styled "gladiator" for the Reagan Doctrine in Central America was forced to apologize to Congress in 1987 for lying about soliciting money from the Sultan of Brunei for the anti-Sandinista rebels in Nicaragua, he was neither was dismissed nor resigned from his job as Assistant Secretary of State.


BRIEFS
DEBT
*
Washington State priced $50 million of college savings general obligation zero-coupon bonds through Security Pacific Securities to yield 6.60 percent for a 2011 maturity.
They have a double-A rating from Moody's and Standard &amp; Poor's.
COMMON STOCK
*
Western Gas Resources Inc., Denver, has filed for 4.1 million shares to be offered through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The proceeds will be used to retire debt and finance some recent aquisitions.
RATINGS
*
Dell Computer's proposed $100 million convertible subordinated debenture issue has been rated B by Standard &amp; Poor's.
The company is based in Austin, Tex.
*
New York State Dormitory Authority's $102.3 million revenue bonds (Suffolk County) have been given a Baa-1 rating by Moody's.
*
Southwest Airlines' $100 million of 8 3/4 percent notes, due October 2003, have been rated A- by Standard &amp; Poor's.
The company is based in Dallas.
*
United Airlines' $360.8 million pass-through certificates, series 1991, have been rated BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's.
The company is part of the UAL Corp., based in Elk Grove Village, Ill.


Another Blow to Westinghouse
For the second time this year, the Westinghouse Electric Corporation has taken a major write-off as a result of real estate problems in its financial-services subsidiary.
The company said yesterday that because of write-offs it had a net loss of $1.48 billion in the third quarter.
The company, based in Pittsburgh, also said it would eliminate 4,000 jobs from its work force of approximately 115,000.


Rain Delays Christo's Umbrellas
The contradiction was not lost on anyone.
The rain in Japan has been so heavy that the artist Christo decided today to put off plans to open 3,100 umbrellas in the rice fields north of Tokyo and on the hillsides along Interstate 5 northwest of Los Angeles.
At a party for the event, the 56-year-old artist said he had taken seven years to plan and execute the project for 1,340 blue umbrellas here and 1,760 yellow umbrellas in California, and he wanted viewing conditions to be ideal.


Computer Biology Unit
THE UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON is starting a department of molecular biotechnology with a $12 million gift from William Gates 3d, the founder and chairman of the Microsoft Corp. of Redmond, Wash., the software publisher.
The university is recruiting Dr.
Leroy Hood, a California Institute of Technology biologist, to head the program.
Mr.
Gates said in a telephone interview yesterday that the new program would attempt to train researchers in the growing convergence between the life sciences and disciplines like mathematics, applied physics and computer science and to develop new tools for basic molecular biological research.


Excerpts of Senator Biden's Chronology of the Complaint by Professor Hill
Following is the text of a statement released today by Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the Delaware Democrat who heads the Senate Judiciary Committee, on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas and the allegation of sexual harassment against him by Professor Anita F. Hill.
The text was provided by the Senator.
I am releasing today a chronology of the  [ Judiciary ]  Committee's contacts with Professor Hill.
The chronology provides the complete details of the full committee staff's contacts with Professor Hill from the time we were made aware of her charges to the day of the committee vote  [ on Judge's Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court ] .


Lower Lead Limits Are Made Official
The Federal Government today officially lowered the threshold at which children are considered to have lead poisoning, thus increasing the number of children considered poisoned to four million or more from several hundred thousand.
The Federal Centers for Disease Control said that scientific evidence was "so overwhelming and compelling" that children suffer mental problems when their blood contains even 10 micrograms of lead per deciliter of blood that the threshold of poisoning, 25 micrograms per deciliter, must be lowered.


Motorcycle of 'Zen' Goes in the Other Direction
Few novelists would ever regret having one of their fictional characters come powerfully to life.
On the contrary, such an occurrence would be cause for celebration.
But for Robert M. Pirsig, the author of "Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance" and now, 17 years later, of a novel called "Lila," the heroine of his new work is altogether too vivid for comfort.
The trouble is, Lila was intended primarily as a device; a foil to the dense metaphysical musings that make up much of the book named for her.
But Mr.
Pirsig said: "She grew out of her subordinate role into a much stronger figure, in fact one that's almost too strong. She tends to make people think, 'Why are you bothering us with all this metaphysics when we want to read about Lila?' "


The White House Refuses to Link Aristide's Return and Democracy
The Bush Administration today further distanced itself from the ousted Haitian President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, by refusing to say that his return to power was a necessary precondition for Washington to feel that democracy has been restored in Haiti.
On Sunday American officials in Port-au-Prince and Washington signaled privately that they were moving away from their unequivocal support of Father Aristide, in light of concerns over his human rights record.
Today, when the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, was asked if that was the case, he responded with a less than ringing endorsement for the Haitian President, and suggested that Washington was most interested in the restoration of constitutional democracy in Haiti, not a particular individual.


NBC to Reimburse Disney for 'Today' Show Junket
NBC News has announced that it will reimburse the Walt Disney Company for travel and hotel fees for some 30 staff members of the "Today" show who covered the celebration of Disney World's 20th anniversary early last week.
An NBC News executive yesterday blamed the "naivete" of some new members of the production staff for the decision by the "Today" show to accept free flights and hotel accommodations.
The staff members spent two days at the Florida site interviewing Disney executives and covering the special events staged by the theme park.


The Gradual Greening of Mount St. Helens
WHEN the Mount St.
Helens volcano exploded in 1980, the north slope collapsed with a mighty shudder and sent an avalanche of mud and rock down into the valley of the Toutle River.
Every tree in sight -- nearly every sprig of vegetation within 15 miles of the erupting crater -- was swept away or buried, leaving a virtually lifeless terrain.
Life is hardy, though, and each year the gray swath of avalanche debris becomes a shade greener.
Biologists and ecologists who study the revegetation of the striken land are encouraged by the gradual comeback, although they are chagrined to discover yet another case in which nature would probably have been better off if people had left well enough alone.


Cuomo Challenges His Chief Judge's Lawsuit
Following the political dictum that it is better to attack than to defend, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo asked a Federal judge today to dismiss a lawsuit filed against the Governor in state court last month by Chief Judge Sol Wachtler.
But the escalating legal and political feud, which began when Judge Wachtler challenged the adequacy of this year's judiciary budget, drew an unusual rebuke from the Federal judge, who admonished the two "titans of New York" to avoid "an unseemly conflict."


Classical Music in Review
Traditional Iranian Music  Weill Recital Hall
To an outsider, the program of traditional Iranian music presented at Weill Recital Hall on Saturday evening proved eminently satisfying, though it raised more questions than it answered about Iranian musical tradition.
A half-hour improvisation by Mohammad Reza Lotfi on setar, especially, seemed heavily dependent for its effect on modern electronics.
Mr.
Lofti sounded for all the world like a rock guitarist at times, drawing a raucous, churning, pounding sonority from the setar.


Court to Review Mail-Order Sales Tax Curb
In a case with enormous financial implications for the mail-order industry, the Supreme Court agreed today to reconsider one of its own precedents, a 24-year-old decision that has barred states from taxing an estimated $45 billion a year in mail-order sales.
The 1967 precedent, which has come under sustained attack in recent years from states eager to capture as much as $3 billion a year in lost tax revenue, held that the Constitution bars states from taxing sales made by out-of-state companies that have no physical presence in the state.


Printing and Scanning
APPLE COMPUTER INC., returning its attention to the desktop publishing market that made the Macintosh computer so popular, introduced two new laser printers and a remarkable new scanner system last week.
The scanner software, in particular, is a breakthrough product that promises to make it much simpler for average users to incorporate pictures into their laser-printed documents.
Three new technologies are employed in Apple's products.
One is called Fineprint, which is built into both of the new printers and which appears to be very similar to the Resolution Enhancement Technology pioneered by the Hewlett-Packard Company.
Fineprint alters the placement of the little dots that make up text and drawings, reducing or eliminating jagged lines.


Brew Battle On Campus: Ban the Can Or the Keg?
The beer keg, as much a staple of college life as the all-nighter or the incompatible roommate, is at the center of debate this fall over how to control alcohol abuse at two of New Jersey's largest campuses.
With the semester in full swing and beer flowing as freely as ideas, Princeton University and Cook College of Rutgers University have moved simultaneously to establish new restrictions intended to curb drunken carousing and worse.


In Ruin of Everglades, Many Share the Blame; Farming's Damage
To the Editor:
In "Everglades Endgame" (Op-Ed, Sept. 23), the Florida sugar industry, after two decades of denying that its water pollution harms the Everglades, contests the cleanup by pointing to the yet greater problems of water shortage.


Freddie Mac Dealers To Pay Fines
The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation said today that 17 banks and Wall Street firms that had admitted to inflating orders and submitting false information in bidding for the agency's securities had agreed to pay penalties imposed last week.
The 17 companies, which were not identified by the agency, called Freddie Mac, had requested a delay until this morning to decide how to respond to the penalities sought by the agency.
Another firm, Salomon Brothers, identified itself and paid the penalty on Friday, as requested.
As a group, the companies were fined about $1 million and were given a deadline last Friday to pay the fine or be cut out of future Freddie Mac securities sales.


Patient at Kings County Dies in Plunge, Police Report
A mentally disturbed woman who was tied to a bed on a regular medical ward at Kings County Hospital managed to loosen her bonds, scamper up two flights of stairs and jump to her death from an unlocked sixth-floor window, the police said yesterday.
According to the police, the woman killed herself during visitors' hours Sunday, while her son and husband were nearby, only after repeatedly trying to escape from her bonds and after a nurse's aide had been assigned to continuously monitor her condition.


The Beauty of Lead
More than 70 tons of lead ingots that sank more than 2,000 years ago when a Roman ship came to grief in the Mediterranean have figuratively turned to gold for Italian physicists.
The ingots -- presumably en route to factories to be fashioned into water pipes, anchors and clamps used to reinforce stone buildings -- have been isolated from the atmosphere for so long that the radioactive form of lead in them has almost entirely decayed.


Court Lets 'Baby Bells' Branch Out
Handing the seven Bell telephone companies a big victory, a Federal appeals court today gave them permission to begin providing information services like stock quotes, sports scores and news reports immediately.
The ruling overturns part of a lower court decision on July 25 in which Federal District Judge Harold H. Greene lifted a longstanding ban that prohibited the regional Bell companies from owning information services but also delayed lifting the ban until opponents appealed.


Birmingham Journal; Work of Obscure Poet Bonds a City and Japan
A professor came out of his office in the Samuel Ullman Building at the University of Alabama campus here a decade ago and was struck by a tableau of Japanese men standing solemnly in front of a portrait of the building's moustachioed namesake.
"They were all silent and looking at the portrait," recalled Tennant McWilliams, dean of social and behavioral sciences at the university.
"We have many internationals on the campus, but never a concentration of folk in front of that portrait. I thought, there's something in this."


On My Mind; Silence Is a Lie
On Sept. 25, a special commission on AIDS appointed by the White House and Congress sent a public message to the President of the United States.
It was almost a prayer -- lead us.
The commission could have sent the same message even more pointedly to every other president, or every king or dictator in office.
They see men, women and children die of the disease in their own capitals, know more will die every tomorrow and are silent.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14
Iraq's nuclear nerve center was found by U.N. investigators, but largely escaped allied attack during the Persian Gulf war, a report to the Security Council says.
Page A1


McDonald's of Canada Picks Review Finalists
McDonald's of Canada, based in Toronto, has selected four finalists in a review for its corporate advertising account, which bills $10 million to $12 million a year.
Peter Beresford, the company's vice president-marketing, yesterday confirmed an article in this week's issue of the trade publication Adweek that listed the finalists as the Toronto offices of Leo Burnett, McCann-Erickson, Cossette and the incumbent, Vickers &amp; Benson.
All of the agencies also handle other McDonald's accounts in Canada and the United States; Burnett shares the fast-food giant's United States corporate account with DDB Needham Worldwide.


Legal Papers Served in Cato Suit
Lawyers for the family of Gavin Cato, the 7-year-old boy killed by a car driven by a Hasidic man in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, yesterday served legal papers saying they would sue the leader of the international Lubavitch movement for being negligent in hiring the driver.
The lawyers, Colin A. Moore and C. Vernon Mason, said yesterday that they had also named as defendants in the suit the driver, Yosef Lifsh; the New York Police Department; the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes; the Hatzoloh Ambulance Corps, and the owner of the car that hit the child, Yehuda Zirkland.


Leases Back Debt Of Unisys Unit
Chemical Securities, a unit of the Chemical Banking Corporation, said yesterday that it completed its first tax-exempt asset-backed transaction on Friday, a $41.1 million debt offering for the Unisys Municipal Credit Corporation, a unit of the Unisys Corporation, the large information systems company.


Homer Jensen, 77, Aerial Mapper And Pioneer in the Search for Oil
Homer Jensen, a pioneer in aerial searches for oil and minerals hidden underground and beneath the seas, died Saturday at his home in Wyncote, Pa.
He was 77 years old.
His family said he died of cancer.


Corrections
A brief dance review yesterday about the San Francisco Ballet omitted the writer's signature.
The review was by Anna Kisselgoff.


Yugoslav Planes Attack Croatian Presidential Palace
Yugoslav Air Force jets fired rockets into the presidential palace in the capital of Croatia today.
The strike missed the two top leaders of the separatist republic and the federal Prime Minister, who were in the building at the time.
The attack in the heart of Zagreb, which Prime Minister Ante Markovic described as "attempted murder" ordered by the Yugoslav Defense Minister, came as the European Community prepared to impose an economic embargo if the combatants in the Yugoslav conflict did not cease hostilities.


Insurers Should Cover Marrow Transplants
To the Editor:
"Patients and Insurers Clash on Therapy's Outer Limits" (front page, Sept. 19) reports that insurance coverage of bone marrow transplants for the treatment of breast cancer has become the subject of bitter lawsuits.


The Ex-Man: Yanks Usher Merrill Out the Door
In a move that had been speculated about in the clubhouse, whispered about in the dugout and expected in the press box for several weeks, the Yankees finally announced the dismissal of Manager Stump Merrill yesterday.
No one was shocked.
No one was surprised.
Merrill traveled an arduous road in his first full season in charge of the club.
The Yankees were uttering pennant thoughts when they creeped over the .500 mark in July, but they faltered soon after and Merrill absorbed most of the blame.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN and CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


THE THOMAS NOMINATION: The Senate and Sexism; Panel's Handling of Harassment Allegation Renews Questions About an All-Male Club
The bitter "he said, she said" case of Anita F. Hill and Clarence Thomas has offered a rare look into the mechanics of power and decision-making in Washington, a city where men have always made the rules and the Senate remains an overwhelmingly male club.
Even with the facts of the Oklahoma law school professor's accusations of sexual harassment against Judge Thomas still in dispute, the story of how members of the all-male Judiciary Committee handled the allegations has touched off an angry explosion among women in legal and political circles.


Review/Television; Muhammad Ali: The Boxer, the Man
Tonight's biography of Muhammad Ali, at 8 on the Arts &amp; Entertainment cable network, catches the courage, independence and sharpness that made the boxing champion an admired figure outside the ring, too.
The hour, with its scenes from the big fights and the hype that accompanied them, covers his career from his youth as an amateur boxer -- when he was still known as Cassius Clay -- to his gold medal in the 1960 Rome Olympics to his interrupted years as champ.
There he is, doing his famous prefight theatrics, especially before the 1963 match with Sonny Liston that made him No. 1: "The world did not dream when they laid down their money/That they would see a total eclipse of Sonny." It wasn't just brashness.
The challenger predicted he would win in five rounds, and Mr.
Liston decided not to come out for the sixth.


Ex-Colleagues of Nominee Step Forward to Rebut Allegations
Several men and women who have worked with Clarence Thomas said today that they were taken aback by a former aide's accusations that he sexually harassed her.
A typical comment came from Phyllis Berry, who was Judge Thomas's assistant for Congressional affairs at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, who said "there were just rigorous rules for personal conduct that he demanded not only of himself but also of his staff."


Treasury Issues Retreat in Price
Prices of Treasury securities dipped in fairly active trading yesterday, as dealers prepared for an auction tomorrow of new seven-year notes and waited for the Federal Reserve Board to push short-term interest rates lower.
The sense that the Fed will lower the overnight rate on bank loans in the Federal funds market to help stimulate the economy was manifested at yesterday's auction of three-month and six-month Treasury bills.
Rates on those short-term securities fell to the lowest level in more than 14 years.


Review/Music; Chamber Symphony Gives Unfamiliar a Hearing
If the new leadership of the New York Philharmonic has any sense, its spies were making a thorough surveillance at the 92d Street Y this past weekend and have already reported back their findings.
The New York Chamber Symphony's program on Saturday night, repeated yesterday afternoon, was in microcosm everything the new Philharmonic aspires to be in general: patriotic, but wisely and selectively so; virtuosic in the face of virtuoso music; unafraid to menace its audience from time to time, and ready to soothe it when a little solace is due.
Two-thirds of this program was unknown to, or only vaguely heard of by, its listeners on Saturday night: Paul Creston's "Choreografic" Suite because few professional orchestras have the time and will to solve its rhythmic difficulties and Prokofiev's Fifth Piano Concerto because of its impudent bad manners.


Patterns
Tiptoe on the Cobblestones
This is a terrible city for high heels.
Everything takes place in palazzi and everything's made of marble, so you go skidding all over the place.
Imagine walking down the Via della Spiga in heels!
The cobblestones kill you.


Algiers Journal; An Army of Angry Men, With Backs to the Wall
By day they lean against whitewashed walls smoking cigarettes or selling imported shirts out of small vinyl bags.
By night they congregate on street corners or in noisy coffeehouses.
And in the future they will inherit Algeria.
The young men of Algeria, many seething with the anger of the dispossessed and the hatred of those who can no longer dream of a better life, must often make their lives on the fringes of society.


Philip Young Is Dead; Hemingway Expert, 73
Philip Young, an authority on Ernest Hemingway and a professor emeritus of English at Pennsylvania State University, died on Friday at Center Community Hospital in State College, Pa.
He was 73 years old and lived in State College.
He died of respiratory failure, said his wife, Katherine.


Market Place; Signals of a Boom In Video Meetings
VIDEO conferencing is fast becoming the high-growth technology of the 1990's.
With transmission costs and hardware prices falling steeply and technical standards emerging, companies seeking to improve productivity and cut costs are embracing televised meetings as a viable alternative to business travel.
"The market is extraordinary," said Al Lill, director of the Gartner Group in Stamford, Conn.
He noted that the leading companies in the field were straining to meet the demand for video conferencing systems, which look like conventional television sets with cameras and microphones mounted on top.
A one-hour video conference between Boston and Los Angeles now costs $20 an an hour, compared with $2,000 a few years ago.


Insider Conviction Ruling
In a ruling expected to preserve the Government's ability to police insider trading, a Federal appeals court reinstated part of a stockbroker's conviction for trading on inside information about a 1986 takeover.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan ruled 10-1 yesterday that a smaller panel of the same court had wrongly thrown out Robert Chestman's conviction on 10 counts of fraudulent trading in connection with a stock tender offer.


Eating Ethics
Whoever coined the adage "There's no free lunch" obviously didn't have the House of Representatives in mind.
House leaders have moved to shut down the House bank where members bounced an astonishing 8,331 checks in one year without penalty.
And they've referred records of bad checks to the Ethics Committee.
Still, Speaker Thomas Foley refuses to make the names public or to dismiss Jack Russ, the House sergeant-at-arms, who cashed his own $10,000 rubber check while running the bank.


CHRONICLE
"Marla, what are you doing here?" DONALD TRUMP called out to a woman ahead of him on an escalator in Trump Tower on Saturday.


People
*
Roger Neill, chief executive at Bozell Europe, London, is leaving the company.
His duties will be assumed on an interim basis by Murray L. Smith, president of Bozell International.
*
Edward R. Erhardt, 34 years old, will be promoted, effective Nov. 1, to publisher of Advertising Age, New York, from associate publisher and advertising director.
Joe Cappo, who had been publisher, takes the title of publishing director and continues as senior vice president and group publisher of the parent company, Crain Communications Inc., Chicago.
Rance Crain, who had been publishing director, continues as editor in chief and president of Crain.


Birmingham Journal; Work of Obscure Poet Bonds a City and Japan
A professor came out of his office in the Samuel Ullman Building at the University of Alabama campus here a decade ago and was struck by a tableau of Japanese men standing solemnly in front of a portrait of the building's moustachioed namesake.
"They were all silent and looking at the portrait," recalled Tennant McWilliams, dean of social and behavioral sciences at the university.
"We have many internationals on the campus, but never a concentration of folk in front of that portrait. I thought, there's something in this."


Vietnamese Refugees, Reconsidered
Vietnam has tentatively agreed to accept the forced return of tens of thousands of its citizens who left, often risking their lives in dangerous, leaky boats.
The agreement, worked out with Britain and the United Nations, could fall apart under strong objection from the United States.
That would be unfortunate.
The U.S. has adamantly opposed forced repatriation of the Vietnamese.
But circumstances, including U.S.-Vietnam relations, are changing and this new policy may be more realistic.
Rather than block it, the U.S. ought to help insure that it is carried out fairly.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Rule on Forced Medication
WASHINGTON, Oct. 7 --
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the Constitution permits a state to medicate a psychotic criminal defendant against his will to make him competent to stand trial.
The Court has ruled in the past that prisoners have some limited rights against forced medication, but it has not previously addressed the issue in the context of the right to a fair trial.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about the appointment of a publisher at Life magazine misstated the magazine's advertising performance for the first eight months of the year.
Advertising pages fell 24 percent from the same period in 1990; they did not increase 22 percent over the first six months of last year.


Guilty Plea in '89 Rape-Murder
A 20-year-old defendant, who had warned some of his female victims that he would blind or kill them to prevent being identified, pleaded guilty yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan to the murder of a 24-year-old pregnant mother two years ago.
The defendant, Matias Reyes, who was also charged in a series of rapes and stabbings that terrorized the Upper East Side in 1989, was sentenced to 33 1/3 years to life in prison by Acting Justice Thomas B. Galligan. 'Your Eyes on Your Life'
Mr.
Reyes pleaded guilty to the rape and murder of one victim and the rape of three other women, and his plea came as Justice Galligan, Assistant District Attorney Peter J. Casolaro and Mr.
Reyes's lawyer, Richard Siracusa, began selecting a jury.
If convicted after trial, he would have faced a maximum of 50 years to life in prison.


Woolworth to Add 25 Lamston Stores
The Woolworth Corporation announced yesterday that its F. W. Woolworth subsidiary had signed an agreement with the Plymouth-Lamston Stores Corporation to acquire 25 Lamston general-merchandise stores in the New York City area.
Terms of the cash transaction were not disclosed.
Woolworth said the company assumed operation of 23 of the stores during the weekend.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.18
5.00
8.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.02
5.02
7.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.07
5.07
7.21
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.14
7.13
8.66
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.78
7.77
8.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.92
8.92
9.96
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.87
6.87
7.82
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellweather bonds, notes and bills


City Opera Orchestra Divides To Conquer 'Die Soldaten'
Bernd Alois Zimmermann had no interest in making life easy for performers of his music.
In "Die Soldaten," his 1965 opera, which is to be given its New York premiere by the New York City Opera tonight, he calls for an orchestra too large and varied for a normal orchestra pit to hold, and gives it swirling, richly textured music that demands extraordinary precision.
To cope with the score's demands, the company split its orchestra in two separate parts, each with its own conductor and connected to the other by means of television monitors and a computerized amplification system.


Spain's King Pleads for 3d World
Welcoming the new climate of cooperation with the end of the East-West confrontation, King Juan Carlos of Spain warned today that the worsening North-South division was "no less terrible."
Addressing the General Assembly as the constitutional monarch of a nation that "has recovered democracy and freedom," Juan Carlos took on the role of a champion of the third world.
The United Nations has played a major part in the changing world, he said, and will be called on to play an even greater role in resolving the differences between the developed and developing countries.


Baxter Takes Show for Jets and Runs
Brad Baxter the name has a kind of matinee idol sound to it -- and Coach Bruce Coslet showed the Jets some of the fullback's starring roles on the eve of their 17-14 victory over the Browns in Cleveland on Sunday.
"On Saturday night at the hotel in Cleveland, I showed the players five plays where Brad pancaked five guys, five different people in the Miami game," Coslet said today.


Soviet 'Democrats' Now Wrestle Over the Spoils
Seven weeks after an aborted coup finally drew the curtain on the Communists, the "democrats" who triumphantly followed their hero, Boris N. Yeltsin, to power in Russia and other republics have fallen to squabbling over the spoils of the old empire.
Quick to proclaim "sovereignty" and independence, the republics have been far slower to negotiate a common market and to begin long-promised reforms.
Hot spots of tribal conflicts continue to smolder across the land.


How to Beat System On Third and Long
Derrick Thomas knows what it is like to be young and full of despair and feel as if you are "a product of the system." He particularly understands that there is a direct link between education and self-esteem and effecting change.
He is a product of that system.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a weakening of support among some Senate Democrats for Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence misidentified the political party of Senator Bill Bradley in some copies.
He is a Democrat.


Kuwaiti Bank Agrees To Fine on Arab Boycott
The Commerce Department announced today that the Commercial Bank of Kuwait had agreed to pay a $383,100 fine for reported violations of an American law that bars companies from complying with the Arab boycott of Israel.
The action follows months of increasing Congressional pressure on the Administration for tougher enforcement of the law.
The Commerce Department denied that its action reflected that pressure.


Airport Rail Portion of Cuomo Plan Must Offer Travelers More; Nothing for Brooklyn
To the Editor:
Our first reaction to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's plan to revitalize New York City (news article, Sept. 24) was one of optimism.
However, that positive reaction quickly faded.


The Dollar Is Mostly Higher; Gold Is Generally Up, Too
The dollar benefited from cross-trading yesterday and settled mostly higher on world currency markets.
Gold prices also finished mostly higher.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold bullion for current delivery rose 30 cents to settle at $359.30 a troy ounce.
The Republic National Bank quoted a late bid for gold of $358.75 an ounce, off 25 cents.


Chiefs in Control as They Smother Bills
The Kansas City Chiefs responded tonight to a game that meant everything to them in terms of national exposure and confidence, with a bruising 33-6 victory over the previously unbeaten Buffalo Bills before 76,120 frolicking fans at Arrowhead Stadium.
In winning, Kansas City made a statement that they are a team to be reckoned with in the American Conference.
The Chiefs began steadily and finished in a flurry in improving to 4-2.
They ran Christian Okoye mercilessly inside at will, and they pressured and sacked Bills quarterback Jim Kelly repeatedly and shut down Buffalo's vaunted no-huddle attack.


By Design; Scarlett in Paris
It's in the wind.
The new novel "Scarlett: The Sequel to Margaret Mitchell's 'Gone With the Wind,' " (Warner Books), by Alexandra Ripley, is creating a whirlwind of sales in bookstores and fashion interest in antebellum silhouettes.
In France, the weekly magazine Madame Figaro devoted a whole issue to the subject.
Clothes from several fall collections were charmingly photographed and accessorized to suggest "Le Style Scarlett." These photos may influence designers there preparing their spring showings.


ICN and Unit Sign S.E.C. Settlement
ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc. said that it and a subsidiary had signed a settlement agreement with the Securities and Exchange Commission, ending a four-year investigation surrounding the development of a drug to fight AIDS.
Without admitting or denying violations of securities law, the companies said they had "agreed to continue to abide by the securities law." No fines or other sanctions were associated with the settlement, the companies said.


How the Senators Handled The Professor's Accusations
The cloud hovering over the Supreme Court nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas first appeared on the Washington horizon on Sept. 9, when a woman who had worked for Judge Thomas during the Reagan Administration told the Senate Labor Committee that she was willing to discuss what she considered his inappropriate sexual advances.
It was not until two weeks later, on Sept. 23, that the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, Joseph R. Biden Jr., informed a stunned and fearful White House and touched off a hasty inquiry into the allegations by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
And it was not until Sept. 25, just two days before the full Judiciary Committee was to vote on the Thomas nomination, that the bureau's conclusions were given to the White House and passed to Senator Biden's office.


Giants Take Big Step Forward
Yes, Ray Handley said today, Rodney Hampton and Jeff Hostetler were sharp against the Phoenix Cardinals.
Yes, he said, his patched-up defensive line held up, but barely.


Japan Clients Are Wary of Anniversary
AS American news media make extensive plans to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the bombing of Pearl Harbor, at least one Japanese company wants no part of their coverage.
"With Dec. 7, 1991, marking the 50th anniversary of the bombing of Pearl Harbor," read a letter, sent by Bozell Inc. on behalf of its client, Minolta Document Imaging Systems, "it is imperative for Minolta not to advertise in any issue containing editorial related to this event."


A LAW PROFESSOR DEFENDS INTEGRITY
Anita F. Hill rarely lectures in the classroom,, and in recent years she has pursued her political interests through quiet work on university committees and by acting as a friend and adviser to black law students.
But today, she stood up before a row of television cameras and took on her critics with calm defiance.
Speaking at a news conference at the University of Oklahoma College of Law, where she is a tenured professor specializing in commercial law, Ms.
Hill said, "My integrity has been called into question by people who have never spoken to me."


Leo Durocher, Fiery Ex-Manager, Dies at 86
Leo Durocher, perhaps major league baseball's best example of the win-at-all-costs manager, one who viewed the game not as a challenging pastime for talented athletes but as a sports relative of guerilla warfare, died yesterday in Palm Springs, Calif.
He was 86 years old.
A spokesman at Desert Hospital, Randy Bevilacqua, said Durocher died of natural causes.


Jules M. Koch, Cardiologist, 82
Dr.
Jules M. Koch, an internist-cardiologist with a Bronx practice for 50 years, died on Saturday at his Manhattan apartment.
He was 82 years old.
Dr.
Koch, who received his medical degree from New York Medical College, was one of the founders of the Health Insurance Plan of New York, where he served as a director and chief inernist.
He taught at the Mount Sinai and Fordham medical schools and was associated with the Hospital for Joint Diseases, Misericordia and other area hospitals.
He retired from private practice in 1989.


Heretical Theory On Brain Diseases Gains New Ground
ONE of the quirkiest mysteries of modern medicine -- involving mad cows, stumbling sheep and dwarfs -- will be one step closer to solution if a heterodox new theory proves true.
The mystery centers on a bizarre disease that is known as encephalopathy because it attacks the brain, and spongiform because it leaves the brains of its victims chock full of holes.
Humans are afflicted by three forms of spongiform encephalopathy, animals by four.


Dinkins Panel to Recommend Raises of Up to 19% for City Officials
A mayoral commission examining the salaries of elected officials will recommend raises this week of up to 19 percent for Mayor David N. Dinkins and other high-ranking elected city officeholders, city officials said.
But by all accounts, the proposed raises have no chance of becoming reality any time soon.
The Mayor has repeatedly said he would not accept a raise for at least a year and has vowed to oppose raises for other officeholders because of the city's bleak financial straits.


Kaat's Homer Field Advantage
Jim Kaat has a great advantage or a great burden.
As Dick Stockton's partner for CBS's coverage of the American League Championship Series between the Minnesota Twins and the Toronto Blue Jays, Kaat enters the Metrodome booth comfortably: He's been there all season as the voice of the Twins on WCCO-TV.
Will he be objective or will he be a homer?
Based on Kaat's underrated work to date, he will likely be the latter.
He is the analytical equal of CBS colleague Tim McCarver (who pairs with Jack Buck on the National League series) and will provide the insights that come with being with the Twins daily for six months.


U.S. Officials Think Slain Israeli Was Hit Man
Federal law-enforcement officials said yesterday that an Israeli visitor slain by a masked gunman on an Upper East Side street over the weekend was believed by investigators to have been a hired executioner for an Israeli organized-crime group.
Mystery continued to surround the gangland-style murder of Uri Mizraci, 38 years old, who had arrived in New York two weeks ago and was gunned down Saturday night by a man who got out of a white van and fired four to six shots at point-blank range outside an underground parking garage at 301 East 79th Street.


Jackson Getting a Chance to Start Over With Knicks
Players involved in as much controversy as Mark Jackson has endured with the Knicks are often traded, benched or even released.
Somehow, Jackson has survived.
As the Knick training camp continues at the College of Charleston, Jackson is entrenched as the starting point guard.
Greg Anthony, the first-round draft choice who signed Saturday, will certainly challenge Jackson for the job.
But by trading Maurice Cheeks last week, the Knicks' front office and coaching staff have demonstrated their belief that Jackson's play can return to the level of two seasons ago, when he was one of the league's top point guards.


CHRONICLE
They play on the same stage as the stars, but the pianists who accompany the greats rarely get their due.
That is to be rectified on Thursday at a concert, "Music and Remembrance: a Celebration of Great Musical Partnerships." The event at Carnegie Hall is to benefit the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
Special attention will be paid to the musical partners of such stars as JAMES GALWAY, LEONTYNE PRICE and BARBARA COOK.


BRIEFS
*
Boeing Co., Seattle, said military spending cuts would force the reassignment or layoff of 2,500 Boing employees, 1,500 more than previously anticipated.
Analysts said they expected little impact on the company's overall performance, *
Handy &amp; Harman, New York, said it planned to relocate a major portion of its New York personnel to Rye, N.Y., from New York City.
The holding company owns speciality-metals businesses.


Helping New Afghan Leaders to Emerge
To the Editor:
"Afghanistan, Still Bleeding" (editorial, Sept. 17) correctly states that despite the agreement ending military shipments to Afghanistan, the potential for continued bloody conflict there is still great.
While Washington and Moscow have agreed to end their proxy war, the Afghan people need assurances from us that credible leadership can now come forward.


Credit Card Company Seeks Clues
The American Express Company is investigating whether its executives falsified records to cover up a ballooning number of defaults on the company's Optima credit card, Wall Street executives and lawyers said yesterday.
The company stunned many analysts last week when it disclosed that it was setting up reserves and taking write-offs for expected defaults and to pay for a reorganization of its flagship charge-card business, which includes the well-known green, gold and platinum American Express cards.
The company said the $265 million worth of reserves and write-offs would include $155 million in expected defaults, mostly from the Optima card.


Scallop Season Opens in New York State


Groups Urge Tax Freeze By Dinkins
In an unusually stiff warning, two leading business groups yesterday urged the Dinkins administration to freeze all taxes on property, businesses and individuals in New York City for the next four years, to cut its work force by 30,000 employees and improve efficiency to maintain vital services.
By making those demands, the groups, the New York Chamber of Commerce and the New York City Partnership, joined a growing chorus, including the City Council and the Real Estate Board of New York, which has urged Mr.
Dinkins to hold down taxes and cuts in services, or risk losing businesses and taxpayers and hurting the economy further.


Stocks Fall Amid Concern Over Earnings
Amid continued investor concern over corporate earnings, accentuated by Westinghouse Electric's news of a third-quarter net loss of $1.48 billion, the Dow Jones industrial average fell 19.01 points yesterday, to 2,942.75.
Westinghouse is a Dow component.
"Without more interest rate cuts, the market must rely more on the outlook for profits," said Joseph Battipaglia, director of research at the Gruntal Company.
"And seeing that outlook dim has given rise to the recent selloff in the market."


Observer; The Old Butler Ploy
President Bush says the media did it.
Not the butler.
The butler never does it anymore.
Everybody's been on to the butler for years.
It must have been 1913 when I first heard a kid coming out of a movie tell a pal who was waiting to get in, "Don't waste your nickel, the butler did it." If not earlier.
Anyhow the butler hasn't done it in years.
This is because hardly anybody has a butler anymore.
The people who can afford butlers nowadays are mostly in prison, which makes you wonder why you never hear anybody say, "The butler's boss did it."


Airport Rail Portion of Cuomo Plan Must Offer Travelers More; Let's Get on With It
To the Editor:
The seemingly lukewarm response of New York City officials to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's plan to revitalize New York's economy with a sweeping public-works program (news story, Sept. 25) is hard to fathom.
To question how such a plan might benefit New York is to ignore established economic theory and more than a century's experience throughout Western society.
Major construction programs send a powerful boost rippling through an ailing economy.


Federated-Allied Plan Is Amended
Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation filed an amended plan of reorganization in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Cincinnati, reflecting "substantial progress" on coming to terms with creditors and obtaining working capital, the companies said yesterday.
The latest plan calls for the companies to retain more than $600 million in cash and have access to a $150 million letter of credit to finance operations after emerging from bankruptcy.
The amendment, intended to bolster the retailers' finances, would mean that creditors would initially receive less cash.
Robert Profusek, a lawyer for the retailer, said yesterday that creditors had not seen the new plan.


Cooperation Treaty Is Signed to Bolster Regional Economy
Officials from New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and New York City took the first tentative steps yesterday toward fashioning a regional approach to economic problems, signing what amounted to a nonaggression pact.
The agreement, endorsed by economic development officials amid the splendor of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, commits them to work toward keeping companies in the region and attracting new ones, instead of concentrating on soliciting each other's business.
It calls for them to forswear advertising that casts aspersions on another area in the region.
And it pledges them to market the three states together to attract overseas companies and to increase tourism.


German Vote Raises Foreigners' Fear
After local elections in which a small far-right party received many more votes than expected, foreigners in Bremerhaven are suddenly beginning to fear for their future.
"Up to now, we've been living here pretty much normally," a young Turkish immigrant said as he walked past the Sarajevo Cafe in a section of town where many foreigners live.
"But now we know that at least 10 percent of the people here hate us."


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Unit Looks for New Agency
A spokeswoman for Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver, New York, said yesterday that the agency had resigned the advertising account for Dun &amp; Bradstreet Software, Framingham, Mass., because of creative differences.


Classical Music in Review
Alan Hovhaness  American Composers Orchestra Carnegie Hall
Two events that frame the current week show how hard it has become to figure out what music is for, for whom it is written and why we should like it.
On Friday at the Juilliard Theater, the Juilliard Quartet plays Elliott Carter's four string quartets.
On Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall, the American Composers Orchestra celebrated Alan Hovhaness's 80th birthday.


Elliott Abrams Admits His Guilt On 2 Counts in Contra Cover-Up
Elliott Abrams, the former Assistant Secretary of State who was one of the Reagan Administration's fiercest advocates of armed support for the Nicaraguan rebels, pleaded guilty today to two misdemeanor counts of withholding information from Congress about secret efforts to aid the guerrillas.
Mr.
Abrams's guilty pleas and his promise to cooperate with Iran-contra prosecutors may open another avenue for investigators as they make what appears to be a final push to broaden their search for wrongdoing at the senior levels of the Reagan Administration.


Retirements Lead to More Female and Hispanic Principals
The number of female and Hispanic principals in New York City's public school system rose significantly this year, as the city filled vacancies created by the departure of more than 200 principals under an early retirement plan.
The overwhelming majority of the city's 1,000 principals continue to be white males, a statistical report by the Board of Education indicates.
But the data show that female and Hispanic employees did well in getting the new jobs.
Gains by blacks were somewhat less striking.


The 1991 Championship Pirates: Enjoy Them While You Still Can
The Pirates are comfortable with the cliche that there is always a sense of urgency for a team good and fortunate enough to have earned an appearance in the playoffs.
Chances at a World Series ring are a lot rarer than the diamonds set in them.
The Pirates, though, are made uncomfortable by the theory that there is a uniqueness to the urgency that attends their second straight qualification for the National League Championship Series.


Court Hears Arguments in Key Desegregation Case
The Supreme Court today was asked by a suburban Atlanta school district to order an end to Federal court supervision of its efforts to integrate its schools because the racial imbalance in the schools resulted from shifts in housing patterns and not intentional discrimination.
Hearing its first arguments of the new term, the Court took up a case that could affect hundreds of school districts nationwide that are under the supervision of Federal judges, some for many years.
The Bush Administration joined the DeKalb County, Ga., school board's efforts to get out from under Federal court supervision.


Club Med Says It's for Families
Club Med's United States marketing unit is hoping to convince vacationers that Club Med is not just for singles anymore.
An advertising campaign that begins appearing today is aimed at families and couples, as well as singles.
One television commercial, aimed at children, will run during Saturday morning programs for youngsters.


Accounts
*
GE American Communications, Princeton, N.J., a provider of satellite-based services that is a subsidiary of General Electric Co., to Earle Palmer Brown, Philadelphia.
Billings were not disclosed.
*
Peachtree Software, Atlanta, to the Morrison Agency, Atlanta, for its advertising account, which the agency estimated at $1.5 million in billings.


F.D.I.C. About to Sell New Hampshire Banks
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is expected to reorganize and sell five troubled New Hampshire banks by the end of this week.
The five banks, which together account for about 25 percent of the $20 billion of assets held by all of New Hampshire's banks and savings institutions, have been badly hurt by losses on commercial real estate loans, and have been the subject of F.D.I.C. negotiations for months.


Anita Hill and the Senate's Duty
Anita Hill, an Oklahoma law professor, has told the Senate Judiciary Committee -- and yesterday told the nation in a televised news conference -- that Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court nominee, sexually harassed her when she worked for him at two Federal agencies.
She made clear that she had raised her complaint reluctantly but in utmost seriousness.
Her demeanor impressed friend and foe of the nomination alike.
Yet even before she finished, Senator Dennis DeConcini of Arizona rushed to call his own news conference and say he believed the nominee's denials and not the accuser.
Senator Orrin Hatch of Utah took the floor to say that, impressive as she was, "the facts do not line up on Ms. Hill's side." Senator John Danforth of Missouri, Judge Thomas's chief patron, denounced her charges as "garbage." And the Judiciary Committee chairman, Joseph Biden, said there was no reason to postpone tonight's confirmation vote.


Business Scene; Figuring a Price On a Soviet Deal
AMONG the Soviet Union's collection of industrial operations, the Volga Automotive Plant Association is the first big target for Western investment.
A 30 percent ownership stake in this Russian version of General Motors is to be sold soon, probably to Fiat S.p.A.
But what should Fiat pay?
What is Volga Autos worth?
Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the Wall Street firm, is using Western techniques to answer this question.
Its price tag, due this month, is likely to reflect Soviet politics and guesswork as much as financial analysis.
The Bear, Stearns effort, undertaken at the request of the Soviet Government, is important because it offers an analytic approach for valuing a company that operates in a society without normal guidelines, like stock prices, real estate values and the cost of labor, once the Government no longer sets Soviet wages.
The goal is to come up with a cash-flow figure -- a rough measure of Volga Auto's potential earnings in hard currency that would indicate the return on Fiat's investment.


Who Will Pay in Connecticut?
Some 40,000 taxpayers descended on Connecticut's State House last weekend to protest the state's new income tax.
Stirred up by defeated politicians and rabble-rousing talk shows, they shouted for repeal.
But the champions of repeal are as irresponsible as they are loud.
Unpopular as the tax may be, there is no viable alternative.
The tax barely squeaked through the Legislature last month, and only after Gov.
Lowell Weicker vetoed three budgets that preserved and broadened the state's regressive 8 percent sales tax.
The new tax -- 4.5 percent on wages, salaries and unearned income -- took effect last Tuesday.


Asian Family Is Attacked in Suffolk County Home
A family that owns a Chinese restaurant in Lindenhurst, L.I., was attacked and robbed on Sunday night, the police said.
The Suffolk County Police said that three armed robbers, described as young Asians wearing neckerchiefs as masks, were waiting inside the family's house in Babylon when Terry Lam, 43 years old, his wife Ho Tsing, 36, and their three children came home from work at the New Chopsticks Kitchen.


Montana's Big Decision
JOE MONTANA will wait until the end of the week before deciding whether to undergo season-ending -- and possibly career-ending -- surgery on his ailing right elbow.
The 35-year-old San Francisco 49er quarterback experienced a flareup of elbow pain Saturday during a brief workout and will undergo further evaluation during the week before deciding if the only possible remedy is surgery.


I.B.M. in Cable TV Accord
The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it had signed an agreement with a Canadian cable television company to study new technologies to transmit text, images, video and sound.
I.B.M. said the agreement with Rogers Cable TV Ltd. would address the growing market for multimedia technologies, which combine these elements in one system.


Bridge
Three close battles seemed likely in the closing stages of semifinal play in the NEC World Team Championships here Tuesday.
In the Bermuda Bowl for Open Teams, Brazil, attempting to defend the title it won two years ago in Perth, Australia, came bouncing back from an early deficit against Poland and led by 18 imps with 32 deals remaining to be played in a 96-deal match.
However, the margin may be reduced by a pending appeal.


Children See Father Fatally Shot in Car
A man was fatally shot in front of his two young children yesterday by a gunman who opened fire into the car in which they were sitting, the police said.
The man, Eladio Fernandez, 44 years old, of 285 Fort Washington Avenue in the Washington Heights section, was pronounced dead at the scene shortly after the 8:30 A.M. shooting in front of 715 West 172d Street in Manhattan.


Seasoned Fund Expert To Run Unit for Chase
After years of watching the mutual fund industry accumulate profits and customers, banks are fighting back and offering their own funds to customers.
To strenghten its mutual fund business, the Chase Manhattan Corporation yesterday named W. Christopher Maxwell as president of Vista Capital Management, a Chase subsidiary that controls 14 mutual funds with assets of about $1.8 billion.
The Chase funds are still a small force in the $1.2 trillion mutual fund business, but Mr.
Maxwell has plans to distribute them more widely outside Chase's customer base.


Steinbrenner to Sit In?
GEORGE STEINBRENNER, who had to give up a seat on the Atlanta organizing committee for the 1996 Olympics, has been recommended to be an alternate on the panel, the United States Olympic Committee announced yesterday from its offices in Colorado Springs.


Bristol-Myers AIDS Drug Is Said to Be Near Approval
Advocates for people with AIDS said yesterday that the Federal Health and Human Services Department would announce approval this week of dideoxyinosine, the first new treatment for the immune deficiency virus since AZT was approved in 1986.
The Food and Drug Administration sped the approval process for dideoxyinosine, also known as DDI, which is made by the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, because tests indicated that the drug had helped some AIDS patients who were not benefiting from AZT, or azidothymidine, the only drug now being marketed for the treatment of AIDS virus infections.


Breeders' Cup Having Trouble Finding Queen for a Day
In the time-honored but tantalizing traditions of horse racing, it looks as though they will conduct a coronation for the fillies next month without the queens.
And that may be the most dramatic example of the tumult in the rankings in almost every class of racing in 1991.
Versailles Treaty will be there at Churchill Downs on Nov. 2 trying to clinch her crown in the Breeders' Cup championships, and so will her stablemate Queena, who has the name but not necessarily the tiara to go with it.
And so will Dance Smartly, who has already been crowned in Canada.


Our Towns
"Wow!" said the boy from the Bronx. "Look at this!"
"Uh-huh," said the adult from Connecticut. "It's a leaf."


Chess
Two former colleagues on the Soviet women's team tied for first place in the 1991 United States women's championship in Highland Beach, Fla., from Aug. 17 to 25.
Irina Levitina of Teaneck, N.J., a former contender for the women's world championship who holds women's grandmaster rank, and Esther Epstein of Brookline, Mass., a women's international master, scored 7-2 to earn $1,500 each and admittance to the women's interzonal tournament, the next stage of qualification for prospective challengers for the women's world title.
Third place in the invitational round-robin tournament of the top 10 women in the United States was taken by Beatriz MacArthur of Jackson Heights, N.Y., a women's international master, who tallied 5 1/2-3 1/2 to win a $500 prize.


Belmont Program Finishes With a Triple Dead Heat
For the first time in 47 years, a triple dead heat was recorded at a New York race track when three horses finished tied for first place yesterday in the ninth race at Belmont Park.
It happened at the end of an otherwise undistinguished $13,000 claiming race, the final event on the day's program, when 3 of the 10 horses hit the finish line together after running six furlongs.


Petition Drive Seeks Income Tax Repeal
Bolstered by the wrath of thousands of angry taxpayers, state Republican leaders started a petition drive yesterday for a special legislative session to consider repealing the state's new income tax.
The House minority leader, Edward C. Krawiecki Jr., Republican of Bristol, and the Senate minority leader, M. Adela Eads, Republican of Kent, signed the first petitions calling for the special session at a morning news conference.


Moody's Reports A Busy Quarter
The Moody's Investors Service said yesterday that it had made 121 revisions in municipal bond ratings in the third quarter this year, a total that it said continued the "extremely high" trend in revisions in the year's first two quarters.


Democrats Urge Study of Budget Before Cutting Money for Military
The House Democratic leadership today moved to look at Federal budget issues for the next decade before trying to see whether last year's budget agreement should be altered to cut Pentagon spending.
The chairman of the House Budget Committee, with the backing of Speaker Thomas S. Foley, said his panel would start on that task tomorrow, and he hoped, would finish by the time Congress adjourns in November.


Metrodome Will Not Intimidate Blue Jays
The dress rehearsals are over, the spring training atmosphere has dissipated.
The American League is about to raise the curtain on its biggest show of the season, and finally true meaning returns to the lives of the Toronto Blue Jays and the Minnesota Twins.
The Jays and Twins, champions of the East and West, respectively, have every reason to want to get going.
Their homework is more than done; the two clubs spent their last two regular-season weekend series playing each other, first in the Skydome in Toronto, then in a weekend three-game finale here in Minnesota's Metrodome.


Czechs Approve the Purging Of Ex-Communist Officials
Czechoslovakia has decided to purge former Communist Party officials from high and middle-ranking posts in the civil service, the still largely state-owned economy, the courts and the universities.
Under a law passed by Parliament last week, the Interior Ministry will establish a screening commission to check on the histories of tens of thousands of people in "leading posts" throughout the large state sector.


Lindros Is Sidelined With Vision Problems
ERIC LINDROS, the No. 1 pick in the National Hockey League draft last June, has missed two games in a row with the junior league Oshawa Generals because of vision problems.


THOMAS'S ACCUSER ASSAILS HANDLING OF HER COMPLAINT
Publicly defending her accusation of sexual harassment against Judge Clarence Thomas, an Oklahoma law professor assailed the Senate Judiciary Committee today, saying it gave short shrift to her repeated allegations against the Supreme Court nominee.
The statements by the professor, Anita F. Hill, at a news conference in Norman, Okla., reverberated through the Capitol, despite the efforts of President Bush and other supporters to contain the fallout on the eve of the confirmation vote by the full Senate.
The remarks produced a series of difficult questions for the Judiciary Committee and its chairman, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., and angry speechmaking on the Senate floor.
It was perhaps the most intense examination in American politics of the issue of sexual harassment.
Several Requests for Delay
George J. Mitchell, the Senate Democratic leader, said several senators, including some who had declared their support for Judge Thomas, asked him to delay the vote, now scheduled for Tuesday evening.
But he said he had told them that would not be possible because a delay would require the consent of all 100 members.
Mr.
Mitchell also delivered a vigorous defense of Mr.
Biden on the Senate floor, commending him for "exemplary leadership."


The European in U.S.
The European, a weekly newspaper published by Robert Maxwell, will be printed and distributed in North America starting Friday, the paper said yesterday.
Gannett Offset of Boston will print the paper, a 32-page broadsheet in two sections.
The first American-printed issue will include a color supplement on European fashion and life styles.
The paper is available in the United States every Friday in 21 cities around the country.
With printing in the United States, the price for an issue will drop from $3 to $2.50 because air freight charges from Europe will be eliminated.


Prices for Soybeans Decline On Forecast of Sizable Corp
Persistent reports that the soybean crop may be far better than expected neutralized the impact of Soviet plans to buy United States beans and sent futures prices into a decline yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade.
With the Agriculture Department's monthly crop report coming out on Thursday, the grain markets are particularly sensitive to the size of the harvest.


National Book Awards Reach Out to Lesser-Known
The National Book Foundation today announced the list of 15 finalists for the 1991 National Book Awards, which this year includes a poetry award after a seven-year hiatus.
In keeping with the foundation's efforts of recent years to encourage lesser-known publishers and writers, the list of finalists includes two first novelists, two first-time authors of nonfiction and works published by small and university presses.


Review/Television; In 2 Shows, The Edge Of Humor That Cuts
So what's funny these days?
Opinions differ, but ABC evidently thinks these are thigh-slappers: a blind man unintentionally wielding his cane as a nearly lethal weapon; a teacher grading papers and changing an F to a D because the student has a handgun; a man kissing a woman, wondering if she vomited recently and being told: "Yes, actually. Do you have any breath spray?"
The illustrations are plucked from two new Wednesday night series: "Sibs" at 9:30, and "Good and Evil" at 10:30.
Here, clearly, are two sitcoms trying desperately to avoid the current season's perky-parents-and-adorable-tots rut.
Quite admirably, they want to be different.
Quite obviously, the effort pushes them into material that is questionable and even -- dare we say it in today's permissive climate? -- tasteless.


Making It Around New York
The microbrew and brewpub movement has been slow to reach the Northeast, but superior examples can still be found in the New York area.
Many good microbrewery products, like the Brooklyn Brewing Company's lager and brown ale and Newman's ales are brewed under a contract with F. X. Matt in Utica.
New Amsterdam, once brewed in Manhattan, is now owned by Matt.


Orange Juice Prices Climb; Smaller Florida Crop Seen
The prospect of a smaller Florida orange crop sent orange juice futures prices sharply higher yesterday on the Cotton Exchange in New York.
With those gains, orange juice futures have advanced 6 percent over the last three trading sessions.
The number of outstanding contracts has almost doubled in the last few months, signifying a growing speculative interest in the futures.


Cell Immunization Tested for Melanoma
IN the first attempt to cure cancer by immunizing patients against their own tumors, scientists yesterday injected genetically modified cancer cells into a man dying of malignant melanoma.
Dr.
Steven Rosenberg, a surgeon at the National Cancer Institute who led the research team, stressed that the treatment was highly experimental.
He likened it to the first flight of the Wright brothers.


Regional Group Agrees to Increase Penalties on Haiti
The Organization of American States today agreed on a plan to toughen economic sanctions against the new Government of Haiti and also offered to send a civilian O.A.S. observer force to Port-au-Prince to help restore democracy.
The O.A.S. officials met in emergency session at their Washington headquarters after an O.A.S. delegation visiting Haiti on Monday failed to negotiate a return to power of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's first democratically elected President.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Bush approved a series of regulatory measures that he said would encourage banks to make new loans and stimulate the economy, but bankers viewed the move as largely symbolic.  [ Page A1. ]


Pirates in Seven
The Pirates are the best team in the majors, but the best team doesn't always win post-season affairs (see Oakland.) World Series, 1988, 1990) If their pitching holds up, the Pirates wil win this affair. The Braves are not champions by any fluke. Their starting pitching, the best in baseball, is capable of carrying them farther. But the Pirates should win in seven.


HBO Soars With 'Ghost' And Crystal
The third week of the television season brought the first strong indication of network vulnerability as programs from two competitors, HBO and PBS, helped drive the overall audience for the three networks down from last season.
There was some good news for CBS, which had its third straight victory in the weekly ratings race, the first time CBS has won the first three weeks of a television season since 1973, when the network's big shows were "All in the Family" and "The Waltons."
But even CBS was affected on Sunday night (after "60 Minutes," which had its highest rating of the year so far) by unexpected strength from HBO and PBS.
For HBO, it was the combination of the television premiere of the hit movie "Ghost" and a new comedy series from Billy Crystal, "Sessions." For PBS it was the first part of "Columbus and the Age of Discovery," which scored the highest ratings for a public television series since "The Civil War" last September.
Topped Almost Everybody
"Ghost" scored a gigantic 30.6 rating in homes that have the HBO service, and "Sessions" added a 15.5 rating, one of the highest ever for any series on the channel.
HBO research said yesterday that the first episode of "Sessions" had a higher rating in HBO homes than every new series on the networks this year except two: "Home Improvement" and "Step by Step," two new ABC comedies.
The 4.9 rating "Columbus" garnered on Sunday in the 25 largest television cities more than doubled the 2.1 ratings that PBS shows average in prime time.
The number for "Ghost" translates to about a 6 national rating, which was better than NBC did between 8 and 9 P.M. on Sunday with "Man of the People" and "Pacific Station," which had 5.3 and 5.2 ratings respectively.
HBO is available in 17.5 million homes; NBC is received in 92 million.
In other words, between 8 and 9 Sunday night, NBC was the fifth-rated network nationally, behind CBS, ABC, Fox and HBO.


Evolution Enters Era of Synthetic Selection; Postgraduate Shrinkage
To the Editor:
J.
S.
Jones, head of the genetics department of University College, London, believes that the strength of natural selection in the West has decreased ("Is Evolution Over?", Op-Ed, Sept. 22), when exactly the opposite is true.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.12
5.18
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.01
5.02
7.20
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.05
5.07
7.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.16
7.14
8.76
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.81
7.78
9.05
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.96
8.92
10.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.86
6.87
7.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellweather bonds, notes and bills


Drug Dispute Suspected in Killing
An Israeli man who was shot to death on an Upper East Side street Saturday night may have been killed because of a falling-out over drugs, which investigators believe he was smuggling into the United States, a police official said yesterday.
The official, Deputy Chief Joseph G. DeMartino, commander of Manhattan detectives, said that the victim, Uri Mizraci, 38 years old, may have been part of an Israeli-based crime group that had been bringing hashish and heroin into the country.


N.H.L. Gives the Bay Area a Second Chance
Fifteen years after abandoning the Bay Area, major league hockey is back to the cheers of sellout crowds and a city aching for the luster of a big-league franchise.
The National Hockey League's newest expansion team, the San Jose Sharks, opened its season last weekend as expected: two losses in a home-and-home series with the Vancouver Canucks.
But on a sports weekend that, within the greater San Francisco area, also featured the Giants playing spoiler against the Los Angeles Dodgers in a heated baseball division race and the Stanford-Notre Dame football game, the hottest ticket was a seat to the Sharks' home opener Saturday night.


Dow Jones Net Off 32.6%
Dow Jones &amp; Company, publisher of The Wall Street Journal, said yesterday that its third-quarter profit fell 32.6 percent from results a year ago that included a $9.3 million tax credit.
The company said its latest earnings would have been 11 percent higher than a year ago, however, if the 1990 tax credit were excluded from the comparison.


Witness in Noriega Trial Describes Cash Delivery
A Colombian drug trafficker associated with the Medellin cocaine cartel testified today that he saw the cartel's four top leaders give Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega a briefcase stuffed with $500,000 in cash at a secret meeting just before the General formally took power in Panama eight years ago.
Gabriel Taboada, a marijuana and cocaine smuggler who also ran an automobile dealership that supplied cartel leaders with luxury cars, said he was summoned to a cartel meeting in Medellin in mid-1983 and was introduced to "the gentleman over there in the uniform." Mr.
Taboada then pointed at General Noriega, who is being tried here on 10 counts of cocaine trafficking, money laundering and racketeering.


Nomura Gets Big Penalties
In the most severe punishment ever meted out to a securities company in Japan, the Finance Ministry today ordered the Nomura Securities Company to close more than half of its domestic branches for a month and shut down several other key departments because the firm had manipulated its customers into a buying frenzy that inflated the price of a stock.
Although this was not mentioned by the ministry in its announcement, Nomura's scheme apparently produced millions of dollars in profits for one of Japan's top gangsters, the late Susumu Ishii, while leaving its customers with large losses when the price of shares in the Tokyu Corporation, a big railroad and property concern, later plunged.


Albany Plans to Allow Surgery By Doctors With the AIDS Virus
Choosing to reject new Federal guidelines, New York State proposed today that health care workers infected with the AIDS virus should be able to perform surgery and other invasive medical procedures without informing patients of their medical status.
A long-awaited policy proposal from the State Health Department reaffirmed the state's commitment to protect the confidentiality of infected health care workers and to allow them to continue working in most cases.


Giants Manage a 3-3 Mark So Put a Hold on the Criticism
Any anonymous players calling for Phil Simms today? Or questioning Coach Ray Handley?
To those Giants fans who live for the moment, this week's 3-3 record feels like perfection after last week's 2-3 mark.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Savings Bank, White Plains, named Joseph C. Lamagna executive vice president and chief financial officer, succeeding Robert J. Hughes, who is leaving the company to pursue other interests. *
Amoco Corp., Chicago, announced that Richard H. Leet, vice chairman, would retire Oct. 11.


Top Officers Rewarded At General Dynamics
The military contracting business may be shrinking along with the threat from the Soviet Union, but the top executives of the General Dynamics Corporation, the Pentagon's No. 2 weapons supplier after McDonnell Douglas, got some good news yesterday.
General Dynamics' stock closed at $46.125 on the New York Stock Exchange, prompting for the second time this year a lucrative bonus program for William A. Anders, the former astronaut who became the company's chairman on Jan. 1, and for 24 other top managers.


Economic Scene; Money Supply Doesn't Tell All
FROM the White House to Wall Street, everybody is watching the weekly money supply numbers as if the economy's life depended on them.
And some people who have been leaning on the Federal Reserve to ease for years, including the Bush Administration, have seized on anemic money growth as a rationale for pressing the Fed to lower short-term rates -- already the lowest since 1973 -- some more.
But Robert Giordano, director of economic research at Goldman, Sachs, contends that the latest obsession with the money supply is a little crazy, if not downright dangerous.
Money growth is not a reliable guide to the economy's direction in the short run, he said.
So tying Fed policy too mechanically to the money supply risks supplying more stimulus than the economy can safely handle and a future inflation flare-up.


J. Burch McMorran Is Dead at 92; Built Many Public Works Projects
J.
Burch McMorran, a career civil servant who helped design and build some of the most important public works projects in New York State, died on Sunday at Eddy Memorial Geriatric Center in Troy, N.Y.
He was 92 years old and lived in Troy.
He died of cardiac arrest, his family said.


Edwin Webb Martin, 74, Dies; Former Envoy and China Expert
Edwin Webb Martin, a retired Foreign Service officer, China expert and former Ambassador to Burma, died on Saturday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 74 years old and lived in Washington and in Otis, Mass.
He died after surgery for an aortic aneurysm, his family said.


Twins Steal Everything In Sight
The Blue Jays like to run wild, create chaos and force the opponent into making crucial mistakes.
Keep gambling.
Keep stealing an extra base.
Keep scoring runs.
Keep winning.
All of those elements were in place tonight in the first game of the American League Championship Series at the Metrodome, but the Blue Jays were not the cunning culprits.
They were the helpless victims as the Minnesota Twins whisked their way to a 5-4 victory and beat Toronto in Toronto style.


BUSH EASES RULES IN EFFORT TO SPUR LENDING BY BANKS
President Bush approved a series of regulatory measures today that he said would encourage banks to make new loans and stimulate the economy, but the announcement was viewed by bankers as a largely symbolic response to growing political pressures.
Taking steps to alleviate what he called a "credit crunch," the President said the measures were intended to "insure that we have sound banks making sound loans." He added that more steps would be taken, but he did not specify them.


Vietnamese Foreign Minister Asks for Ties Now With U.S.
The new Foreign Minister of Vietnam called today for the immediate restoration of diplomatic ties between Vietnam and the United States and described the Bush Administration's refusal to end a 16-year trade embargo against this impoverished nation as "not right."


Dig Unearths Early Black Burial Ground
Churning through the stillness of centuries, a trowel-by-trowel probe has yielded one of the oldest remnants of a black community in New York City -- a colonial-era cemetery that was then at the most desolate edge of town and is now 20 feet below the civic center.
Thirteen bodies have already been exhumed by archeologists at a construction site at Broadway and Reade Street.
It seems certain they are unearthing the "Negros Burial Ground," documented as early as 1755, which also served as a potter's field and as a graveyard for American prisoners during the Revolutionary War.


Food Notes
Tofu Cheese
Ideal Cheese, 1205 Second Avenue at 63d Street, has started selling mock cream cheese with chives.
The cheese, made from tofu, is an excellent imitation.
And because tofu is a legitimate food, not some laboratory concoction, this substitute product, which contains no cholesterol and less than one gram of fat per ounce, can be considered gastronomically correct.


Editorial Notebook; Bidding Blind for Capitalism
"The market is
always
good," said the Czechoslovak official, exasperated by questions about his country's plan to auction off thousands of state-owned businesses through the use of vouchers. Blinded by his free-market fervor, he could not fathom why I, a Western economist, would question quick privatization. Czechoslovakia is on the verge of an economic revolution; this is no time to quibble over details.
But dizzyingly complex details threaten to undermine noble purpose.
Early next year adult citizens will be allowed to buy, for about $30, a 14-page book of vouchers along with a 30-page, single-spaced instruction manual.
Each voucher is worth points.
The voucher holder will be allowed to bid 1,000 of the book's 11,000 points for shares in at most 10 enterprises.
Voucher holders may also turn points over to mutual funds, which will then bid for shares.


60-Minute Gourmet
CALF'S liver is one of those foods that is either adored or avoided like a cold.
The flavor is anything but neutral, yet I have found that its character can be changed when combined with assertive sauces.
I have also learned that calf's liver benefits enormously from liquids or other foods that give a slightly acid taste to the finished dish: a trace of vinegar, lemon, mustard or, even better, capers.
To my mind, capers are among the most underused ingredients in the American kitchen.
They are thought of, if at all, as an ingredient for salads, as a garnish for stuffed eggs and, occasionally, as an ingredient for sauces for boiled beef.
Few home cooks seem to realize that capers, when cooked in butter or other fat, gain a whole new dimension, as if their flavor had been concentrated.


Remnants for a Museum
Some remnants of the huge anti-income tax rally at the state Capitol last weekend will wind up in an exhibit of recent Connecticut history instead of a trash heap.
Workers from the Museum of Connecticut History scavenged placards and other items from the rally, including a straw effigy of Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.
"It's the only way to show politics in three dimensions," said David Corrigan, the curator.


Montreal Journal; In a Language Minefield, Enforcer Treads Softly
In 1949, after the Communists took over her native Czechoslovakia, Ludmila de Fougerolles, who was 6 years old, fled with her family on foot through Bohemia and Bavaria into southern France.
She went to grade school in Nice and later settled in Quebec, where for the last four years she has been president of the Commission for the Protection of the French Language, the province's top language cop.
It is a term she doesn't much like.
She considers herself more a linguist than a policewoman, more a persuader than an enforcer.


To Shed More Light On Foreign Policy
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 25 article on legislation requiring the State Department to do away with its secret list of ideologically unacceptable aliens does not report another change with implications for the public's right to information.
Tucked away in that same State Department authorization bill approved by a House-Senate conference are provisions to insure that the historical record of United States foreign policy and diplomacy that is made available to the public will be free of distortion through misuse of classification to hide from view documents that are only politically embarrassing or awkward.


Care to Take a Back Seat? Vanbiesbrouck Says No.
Two first-string goaltenders crouched at opposite ends of the rink today, stopping slap shots with equal skill and trying again to make the best of an inequitable situation.
"I don't think I'm ready to be a backup just yet," John Vanbiesbrouck said after the Rangers' workout at the Playland Ice Casino.
"I definitely don't want to sit a lot. But the situation has a way of changing every day."


Saudi Arabia Pledges $1 Billion to Soviet Union
Saudi Arabia has agreed to send $1 billion in emergency humanitarian aid to the Soviet Union this fall and is working with Egypt to send Islamic "preachers" into Soviet Muslim republics to head off Islamic fundamentalism and "revolutionary themes" coming out of Iran.
The direct aid of food, clothing and medicine is in addition to $1.5 billion in credits pledged earlier to the Soviet Union by Saudi Arabia.
The aid has been the subject of high-level discussions in Moscow, Cairo and Jidda over the last two weeks, Saudi and Egyptian officials say.


Judges Dismiss Results of 2 Democratic Primaries
Judges in the Bronx and Queens have thrown out the results of two Democratic primaries because of irregularities in the voting and ordered special runoffs, Board of Elections officials said yesterday.
In Queens, a judge's ruling on Monday is expected to raise the chances of a Republican being elected to the District 30 City Council seat, political strategists said.
In the Bronx, a judge's decision late yesterday afternoon breathed new life into an attempt by a former State Senator, Israel Ruiz Jr., to resurrect his political life after being convicted in 1989 of falsifying a loan application.


On Foot and Twirling a Nightstick, Via Madison Ave.
In a poster on the back of a Manhattan bus, an elderly couple walks serenely along a deserted street.
The scene might hint of urban menace were it not for one thing: In plain view is the reassuring figure of a police officer walking a beat.
The poster -- a stark black and white photograph with a message that says simply "The beat cop is back" -- promotes New York City's new, official Police Department strategy of community policing.


Court Hears Debate on Suits Against Makers of Cigarettes
The cigarette industry came before the Supreme Court today seeking protection against lawsuits by smokers who assert that the manufacturers induced them to smoke through fraudulent advertising and by failing to warn of the dangers of cigarettes.
The case argued today carried with it both enormous financial stakes and a sad family story of illness and death -- that of Rose Cipollone of Little Ferry, N.J., the original plaintiff, who continued to smoke even after she had a lung removed for cancer in 1982 and who died in 1984, the year after bringing a damage suit against three cigarette companies.


Bengals' Walker Is Out for the Season
Playing football on artificial turf can be treacherous, and for linebacker KEVIN WALKER of the Cincinnati Bengals, it may have ended his career on Sunday.
Walker, who tore a ligament in his right knee when he caught his cleats in the artificial turf of Riverfront Stadium during the Bengals' loss to the Seahawks, will have surgery in the next few weeks and will be out for the season.
Walker had a similar operation on his left knee during the 1988 season, and according to team physician ROBERT HOLT JR., "it's very rare for a guy to come back to what he was from two such operations."
Walker, a fourth-year pro from Maryland, is no stranger to career-threatening injuries.
It was he who made the tackle in the playoffs last year that left Los Angeles Raider running back BO JACKSON with a severe hip injury. (AP)


SPORTS PEOPLE: PRO BASKETBALL;
After setting a Georgetown career record by hitting 64 percent of his shots from the floor and being hailed by the Denver Nuggets as the cornerstone of both their offense and defense, 7-foot-2-inch DIKEMBE MUTOMBO has received a contract worthy of his rookie stature: a five-year, $12 million deal.
As the fourth choice in the June draft, Mutombo is the highest first-round selection to sign so far this year.
"I gave a big sigh of relief when Dikembe walked through that door," Coach Paul Westhead said yesterday in Colorado.
The Nuggets' 20-62 record was the worst in the National Basketball Association last season, and Mutombo is expected to step in immediately as the starting center.


Riddle for Healthful Cooks: How to Leave Out the Fat?
HOME cooks are no strangers to the food police.
Using scientific studies like restraining orders, dietitians, health organizations and journalists have, in recent years, trumpeted a lowering of salt, then sugar, then cholesterol.
Watch out for apples, they could conceal Alar!
Poultry is a salmonella suspect!
Beef is practically public enemy No. 1!


F.D.U. Extends Pact for Coach Tom Green
The school may not be a perennial powerhouse, but Fairleigh Dickinson has made the Division I tournament twice in the last eight years, and the man who made it happen has agreed to stick around a while and try to do it again.
Coach TOM GREEN was given a contract extension that will keep him on the job through the 1995-96 season.
Green, who has a 157-81 record and two conference titles, last took the Knights to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament in 1988.


Sports of The Times; Leo The Lip Was Baseball In New York
IT'S as if Leo Durocher wouldn't leave until he learned that the Giants had knocked the Dodgers out of the National League championship series that opens here tonight.
Those teams represent San Francisco and Los Angeles now, but he had managed the New York Giants to the 1951 pennant and the Brooklyn Dodgers to the 1941 pennant.
"No matter where the Giants and Dodgers are," he once said, "those teams are part of me. So are the Yankees."


At a Festival, Every Beer's The Right One
Slogans were big at this year's Great American Beer Festival.
One brewer's T-shirt posed the question, "If You Can't Taste It, Why Bother?" Another admonished, "Life's Too Short To Drink Cheap Beer." It was certainly too short to drink all the beer here.
At this, the 10th anniversary of the festival, about 7,000 people spent two nights sampling more than 500 beers from 159 breweries ranging from Anheuser-Busch to New Belgium (a tart, yeasty Trappist ale hand-bottled in a Fort Collins, Colo., basement).
The crowd consisted of homebrewers, their palates already seasoned by strange concoctions of their own, and the curious, who had come to expand their idea of what makes beer beer.
Despite the presence of national breweries, the event, run by the Association of Brewers, based in Boulder, Colo., is best known for fraternal atmosphere among "microbrewers," "craft brewers" or (the word makes most of them wince) "boutique" brewers.
Whatever you call them, they are all individual, independent small makers of beer.
Charlie Papazian, president of the American Homebrewers Association, who weaned many microbrewers with his 1982 manual, "The Complete Joy of Homebrewing" (Avon Books), extended his hand toward hundreds of besieged tap handles.
"Go to Germany, Belgium, anywhere," he said, a copy of his book tucked into the back of his trousers.
"I don't think there's a country in the world with this kind of selection. That's what this festival is about -- education. You can't get any closer to a beer than having it poured by someone from the brewery and asking them nitty-gritty questions."
Ask any one of the brewers serving beer about the movement to brew traditional, unadulterated beer and you will be told that a century ago there were over 4,000 regional breweries in the United States.
Prohibition killed off half of them; superhighways and advertising made light, watery national lagers feasible and fashionable.
The legalization of homebrewing in 1978 helped to inspire a new beer culture.
At the last count taken by the Institute for Brewing Studies, based in Boulder, there were 238 microbreweries in the United States, most of them in the West, where laws are less restrictive.
The Great American Beer Festival is where the homebrewers-turned-microbrewers come to taste, trade notes, party and prostelytize, to bask in their accomplishments.
And if all this fervor is on behalf of an estimated one-tenth of 1 percent of the American market that buys the microbrews, who was counting?
Last Wednesday and Thursday, 26 experts gathered at 9 A.M. to judge 31 different styles in blind tastings -- from fruit and herb beers to full-bodied stouts.
The process was not as ebullient as one might imagine.
The experts swirled the beer and scrutinized the color, head and carbonation.
They pondered in silence, scribbled, sniffed and finally tasted. (Unlike wine tasters, they did not spit -- how a beer goes down is of paramount importance.)
They worked on a kind of negative trajectory, in which beers were cast off one by one for taste defects or for not conforming to a standard style.
"I really want to say it smells like my workboots," said Phil Moeller of the Rubicon Brewing Company of Sacramento as he sniffed a light lager.
Perhaps he was slightly peeved that its brewery would sell more beer in a day than he would in a lifetime.
Down the hall, 33 stouts had judges sweating out fine points.
"Did you get any bacon fat on 98?" one asked.
"There's nothing wrong with a little smoke in this category," said another.
"Maybe if you served it with eggs."
"There's nice roast but a touch of rubber. Are you getting rubber?"
"Ninety-six, I got warm milk, clean malt, no bitterness."
The winners weren't announced until Saturday, when the brewers left their tasting tables to gather around the lectern.
As soon as she heard the words "From Eugene . . . , " Teri Fahrendorf of the Steelhead Brewery in Eugene, Ore., tapped her cousin and whispered, "That's me!" She mounted the stage with the tipsy dignity of Lucille Ball to collect a gold medal for her Scotch ale.
She had hardly returned to the crowd before her name was announced again as the winner of the richly competitive stout category, and while she was telling an admirer that yes, there are other female brewmasters, Carol Stoudt from Stoudt's Brewery in Adamstown, Pa., won a medal for her Doppelbock, a heavy, malt-accented lager.
Ms.
Fahrendorf was asked why so few women were brewers.
"Society still doesn't encourage little girls to be what they want to be," she said.
She added that she hadn't ever been much of a beer drinker, but had a peculiar gift for handling yeast.
The "bacon-fat" stout, which won a silver medal, turned out to be from the Appleton Brewing Company in Appleton, Wis.
Its owner and brewmaster, John Jungers, sold his rustproofing business to open his restaurant-brewpub.
He won four other medals for his pilsener, helles, bock and amber beers.
You can't taste Mr.
Junger's beers unless you visit his place, however.
This is the nature of microbrewing, which tends to limit its distribution to a 200-mile radius.
"People don't want national," said C. R. Saikley, an associate editor of the monthly West Coast "brewspaper," the Celebrator.
"Part of the appeal is becoming thirsty for beers in other regions and then traveling to find them."
The festival director, Daniel Bradford, says he wants people to embrace the "entire beer family." Much of the money for the festival comes from large brewers.
Anheuser-Busch donates storage space and refrigeration; Coors helps with transportation of beer, and Miller underwrites an anti-intoxication campaign that provides free cab rides home.
In return, the festival has devised categories for what most brewers consider degraded styles: light beer, dry beer and malt liquor.
Pabst took home two gold medals -- although the fellow at the Pabst table was the loneliest person in the hall.
Of course, people can drink Pabst anywhere; where can they drink chili beer, potato beer, orange-cardomom beer?
"Indigenous beers, beers with a regional character -- that's the renaissance we're all immersed in," said Geoff Larson of Alaskan Brewing, "We had to turn to Europe for our first inspiration, but now we're turning back to America."


A.T.&amp;T. Considers Entering Cellular Service Abroad
A.T.&amp; T. is considering becoming a provider of cellular-telephone service, where there is the potential for explosive growth around the world, especially in Europe and the Soviet Union, said Richard S. Bodman, A.T.&amp; T.'s senior vice president for corporate strategy.
"We want to become a cellular-service provider somewhere in the globe," said Mr.
Bodman, top strategist at the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.
"It's an area that A.T.&amp; T. needs to look at and we are looking at it."


Effort to Fight Malaria Appears to Have Failed
After years of optimism about the development of vaccines against malaria or new drugs to treat it, experts now believe that those efforts have largely failed and that the outlook in the struggle against the disease is grim, according to a new report from the Institute of Medicine.
"Despite heroic efforts to eradicate malaria in the 1950's and 1960's, this disease not only has prevailed but has made a dramatic resurgence within the past two decades," the report said.


Recession and Re-election Don't Mix
From George Bush down, top officials in the Administration and other Republican strategists are convinced that the only obstacle in the way of the President's re-election would be a recession next year.
The White House does not believe such a recession is likely, and neither do most private economists.
But the President's advisers cannot ignore the possibility.
And what frustrates them, many said in interviews, is that unlike previous Presidents who found ways to boost the economy for their political advantage in an election year, this Administration feels its hands are tied.


Treasuries Mixed in Slow Trading
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed in slow trading yesterday, as credit market participants bid up prices of short-term issues and sold longer-dated notes and bonds.
Analysts attributed the strength among shorter-term issues to suspicions that the Federal Reserve Board might be gradually moving its target for the overnight Federal funds rate down another notch, to 5 percent.


Germans Convict Terrorist
Silke Maier-Witt, a former member of the Red Army Faction terrorist gang, was convicted today of helping to kidnap and kill a prominent industrialist, Hans-Martin Schleyer, in 1977 and of taking part in an attack in 1979 on Alexander M. Haig Jr., then NATO commander.


Matchmaker, Matchmaker Find Me an Opponent
While Pernell Whitaker's demolition of Jorge Paez on Saturday in Reno, raised his standing in the boxing world, it did nothing to solve a matchmaking problem that the undisputed lightweight champion faces.
Whitaker shares this problem with several other champions: Meldrick Taylor (World Boxing Association welterweight), Hector Camacho (World Boxing Organization junior welterweight), Terry Norris (World Boxing Council super welterweight), Mike McCallum (World Boxing Association middleweight) and James Toney (International Boxing Federation middleweight).


International Paper Falls
International Paper yesterday reported a 40 percent drop in third-quarter profits, saying the recession cut demand for paper products.
The company said net earnings were $109 million, or 98 cents a share, in the three months ended Sept. 30.
That was down from $181 million, or $1.66 a share, in the previous third quarter.
Revenues were unchanged at $3.3 billion.
The company's chief executive, John A. Georges, said the results were expected.


Brister Might Be Out For Giants-Steelers
The Giants can now start thinking about Neil O'Donnell.
Bubby Brister, who started 30 games in a row as the Pittsburgh Steelers' quarterback, has a sprained knee and was listed yesterday as "questionable," or 50-50, to play against the Giants at Pittsburgh next Monday night.


'Baby Bells' Still Cautious on Data Services
Having won court permission on Monday to begin immediately to provide information services over their phone networks, the seven Bell companies yesterday began trying to figure out which products they wanted to rush to market.
The services most often discussed included customized stock quotes and other news items, enabling callers to get only the data of interest to them; home security and health-monitoring systems, which automatically dial for help in emergencies, and "electronic Yellow Pages."


Contra Inquiry to Focus on Abrams's Silent Role
In the searing policy battles over aid to the Nicaraguan rebels in the 1980's, Elliott Abrams operated as the Reagan Administration's combative public patron of the contras, but it is his behind-the-scenes role at the State Department that the Iran-contra prosecutors now want to explore.
That opportunity emerged on Monday, when Mr.
Abrams agreed to cooperate with prosecutors in what appears to be their culminating drive to investigate efforts by Reagan Administration officials to conceal the Iran-contra affair from Congress as details of the affair began to unfold in the fall of 1986.


Review/Film; Independent Movie Displays
"The Heck With Hollywood!" by Doug Block is a prime example of the phenomenon it seeks to illustrate, that of the independently financed film whose greatest and possibly only virtue may be the enthusiasm of those who fought to get it made.
Mr.
Block sympathetically details the struggles of three film makers and the stumbling blocks they have encountered, from raising money to trying to find theaters where independent films are welcome.
His own film, which is actually an hourlong video, opens today at the Anthology Film Archives.
A lot of what is revealed here will be of interest only to fellow would-be film makers, like the problems inherent in trying to find investors for untried talent and an iffy project.
But Mr.
Block, who is well attuned to the amateurish eagerness of some of his subjects, eventually moves on to the dark humor inherent in making films that may never see the light of day.
The collaborators on something called "Only a Buck," who have credits like "cowriter/accountant" and "lead actor/art director," are seen joining the director, Gerry Cook, for a National Rest Stop Tour in a flamboyantly painted camper, out of which they sell videocassettes of their film "factory direct." They also give out a phone number, (800) HECK-YES, which is cute enough to land them on local news shows in the cities they visit.
All that this eventually gets them is video distribution in a handful of countries, including Turkey and South Korea.
This extremely limited success comes despite the film makers' vow to distributors that "we're not too fully committed to any of it -- so we can take any of it out, or put any of it back in."


Corrections
A Topic of the Times on Sunday misspelled the name of Representative Barbara Kennelly of Connecticut.


Bridge
In one of the most exciting days in the history of international bridge, three of the four semifinal matches in the NEC World Team Championships here went right down to the wire today.
In the Bermuda Bowl for Open Teams, the defending champion, Brazil, was one imp ahead with four deals remaining in a 96-deal match, but Poland pulled ahead at the finish to win by 52.
In the other semifinal, Sweden trailed Iceland by 43 with 16 deals remaining, then surged to cut the margin to 7 with three deals remaining.
But Iceland held on to win by 12 and will meet Poland in the 160-deal final beginning Wednesday.


New York Corrections Watchdog Is Out in a Management Shakeup
The executive who was hired last year to reorganize and tighten internal investigations for New York City's jail system is himself being reorganized out of a job.
As part of a management shakeup in the Correction Department, the post held by Arthur Sinai as the Deputy Commissioner for Management Integrity is being abolished, department officials said yesterday.
Mr.
Sinai was appointed to the newly created position in April 1990 by Allyn R. Sielaff, the Correction Commissioner.


Sniffing for Drugs by Testing Vapors
Police dogs that sniff for drugs may soon find themselves out of a job.
Thermedics Inc. of Woburn, Mass., and Pinkerton Security and Investigation Services of Van Nuys, Calif., have begun jointly marketing a portable drug-detection system that they say can be used to identify vapors from minuscule particles of cocaine, heroin and methamphetamines in the workplace.


Casualties in Fighting in Iraq Are Reported to Exceed 400
Fighting continued today between Kurdish rebels and Government troops in northern Iraq, with the number killed or wounded reportedly rising to more than 400.
United Nations officials and fleeing Kurds said the fighting, the worst since the collapse of a Kurdish revolt against President Saddam Hussein in the spring, was concentrated around Sulaimaniya, nearby Arbat and the towns of Kifri and Kalar 100 miles to the south.
Thousands were reported to be fleeing the area.


Review/Dance; San Franciscans End Visit With Debuts
The San Francisco Ballet closed its weeklong engagement at the City Center on Sunday afternoon by presenting the same program it had offered on opening night.
This was no ordinary repeat performance, for New York debuts were made in several principal roles.
The fact that there can be alternate casts for the works in the repertory is evidence that Helgi Tomasson, the troupe's artistic director, has developed a talented and well-trained company.


Dollar Higher as Skepticism Is Voiced on Lower Rates
The dollar advanced in world trading yesterday amid renewed skepticism that American interest rates were heading lower.
Gold prices subsided worldwide on profit taking.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold bullion for current delivery settled at $357.60 an ounce, off $1.70 from Monday.
The Republic National Bank of New York said later that gold had fallen $1.95, to $356.80 an ounce.


Review/Film; Ulcers and the Other Prices Of Being a Pint-Sized Prodigy
Fred Tate (Adam Hann-Byrd) is like any other 7-year-old.
He's not especially handsome but, aside from his introspective manner, he is the kind of kid you might see in a television commercial for a ghastly new multi-colored breakfast cereal.
His height is average; his face is still fleshed with baby fat.
His mind, though, is something else. It's moving at the speed of light.


Wine Talk
THE annals of the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau overflow with the histories of every conceivable type of large-scale gathering, from medical conventions to cat shows.
Boat lovers, horse lovers, stamp collectors and veterans of various wars have all gathered here at one time or another in solemn conclave.
But has any one of them, including the Democratic Party, which turns up now and then, ever laid out 165 different wines for the participants to sample?
Fat chance.


Brim Gets Job Done for Jets; It May Help Him Get the Job
Mike Brim doesn't know if he started at left cornerback for the Jets in Cleveland on Sunday on his own merit or because Tony Stargell was hurt.
He also doesn't know if the fumble he forced to preserve the Jets' 17-14 victory with 74 seconds left also preserved the starting job for him this week.
"He made the big play of the game, and he got the defensive game ball," said Coach Bruce Coslet, who was noncommittal although Brim is now listed ahead of Stargell on the depth chart and Stargell is not on the injury list this week.


CHRONICLE
AMY TUCKER, JON MELTZER and LUCIANO PAVAROTTI were seated together at a dinner last November at the Metropolitan Opera House for the Richard Tucker Foundation, when Mr.
Pavarotti said, "What a wonderful setting this would be for a wedding."
As Ms.
Tucker recalled, "Luciano was always telling Jon: 'Come on already, give her a ring. If you won't, I will.' "


THE THOMAS NOMINATION: A Pause to Reconsider; Delay of Thomas Vote an Acknowledgment Of Declining Faith in Judge and the Senate
Hit broadside by an issue whose force it had misunderstood and mishandled, the United States Senate belatedly acknowledged today that its fairness and credibility had been damaged and agreed to postpone a scheduled vote -- a rare development in its tradition-bound annals.
The decision to investigate allegations of sexual harassment by an Oklahoma law professor against Judge Clarence Thomas reflected the growing power of women and of issues of importance to women in American politics.
Once the allegations had been made public, any "rush to judgment," as several senators put it, would surely be taken by many to mean that the Senate considered the questions at stake trivial.


Advised of Surgery, Montana Holds Off
JOE MONTANA has been told by 49ers team doctors that he should undergo elbow surgery, but the San Francisco quarterback is still seeking other medical opinions.
Any surgery would end Montana's 1991 season as well as threaten his career with the 49ers, who have won four Super Bowls with Montana as their quarterback.
A person close to the 49ers and another person close to Montana said yesterday that team doctors had recommended surgery to repair a torn tendon in his right elbow.
But the 35-year-old quarterback was seeking opinions from other specialists, one source said.


A Bronx Youth Is Shot to Death Outside a School
Tryon Whittaker was known on the streets around the Bronx River houses as a loner who studied karate and believed he was invincible.
Yesterday, he got into an argument with another youth in front of a Bronx high school and was shot to death, the police said.
The 17-year-old victim was a former member of a rap group that appeared in the 1985 film "Rappin," friends said.
He was struck twice in the chest at point-blank range by his attacker in front of James Monroe High School at 1334 Manor Avenue in Clason's Point at 9:15 A.M.
He was pronounced dead at Jacobi Hospital a short time later, the police said.
A Challenge to Fight
The youth with the gun fled on foot.
The police said last night that they did not know what the dispute was about and that they had no suspects.


About New York
Margaret Mead said her years at Barnard College are the ones that impressed upon her "what I could do in life." Because so many alumnae and others feel the same way, the prestigious women's college in Morningside Heights, in the first year of an eight-year fund-raising campaign, has already collected $37 million toward its goal of $100 million.
Some contributions have exceeded $1 million.
But none signifies more than that of Phyllis Ben.


Richardson, Ex-Colt, Has Heart Surgery
WILLIE RICHARDSON, a former wide receiver for the Colts in Baltimore, suffered a heart attack over the weekend, his second in recent months, apparently while providing radio commentary for the game in Robert F. Kennedy Stadium in Washington on Saturday between Delaware State and his alma mater, Jackson State.
Richardson, who underwent an angioplasty at Georgetown University Hospital on Sunday, said he had undergone a similar procedure to unblock another artery on Aug. 1.
He joined the Colts in 1963 and left in 1971. (AP)


The Pop Life
A Storied Approach
The guitarist and songwriter Robbie Robertson has just released "Storyville" (Geffen), his first album in four years, and like most of themusic he has been involved in, it deals with American myths.
Mr.
Robertson, who was a member of the Band, is obsessed with America, and on "Storyville," he has taken a short story he wrote and mingled it with the sounds of New Orleans and Los Angeles.
Aaron Neville, the Meters and various Mardi Gras Indians appear, as do the standard-issue Los Angeles session musicians, the former Band member Garth Hudson and friends like Bruce Hornsby and Neil Young.


New Jersey Makes Headway on High Auto Insurance Problem
To the Editor:
As you state in "Break the Gridlock Over Car Insurance" (editorial, Sept. 24), car insurance is a crucial issue in many states, and the universal truth is that rates are too high for drivers to afford comfortably.
However, car insurance rates can be reduced if costs are reduced.


Mets' Cone Investigated In Rape Case
The Philadelphia police confirmed yesterday that David Cone, the pitcher for the Mets, is the subject of a rape investigation arising from an incident at the team's hotel last weekend.
"It's an investigation into an alleged rape, and it is in its preliminary stages," said Capt.
Richard Bullick, the commanding officer of the Philadelphia Police Department's sex crimes unit.


Lavish Homes Seen Losing Luster in New Jersey
In New Jersey, where housing costs reached record heights in the 1980's, the next decade will be a time of maturing baby boomers whose consumption will be less conspicuous and whose home buying may be more modest, forecasters said today in presenting a census portrait of the state in the 1990's.
"The decade of yuppie spending is over," said Dr.
James W. Hughes, a demographer who is a professor of urban planning at Rutgers University.
"The three-car garage in the front of the house will be a thing of the past. The numbers of those waiting to board the housing train will be smaller and there will be more stability in shelter costs."


For Mayor, Urn Is Butt of Scorn
For Mayor David N. Dinkins, "neatness counts" is more than a motto, as he reminded the City Hall janitorial staff yesterday afternoon in no uncertain terms.
On his way into the building for a meeting with Japanese executives, Mr.
Dinkins spotted a large sand-filled cigarette urn, overflowing with butts and a paper coffee cup.


Friends Remember Anthony Bliss With Anecdotes, Arias and Dance
Relatives and friends of Anthony Bliss gathered at the Juilliard Theater on Monday afternoon for a memorial service in which his enthusiasms and accomplishments were recalled in touching and, at times, amusing detail.
Mr.
Bliss, the executive director of the Metropolitan Opera for 11 years beginning in 1974, and a co-chairman of the Joffrey Ballet until 1990, died on Aug. 10 at the age of 78.
Musical performances framed and punctuated the tribute.
It began with the Intermezzo from Puccini's "Manon Lescaut," played by the principal string players of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra: Raymond Gniewek and Shirien Taylor, violinists; Michael Ouzounian, violist, and Jascha Silberstein, cellist.
It ended with the Pas de Deux from Act I of Prokofiev's "Romeo and Juliet," choreographed by John Cranko and danced by two members of the Joffrey Ballet, Tina LeBlanc and Tom Mossbrucker.


CHRONICLE
As if a daily talk show, acting and producing television shows were not sufficient, OPRAH WINFREY has taken on a new role: she will be a producer of an off-Broadway play, "From the Mississippi Delta," which will begin previews at the Circle-in-the-Square Theater downtown on Oct. 29 for a Nov. 11 opening.
The play tells of the struggle of its author, Dr.
ENDESHA IDA MAE HOLLAND, to rise from prostitution and earn a doctorate in American studies from the University of Minnesota in 1985.
She is now an associate professor of women's studies at the State University of New York at Buffalo.


Israel Interrogates 2 Palestinian Negotiators
Two leading Palestinian negotiators in the Middle East peace process were called in for questioning today by the Israeli Police as they were preparing for consultations in Washington with Secretary of States James A. Baker 3d.
The Palestinians, Faisal al-Husseini and Prof.
Hanan Ashrawi, were allowed to leave police headquarters in East Jerusalem after an hour, and apparently no attempt was made to block their scheduled departure for Washington on Wednesday.


Workers Accused of Stealing Tokens
New York City transit officials, already busy fighting fare beaters and criminals who jam turnstiles and steal subway tokens, must now contend with a new kind of token thief.
Yesterday, the transit police arrested 11 transit employees for stealing hundreds of thousands of tokens from broken turnstiles and selling them back to the public.
For two years, officials said, the well-organized band -- nine turnstile maintainers and two token clerks -- has sold tokens taken from turnstiles under repair.
The transit police said the group may have made off with as many as 500,000 tokens.
Where the Tokens Go
If a turnstile is working properly, the tokens fall into a secure vault in the base of the turnstile that can only be opened by the clerk.
A counter on the turnstile keeps a record of each token that goes into the vault.


Natalia Ginzburg, 75, Novelist, Essayist and Translator, Is Dead
Natalia Ginzburg, an author commonly ranked with Umberto Eco as one of Italy's most important writers of fiction, died on Monday at her home in Rome.
She was 75 years old.
She died of cancer, a spokesman for her publisher, Einaudi, said yesterday.


Now, Implants Instead of Dentures
After a long period of slow development, false-teeth implants are rapidly gaining popularity with dentists and consumers as an alternative to ordinary dentures.
The implants can cost more than twice as much as dentures but they are more secure, easier to maintain and less likely to irritate gums or harm adjacent natural teeth.
"This field is as hot as can be," said Dr.
Dennis Tarnow, chairman of New York University's recently formed Department of Implant Dentistry.
Consumer spending on dental implants could top a half-billion dollars in the United States this year.


CHRONICLE
Does anyone know who's in charge here?
HARRISON J. GOLDIN, the former New York City Comptroller had cause to wonder the other day.
On his way to the bris of a colleague's newborn son, he found himself with time to spare, so he stopped in at a haberdashery on the Upper East Side.
"The proprietor looked at me and asked, 'Gee, don't I know you?' " Mr.
Goldin recounted.
"I replied, 'I don't know.' He said, 'Your name is Goldin, isn't it, Harrison Goldin.' I said, 'That's right.'


Historic Fulton Market's King of Facts About Fish
"AND this is yellowfin grouper," said Richard Lord, picking up an uncomely creature whose bulging eyes make it look as if its last day of freedom was marred by a Pacific-sized hangover.
"These can grow to well over 100 pounds."
"And this is a Saudi Arabian parrot fish," he continued during a predawn tour of the Fulton Fish Market in lower Manhattan.
"The male parrot fish is a hermaphrodite. It starts as a female, and only when the largest male in the group dies does it convert to a male."


Soviet Union Agrees to Pull Out of Poland
The Soviet Union has agreed to withdraw its remaining 45,000 troops from Poland by the end of next year, ending months of tense negotiations between the two countries.
The troop issue is part of a broader treaty on Polish-Soviet relations, and Polish officials said the accord reflected the significant moderation in foreign policy wrought by the failed Soviet coup in August.


Citibank Pulls Out Of Philharmonic Tour
The New York Philharmonic's scheduled three-week tour of Latin America next July is in doubt because Citibank, the principal financial backer, says it is unable to contribute the required support.


Biden's Panel to Inquire Into Several Allegations
Joseph R. Biden Jr., chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, said today that he would use any delay in Senate action on the Supreme Court nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to look into several allegations against the nominee.
But Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader, warned that a delay would lead to a flurry of new accusations.
"Then you check that out and you leak that and then you start again," Mr.
Dole said.
Nonetheless, the Senate tonight agreed to postpone its vote on the nominee until next week.


Equality Plan on School Financing Is Upsetting Rich and Poor in Texas
For years "the Robin Hood plan" loomed as a dreaded last resort for Texas public schools, and now that it is operating, no one is very happy about it.
The rich say they are being robbed by the new system for financing public education.
The poor say that despite sweeping revisions designed to eliminate financial inequities among school districts the state is still not giving them what they need.


7 Congresswomen March to Senate To Demand Delay in Thomas Vote
The group of seven women, all Democratic members of the House, marched purposefully up to the Capitol room where the Democratic senators were in their regular Tuesday caucus.
They knocked on the door, hoping to give their colleagues in the room, all men except for Senator Barbara A. Mikulski of Maryland, "the woman's point of view," as Representative Louise Slaughter of upstate New York, put it.
They wanted to state their case about why the vote on Judge Clarence Thomas should be delayed to give a thorough airing to Prof.
Anita F. Hill's accusations of sexual harassment.


How Soviet Chaos Stifles An Enterprising Factory
When the Soviet economy was in merely bad condition last year, Yuri S. Korolev defied the odds and turned his rundown electrical equipment factory into a smoothly running operation that was the envy of other Soviet managers.
But now that the economy has fallen into critical condition, not even a masterful manager like Mr.
Korolev can avoid being dragged down into the all-engulfing chaos.


Evolution Enters Era of Synthetic Selection
To the Editor:
I don't know where J. S. Jones ("Is Evolution Over?", Op-Ed, Sept. 22) has been for the last decade, but the onslaught on the human aging process and the augmentation of a human's capabilities, through dramatic advances in all the sciences, have taken on the same proportions that caused humans to reach the moon or to create an atomic bomb, once the demand was made.


Books of The Times; The Latest From the New Nobel Laureate
Jump and Other Stories By Nadine Gordimer 257 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $20.
Of Nadine Gordimer's new book of short stories, this should be emphasized: Her themes range far beyond apartheid, her characters -- whether black or white -- are delegates representing the vast human comedy and tragedy, and her lapidary language is often elegant.
A wise Swedish Academy has finally recognized her social consciousness and literary significance; new readers are now free to savor her professionalism as a working writer with something to declare.


Soviet Republics Back Gorbachev on Nuclear Cuts
The four major Soviet republics with nuclear missile bases have been consulted on the latest disarmament initiatives and support President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Soviet officials said today.
The officials insisted that Mr.
Gorbachev's powers in the arms area were not eroding with the integrity of the union.
With the dissolution of the monolithic Soviet Union, there has been uncertainty and concern about the future control of the long-range nuclear missile bases in the Russian federation, the Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Byelorussia, even as President Bush and President Gorbachev make further pledges and proposals for disarmament.


Muscle Is Turned Into Bone By Researchers in St. Louis
In an animal experiment that sounds almost like science fiction, researchers at Washington University in St.
Louis have transformed muscle tissue into bones that, they say, could be tailor-made to repair bone defects caused by accidents, diseases or treatment of tumors.
The achievement represents the most promising method yet devised for repairing large bony defects.
Currently, plastic surgeons trying to replace a jawbone, for example, must rely on transplants of bone from the lower leg or hip, which involves complex surgery that is sometimes permanently debilitating to the patient.


Eating Well
MILLIONS of home cooks who are eager to serve more healthful meals no longer plead ignorance for their lapses.
They know what they should do.
They just don't think they have the time to do it.
Who can spend an hour or more cooking beans for the night's dinner?
Who even gets that far?
Cooking beans requires that someone remember to soak them the night before.


Israeli Jets Fly Spy Missions in Iraq, Prompting U.S. Protest
Israeli reconnaissance planes flew over Arab territory and entered Iraqi airspace last week on an unspecified mission that has prompted the Bush Administration to complain about the flight in private diplomatic channels, Administration officials said today.
White House and State Department officials consulted late today on whether the Administration should publicly protest the flights.
Coming weeks before the United States hopes to convene a Middle East peace conference, the Israeli action was viewed by some senior Administration officials as a potentially inflammatory step.


In Florida, Gators and Humans Vie for Same Turf
It is a Saturday afternoon, and the residents of this suburb on the edge of the Everglades are making the most of the good life and warm weather that Florida offers.
As football games and rock music blare from radios, barbecuing, fishing, shopping and boating are the order of the day.
But Joe Samsel has other things on his mind as he roams the grounds of the Fisherman's Landing apartment complex, just northwest of Fort Lauderdale.
He and his partner, Dan Svorinich, are after an 8-foot-long alligator that earlier in the month swallowed two ducks whole and nearly ate a tenant's dog as two small children watched from the shore of a man-made pond at the center of the complex.


A Ban on McFadgen May Not Apply
Four days after DAVID McFADGEN, a triple-jumper, was suspended from competition for two years after testing positive for cocaine at the Olympic Festival in Los Angeles in July, officials of the Empire State Games said they were not sure whether the ban would apply to their competition.
The ban was imposed by The Athletics Congress, track and field's national governing body, but Empire State officials said that theirs was not a T.A.C. event even though T.A.C. recognizes records set there.


No Progress on Signing Viola
Al Harazin, the general manager of the Mets, met for 90 minutes yesterday with the agent for Frank Viola, a meeting that ended with no great optimism that the Mets would re-sign the star left-hander.
Harazin, who characterized the meeting as "genial and cordial," said there were "no surprises on either side," and that the length of the contract was "still the problem."


After 100 Days, The Hardest Yet For One Senator
It had been a hard day, and a hard three months for Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri, the tireless chief advocate of Judge Clarence Thomas, and only 100 minutes remained until the Senate was scheduled to vote on Judge Thomas's nomination to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.
He took the Senate floor to rage at the judge's critics, saying that for 100 days "this whole confirmation process has been turned into the worst kind of sleazy political operation with no effort spared to assassinate the character of Clarence Thomas."


British Regulators Broaden Inquiry on Futures Trading
British regulators said today that their investigation of the London Futures and Options Exchange would go beyond the trading in property futures, which started the inquiry.
Geoffrey Turner, a spokesman for the Securities and Futures Authority, which regulates the exchange, said of the investigation, "I'm sure it's looking at the whole operation."


The Gates Case: Three Doubts
Robert Gates, President Bush's nominee to head the Central Intelligence Agency, has now responded, point by 20 points, to accusations that he improperly slanted intelligence assessments.
But even though Mr.
Gates has rebutted the main charges, he has not refuted them.


Kelly Gets Fired Up Over Manager Dismissals
When someone told Tom Kelly in Minnesota yesterday afternoon that Joe Morgan had been dismissed by the Red Sox in Boston, the Twins' manager almost swallowed his cigar.
"No, you're kidding me," said Kelly. "I just got finished reading about Stump."


Nynex Ad Becomes A Hit With Consumers
It is a marketer's dream come true: an advertisement that becomes so popular, people will pay to put it on the walls of their homes.
This is what happened with an ad for the Nynex Yellow Pages that shows a bunny that has been tinted blue, the company logo, and the tagline: "Hair Tinting. If it's out there, it's in here."


Second Research Group in a Year Is Leaving Rockefeller U.
For the second time in less than a year, a major research group has announced it is leaving the campus of Rockefeller University in New York City.
The Neurosciences Institute, headed by Dr.
Gerald M. Edelman, a Nobel Prize-winning scientist, said it was moving to the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif.
University officials and Dr.
Edelman's group said yesterday that the move was not directly related to recent faculty turmoil stemming from the arrival two years ago of Dr.
David Baltimore, another Nobel Prize-winning biologist, as the Rockefeller president.


For Hartmarx, a Videotape Is Worth 1,000 Catalogues
Hoping to cut through the clutter of Christmas catalogues already filling mailboxes, the Hartmarx Corporation is presenting its holiday offerings on videotapes that will be mailed to 150,000 of the clothing company's best customers on Nov. 1.
"We wanted to bring the merchandise to life, to show people enjoying giving, enjoying each other, enjoying our clothes," said John Eyler, chairman and chief executive of Hartmarx's specialty stores division.


Historian's Menu: What Europe Ate Before Columbus Sailed
WHEN it comes to Columbus, Luisa di Giovanni, a biologist and historian, is less than sanguine.
Ms. di Giovanni, a native of Genoa, will acknowledge that the foods brought back from the New World enriched the diets of various countries, but Italy benefited less than others.
As far as she's concerned (the tomato notwithstanding), Columbus's impact has been greatly exaggerated in his native land.


Devils Edge Nordiques To Push Record to 3-0
If the sign of a good team is to play sloppy and sluggish and still win, then the Devils may be one of the better teams in the National Hockey League.
Despite their lethargic play for the most of the game tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the Devils ended up posting a 6-5 victory over the Quebec Nordiques, the weakest team in the league last season.


Foreign Affairs; The Asia Test for Mr. Bush
President Bush will soon face his biggest and most challenging test in shaping a new world order since the Persian Gulf war.
Beginning in mid-November, Secretary of State Baker and later Mr.
Bush himself will spend the better part of a month traveling in Asia, ending symbolically on Dec. 7 in Pearl Harbor.
They will be trying to pull together a policy for the Asian-Pacific rim, an area of the world that will probably have a greater impact on America than all the latest Soviet-American arms control announcements and the Middle East negotiations.


C.D.'s and Bank Funds Drop Sharply in Week
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts continued to decline briskly for the week that ended yesterday, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, the publication based in North Palm Beach, Fla., that focuses on interest rates.
"New York's biggest commercial banks have cut short-term certificate of deposit yields by 29 basis points since the prime rate was lowered on Sept. 13," said Robert K. Heady, The Monitor's publisher.
"Assuming the strong downward direction in yields continues at its present pace, the banks' cost of funds would be lowered by 50 basis points by mid-November." (A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.)


People
*
Carol Holding has been named senior vice president at McCann-Erickson, San Francisco.
She had previously been senior vice president at Siegal &amp; Gale, New York. *
Terry MacDonald and Oliver White have been appointed executive vice presidents and co-creative directors at Mintz &amp; Hoke, Boston.
Both had previously been principals at MacDonald Boyd White, Boston, before it closed in August.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi Beats Herrera in Tokyo  Andre Agassi, seeded fourth, beat Luis Herrera of Mexico, 7-5, 6-1, yesterday and advanced to the third round of the Seiko Super tournament in Tokyo.
Also Derrick Rostagno of the United States, seeded seventh, came back to beat Jason Stoltenberg of Australia, 3-6, 6-3, 6-2, and Michael Chang of the United States, No. 8, beat Mark Woodforde of Australia, 6-1, 6-4. (AP)
McNeil and Shriver Advance: Lori McNeil and Pam Shriver of the United States won opening-round matches in the European Indoors tournament yesterday in Zurich.
McNeil defeated Amy Frazier of the United States, 7-6, 6-3, and Shriver beat Helen Kelesi of Canada, 6-3, 6-2. (AP) RUGBY  Rout for New Zealanders  Fullback Terry Wright had three tries and five other New Zealand players had a try apiece as the All Blacks team overpowered the United States, 46-6, yesterday in the first round of the Rugby World Cup in Gloucester, England.
The All Blacks, the defending champions, took a 20-3 halftime lead and dominated the match.
The only American points came on two penalty goals by Mark Williams.
N.H.L.
Whalers Rally to Tie Canadiens  Mark Hunter and Rob Brown scored power-play goals in the second period to give the Whalers a 2-2 tie with Montreal last night in Hartford's home opener.
In the first period, the Canadiens took a 2-0 lead on goals by Kirk Muller and Russ Courtnall, but the Whalers scored on two of three second-period power plays. (AP)


Stocks Regain Ground as Dow Rises 21.02
Stock prices rose smartly yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average breaking a four-day losing streak to gain 21.02 points, to 2,963.77.
Dennis E. Jarrett, chief market analyst for Kidder, Peabody, said the market was oversold after a few down days and "it gave an opportunity for some investors to bargain-hunt."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Fired Joe Morgan, manager. Named Butch Hobson manager.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Reassigned Harry Dalton, general manager, to senior vice president for baseball operations.
Named Sal Bando general manager; Bruce Manno assistant vice president of baseball operations and Al Goldis vice president of scouting and planning.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Extended the contract of Bill Kearns, major league and special assignment scout, for two years.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Added Jerry Willard, catcher, and Randy St.
Claire, pitcher, to the post-season roster.
Dropped Nick Esasky, first baseman, and Juan Berenguer, pitcher, from the post-season roster.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Named Whitey Lockman senior advisor for player personnel.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Named Eddie Haas executive advisor for baseball operations; Kent Qualls director of minor league operations; Gregg Leonard adminstrative assistant for scouting; and Felipe Alou coach.
NEW YORK METS -- Claimed Junior Noboa, infielder, off waivers from the Montreal Expos.
International League
ROCHESTER RED WINGS -- Announced the resignation of Dan Lunetta, general manager, effective Dec. 1, so he can become director of minor league administration for the Florida Marlins.
College
BENTLEY -- Named Bob DeFelice athletic director.
COAST GUARD -- Named Charles Goodwin assistant athletic trainer.
EASTERN INTERCOLLEGIATE BASEBALL LEAGUE -- Announced Army and Navy will leave the league after the 1992 season to join the Patriot League.
GANNON -- Named Rick Binder men's assistant basketball coach.
MONMOUTH, N.J. -- Named Jack Miller women's part-time assistant basketball coach.
UNLV -- Announced the resignation of Chuck Pagano, defensive coordinator.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Fulton County, Ga., Building Authority tentatively priced $63 million in revenue refunding bonds through Paine Webber Inc. to yield 6.584 percent for a 2015 maturity.
Moody's Investors Service Inc. and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. rated the issue double-A.


Fury and Relief Greet AIDS Proposal
From enraged patients whose dentist died of AIDS to a doctor who wonders if physicians might someday have the right to turn away patients with the disease, New Yorkers were torn by the complexities of the issue as the State Health Department proposed yesterday that health-care workers not be forced to disclose whether they carry the AIDS virus.
One mother said her son's girlfriends have shied away from him only because the family dentist had the disease.
An upstate doctor -- who has the virus, but no symptoms -- said he would not have had to resign from the staff of a hospital three months ago had the state guidelines been in place.


Judge Accepts Exxon Pact, Ending Suits on Valdez Spill
A Federal judge today accepted a $1 billion package of criminal and civil settlements to bring to an end the state and Federal cases against the Exxon Corporation arising from the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill.
Federal District Judge H. Russel Holland, who rejected an earlier settlement in April, said two changes in the package made it acceptable: the increase of the criminal penalty from $100 million to $125 million, and the allocation of $100 million of the penalty toward restitution of the area devastated by the spill.
In the earlier settlement, $50 million was allocated toward restitution, and the remaining $50 million was to have been paid into the Federal treasury.


Torrey Pursuing Trade Offers for LaFontaine
Undefeated one game into the 1991-92 season but under pressure to add an explosive element to the unspectacular chemistry of his team, Islander General Manager Bill Torrey said he was "continuing to explore the possibility" of trading center Pat LaFontaine.
Torrey last week informed the rest of the league that he was prepared to entertain offers for LaFontaine, who refuses to play for the franchise as long as John O. Pickett continues to own it.
Torrey confirmed that he has been contacted by several teams since then.


Christo's Umbrellas Blossom in Japan
After waiting a day for the rain to stop, the artist Christo opened the first phase of his trans-Pacific leap of imagination this morning by unfurling 1,340 immense blue umbrellas spread across a dozen miles of the sodden plains of central Japan.
The umbrellas -- each 20 feet tall and 28 feet in diameter -- blossomed in the gray dawn in rice fields, villages and bamboo forests, on riverbanks and even in the rivers themselves in a meandering pattern that, for all its whimsy, cost at least $26 million and took seven years of planning.


Market Place; Changing a Rule Could Help Banks
WITH many banks facing financial problems, accounting regulators are about to ride to the rescue, changing the rules on income tax accounting in a way that will enable banks to report sharply higher net worths.
The rule change, on which the Financial Accounting Standards Board will hold hearings next week, would effectively let banks -- and many other companies with large recent losses -- report as current income part of the profits they expect to earn in future years.


U.N. to Impose New Arms Curbs on Iraq
The United States and its allies are planning to usher a new resolution through the Security Council imposing a tight new web of industrial and scientific restrictions meant to prevent Iraq from ever reacquiring weapons of mass destruction.
The proposed resolution, which is expected to be approved by the Council in the next week or so, would bring detailed restrictions into force to back up the Council's general order in April forbidding Iraq to keep or acquire nuclear, chemical or biological weapons or ballistic missiles.
That ban, formally accepted by the Baghdad Government, was among the terms set by the United Nations for a cease-fire formally ending the Persian Gulf war.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-9
A new Haitian President was named by the nation's legislature to replace the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who was deposed in a violent coup last week.
The provisional leader is a Supreme Court Justice.
Page A1
Tougher economic sanctions on Haiti were passed by the Organization of American States.
The group also considered an offer to send a an observer force to Port-au-Prince to help restore democracy.
A3


Why Peru Accepts Wrong Kind of Aid
To the Editor:
In "Peru's President -- A Good Bet" (editorial, Sept. 28), you cynically misrepresent the Bush Administration's latest bribe to Peru as "aid." In the last few months, your news columns have documented the negotiations between the United States and Peru that led to President Alberto Fujimori's eventual surrender to White House "diplomacy."


Review/Music; For the Foolish or the Brave
Bach's "Goldberg" Variations are hardly the vehicles most young pianists would choose to convey them through a New York debut and on to a wider career.
Before the fact, Kevin Sharpe's choice of this music (nothing else was on the program) appeared either foolhardy or else very confident.
Mr.
Sharpe, a pianist from Newark who has been educated at Oberlin College and Indiana University, decided on Sunday evening that confidence might be the better option.
The listener heard at once from the crisp tone and fastidious ornamentation of the Aria that this young man knew what he was about and questioned only whether he could sustain his knowledge through 30 variations.


Why Peru Accepts Wrong Kind of Aid; Two Colossal Menaces
To the Editor:
In "Misadventures in Cocaland" (Op-Ed, Sept. 8), Gustavo Gorriti depicts the United States aid package for Peru as unbalanced and shortsighted, and worries that it will cause the campesinos, or peasants, to rise up and group behind the terrorist group Sendero Luminoso, or Shining Path.
Furthermore, he describes the drug trade as indispensable for the survival of the Peruvian economy.
I disagree with both statements.


INSIDE
Exxon Spill Deal Accepted
A Federal judge approved a $1 billion settlement of criminal and civil charges arising from the Exxon Valdez oil spill.
Page A14.
Fighting Rages in Kurdistan
Fighting continued between Kurdish rebels and Iraqi troops, with the number killed or wounded reportedly climbing to more than 400.
Page A6.
Another Perquisite Falls
The Speaker of the House said the House sergeant-at-arms would no longer fix District of Columbia parking tickets for lawmakers.
Page A14.
Immunization for Cancer
For the first time, scientists tried to immunize a dying cancer patient against his own tumor, but not without criticism.
Health, page C14.
Unearthing Black History
Archeologists have found a cemetery in lower Manhattan that may yield clues about the life of blacks in colonial-era New York City.
Page B1.
Twins Win Opener, 5-4
Minnesota scored all its runs in the first three innings and held off Toronto in the first game of the American League pennant playoff.
Page B11.


Roger Forsythe, 36, Men's Wear Designer
Roger Forsythe, head designer for the Perry Ellis Group, the men's wear company, died on Sunday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 36 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of lymphatic cancer, a company spokesman said.


Dinkins Vows To 'Contain' Tax Growth
Mayor David N. Dinkins pledged yesterday to hold down taxes, to build up reserve funds to weather future fiscal storms and to cut New York City's work force further to keep its budget balanced over the next four years.
Reporting to the State Financial Control Board, Mr.
Dinkins said he would "contain the overall level of tax growth" to "make sure it is well below" the $500 million annual property tax increases that he had previously planned to help close projected deficits in each of the next three years.
He did not offer to freeze taxes, as some business and civic groups and the City Council have urged, but he did not flatly rule it out.


Haitian Legislators Name a Judge To Be President Until a New Vote
The Haitian National Assembly swore in a Supreme Court Justice as provisional president today to replace the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the country's first democratically elected leader, who fled the country after being overthrown in a military coup eight days ago.
The appointment of Joseph Nerette, a Justice described as political centrist in his late 60's, came after the parliament overwhelmingly ratified a motion declaring the office of the president vacant.


Toshiba Rewrites a Hollywood Script
From a distance, Time Warner's talks with two big Japanese companies about a billion- dollar investment in the debt-laden American company seem familiar: another Japanese effort to buy into Hollywood and the software that will be critical for the next generation of consumer electronics.
But to hear the executives of the Toshiba Corporation talk, an alliance with Time Warner Inc. is very different from the recent forays of the Sony Corporation and the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company.


Kellogg in India
The Kellogg Company said it had received approval from India to make ready-to-eat cereal products for sale there.
The company said it planned to sell Corn Flakes, as well as other cereal products.
A Kellogg spokesman said the company had no large international competitors in India, which has a population of about 900 million.
Construction of a cereal production plant is expected to begin in 1992 near Bombay.


Latest Cease-Fire in Yugoslavia Appears Effective
A tenuous cease-fire appeared to be taking hold along the battlefronts in Yugoslavia this evening after a day of flare-ups between units of the Yugoslav National Army and an assortment of Croatian forces.
The six-point cease-fire was arranged this evening in Zagreb, the capital of the Croatian republic, between the Croatian Defense Minister, Gojko Susak, and Gen.
Andrija Raseta, the senior army commander in Croatia.


Lou Stoumen Is Dead; Photographer Was 75
Lou Stoumen, a photographer and film maker who taught for many years at the University of California in Los Angeles, died in Sebastopol, Calif., on Sept. 13.
He was 75 years old.
He died of cancer, said Barry Singer, a friend and business associate.


Investor Group to Buy 3 New Hampshire Savings Banks
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation plans to sell three insolvent New Hampshire savings banks later this week to a group of private investors who have agreed to inject about $40 million of capital into the new bank, several people involved in the transaction said.
Officials at the F.D.I.C. declined to comment on the fate of the New Hampshire banks -- the Dartmouth Savings Bank of Hooksett, the New Hampshire Savings Bank of Concord and Numerica Savings Bank of Manchester.
The F.D.I.C.'s chairman, L. William Seidman, told reporters on Sunday evening that a sale was imminent and that several of the banks would be sold to an outside investor.


Public &amp; Private; Listen to Us
Listen to us.
You will notice there is no please in that sentence.
It is difficult to feel polite, watching the white men of the United States Senate and realizing that their first response when confronted with a serious allegation of sexual harassment against a man nominated to the high court was to rush to judgment.
It is difficult to feel polite, knowing they were more concerned about how this looked for them, for their party, their procedures and their political prospects than in discovering what really happened.
The gender divide has opened and swallowed politeness like a great hungry whale.
Why?
Why?
Why? they asked.
Why did Anita F. Hill, now a tenured law professor at the University of Oklahoma, not bring charges against Clarence Thomas when, she contends, he sexually harassed her a decade ago?
Why did she stay on the job although, she says, he insisted on discussing with her the details of pornographic movies?
Why was she hesitant about confiding in the Judiciary Committee?


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day on Friday quoted an executive who misidentified the company that is merging with the Chiron Corporation.
It is the Cetus Corporation, not Genentech.


Top of the Lineup Gets Twins Off to Fast Start
The focus leading up to the start of the American League Championship Series had been on table- setters.
And nowhere did the spotlight shine more brightly than on Toronto's Devon White and Roberto Alomar.
By the second inning of Game 1, however, one thing had become abundantly clear: Minnesota's top two hitters, Dan Gladden and Chuck Knoblauch, had also come to play.


Eastern Orthodox Leader Is Buries


House Votes to Lift Limits On Eastern European Trade
The House voted this evening to remove restrictions on trade and financial relations with Hungary and Czechoslovakia, in a move aimed at helping the struggling economies of Eastern Europe.
Similar legislation has been introduced in the Senate and is expected to pass easily.


New York Trash Haulers Charged With Bribery and Payoffs to Mob
A major trash hauler in the Hudson Valley was indicted today on Federal racketeering charges.
Prosecutors said the hauler tried to keep a stranglehold on waste disposal in Orange County and elsewhere by making payoffs to the Genovese crime family and trying to bribe a state environmental official.
In announcing the indictment, United States Attorney Otto G. Obermaier said that the two brothers named in the 84-count indictment "siphoned millions of dollars in cash" from six waste hauling companies they control in Harriman, N.Y., in part for bribes.


Panel Grants Bailout Money, With Strings
A House Banking subcommittee today approved the Administration's request for an additional $80 billion to pay for the savings and loan bailout, but included a disputed amendment requiring that the funds be raised on a "pay as you go" basis rather than through Government borrowings.
The amendment was quickly criticized by the Bush Administration.
Deputy Treasury Secretary John E. Robson said, "We're deeply disappointed by the action of the committee and want to get it corrected."


A Hot Feud, Through Cooler Eyes
Last month New York State's Chief Judge, Sol Wachtler, delivered a roundhouse punch: a state lawsuit demanding that the Governor and Legislature provide more money for the courts.
On Monday, Gov.
Mario Cuomo came back with a sharp uppercut: a Federal suit challenging Judge Wachtler on constitutional grounds.
Confronted with state officials behaving like schoolyard gladiators, U.S.
District Judge Jack Weinstein advised them to work with a distinguished mediator, Cyrus Vance.
That's sound advice, but it doesn't require a Federal judge to point out what should be obvious to both Governor Cuomo and Judge Wachtler.
This dispute simply doesn't belong in court.


Woman at Center of Furor Seeks Quiet of Law Classes
Anita F. Hill was teaching the dry subject of commercial law this afternoon while the United States Senate debated how to handle her allegations of sexual harassment against Judge Clarence Thomas, whose nomination to the Supreme Court was hanging in the balance.
After three hours in a University of Oklahoma classroom she emerged, appearing tense, to give one comment on the events in Washington: "My only reaction is to say that if called to Washington, I will fully cooperate with the efforts of the Senate."
Professor Hill appeared to be doing her best to have a normal day, even though her accusations against Judge Thomas had made her a subject of intense scrutiny and criticism by some of the most powerful politicians in Washington.
Back to Work
After giving an interview on the NBC News program "Today," she spent several hours preparing for her classes, friends said.
A little before 1 P.M. she drove to the University of Oklahoma College of Law, where she is a tenured professor and a specialist in contract law.
In the parking lot of the Law Center she was met by several plainclothes university police officers, who formed a phalanx to escort her through a crowd of reporters and cameramen and to insure that her classes were not disturbed.
Her first class was a basic course on contracts.
Then she taught two advanced classes on commercial law governing transactions.
In between courses she spent time in her office in the Law Center, where she received several floral bouquets sent by friends and supporters.
Late in the afternoon, law school officials said she would give a brief news conference when the last class ended.
When Professor Hill arrived at the faculty lounge, where members of the press had assembled, she appeared somewhat nervous and unsettled, in contrast to her poised, steady performance in a lengthy news conference on Monday.
A Single Comment
But instead of answering questions, she offered the single comment expressing a willingness to cooperate with the Senate.
The news conference was then called to a halt.
Although she limited her public comments today about the furor, Professor Hill was in touch with a network of close friends with whom she has discussed her allegations against Judge Thomas since first making them to the Senate Judiciary Committee early last month.
Kim A. Taylor, an associate professor at the Stanford Law School and who was a classmate of Professor Hill at Yale Law School, said they had conferred regularly during the time that Professor Hill was trying to bring her allegations to the Senate's attention.
Professor Taylor said the two spoke as recently as Monday night.
Professor Taylor would not say whether Professor Hill had complained about Judge Thomas before he was nominated to the Supreme Court.
Describing Professor Hill as "exhausted," Professor Taylor said today, "she continues to feel that it's important that the Senate has this information."
Professor Taylor said there was no question that Professor Hill "grasps the enormity and gravity of the issue" and that raising the issue at this time "has potential for causing her professional problems."
She continued: "But she felt the principle was important enough that she was willing to risk that personally. It is not in her character to make an accusation lightly." Was There a Relationship?
Throughout the day in Washington a major point of contention was Professor Hill's relationship with Judge Thomas in the years after she quit her job as his special assistant at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 1983.
Senator John C. Danforth, Republican of Missouri, released a secretary's records of the Judge's telephone calls showing that Professor Hill had phoned the Judge about a dozen times between 1984 and 1990.
Senator Danforth and other supporters of the nominee suggested that this conduct was not consistent with a person holding a serious grievance.
But a friend of Professor Hill who said he discussed Judge Thomas with her during this period said he believed she was merely being discreet.
Harry F. Tepker Jr., a colleague of Professor Hill on the faculty of the University of Oklahoma law school, said that in 1988 when he took a temporary assignment as a professor-in-residence at the commission, he asked her what it was like to work at the agency.
"I remember she mentioned that it was an agency that had been in trouble, that there were bureaucratic problems," he said.
"But she never gave the impression that she had any inside information about Judge Thomas."
Professor Tepker, who said Professor Hill discussed the allegations with him during the period she was dealing with the Senate Judiciary Committee, said, "I absolutely take her at her word that she did not want to make this a public issue, and that is why she was not going around talking about it until the people on the Senate staff raised the issue with her."
But on Monday, Joel Paul, a law professor at American University in Washington, said Professor Hill did mention the allegations to him in 1987 when he discussed a possible job at the law school there with her.
He said in an interview: "I recall very clearly asking about why she left the E.E.O.C., and she said she was sexually harassed by her supervisor. It was obvious she had a very bad taste from her experience in government and it was something that she really didn't feel comfortable talking about." Some Critical Memories
Some of the most critical comments today regarding Professor Hill's behavior came from Charles Kothe, who was dean of the law school at Oral Roberts University in Tulsa when she joined the faculty there after leaving her job in Washington.
Mr.
Kothe, now in practice in Tulsa, said in a telephone interview on Monday that he first approached Professor Hill with a job offer when she and Judge Thomas, then still at the commission, came to Tulsa for a seminar.
Mr.
Kothe said he sat next to Professor Hill at lunch, learned she was from Oklahoma and a Yale graduate, and told her about a vacancy he had for a civil rights professor.
Professor Hill said Monday that at her request Judge Thomas wrote a letter recommending her for the job.
While Professor Hill was at Oral Roberts, Mr.
Kothe said, Judge Thomas spoke at another seminar and remained overnight as a guest in his home.
He said Professor Hill had had breakfast with him, and he said he thought he remembered that she had driven Judge Thomas to the airport.
"In all my experiences with her, she never once mentioned anything irregular in their relationship," Mr.
Kothe said.
Mr.
Kothe said that he discussed Judge Thomas with Professor Hill during his second confirmation to the commission, and again when he was appointed to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit and that she never mentioned the allegations.
He said it was "out of sync with anything" they had ever discussed.
"I can't believe it. It seems preposterous."


School Spending Suits in New York Area
Nine years ago, New York State's highest court rejected a lawsuit intended to force the state to do more to equalize spending among school districts.
It said unequal spending may be unfair but was not unconstitutional, "absent gross and glaring inadequacy."
Earlier this year a new challenge was filed, by a group of 20 property-poor school districts on Long Island.
The districts argue that the gaps between rich and poor districts have grown so much wider since the Court of Appeals ruling in 1982 that they are now "gross and glaring" and therefore unconstitutional.


Theater in Review
The Boxing Day Parade  Intar 2 508 West 53d Street Manhattan Through Sunday  By Clifford Mason; directed by Jennifer Vermont-Davis; set and lighting, Donald L. Brooks; costumes, Myrna Colla-Le and Ali Turns; choreography by Jeffrey Dobbs.
Presented by Vere Johns.
WITH: Jeffrey Dobbs, Arthur French, Pam Hyatt, Carol London, Clifford Mason, Norman Matlock, Morgan, Monica Parks and John Steber
As one has come to expect of Clifford Mason, the central idea in his new play, "The Boxing Day Parade," is sharp and salutary: in an age when almost everyone claims to be a victim of someone else, here is a timely reminder that oppression is not always imposed from the outside.


Monty Alexander's Jazz
"Monty Alexander's House Party," a concert featuring the jazz pianist as leader of a trio and the debut of the Monty Alexander Big Band under the direction of Duffy Jackson, is to open the 18th season of the Highlights in Jazz series at the Pace Downtown Theater (3 Spruce Street), tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $12 ($8.50 for students).
Information: (212) 346-1715.


Theater in Review
The Misanthrope  York Theater Company  2 East 90th Street  Manhattan Through Oct. 20  By Moliere; translated into English verse by Richard Wilbur; directed by Alex Dmitriev; scenic design, James Morgan; costumes, Barbara Beccio; lighting, Jerold R. Forsyth; technical director, John Miller; production stage manager, Mary Ellen Allison.
Presented by the York Theater Company, Janet Hayes Walker, producing director, and Molly Pickering Grose, managing director.
WITH: Patrick Stretch, Andrew Borba, Lee Chew, Oliver Clark, Michael Hammond, Gillian Hemstead, Gordana Rashovich, Shari Simpson and Ian Trigger.
Alceste in "The Misanthrope" is either a piercing truth teller or a moral snob, or perhaps both at the same time.
He is, of course, the fervid title character of Moliere's dark comedy, a classic that validates itself for every age.
Watching the play in Alex Dmitriev's production for the York Theater Company, one can transpose the character's criticism to any climate in which hypocrisy rides high.


Review/Theater; A Play, Its City and Its Setting, All Defined by the Color Gray
Loy Arcenas, the designer known for the childlike innocence and fairy-tale hues he brought to "Once on This Island" and "Prelude to a Kiss," has left his palette, though not his talent, at home for "Babylon Gardens," the new play by Timothy Mason at the Circle Repertory Company.
The Playbill lists Mr.
Arcenas's assignment as "New York City, the present day," and surely it's a sorry sign of the times that the only color the designer can muster is gray.
The monochromatic pall extends from the twisted beams and rotting steel girders that crown the set to the cinder blocks that fill in most of its tenement windows to the slab of concrete floor on which sits the forlorn living room occupied by Bill and Jean, an East Village couple played by Timothy Hutton and Mary-Louise Parker.
And "Babylon Gardens," it must be said, courts exactly such gloom.
Mr.
Mason has drawn an unrelentingly open-eyed survey of an environment blighted by poverty, crime, drugs and cynicism, a city where apartment dwellers live behind bars and where anyone with means moves to Santa Fe or Seattle and feels "terribly self-righteous about it."


Youth Will Not Endure, So Dancers Sue for Early Pensions
A dancer's professional life begins young and ends early, often before the performer's 40th birthday.
But unlike many professional athletes, dancers must wait until they are 65 to collect their pensions, a situation some of them have decided to challenge in court.
Led by several of the most prominent names in dance, a group of ballet dancers filed a lawsuit yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan against their union over its pension plan, saying that the plan, available only after age 65, "discriminates against dancers."


Speaker Orders End to Congressional Ticket-Fixing
Trying to stem the controversy over Congressional perquisites, the Speaker of the House, Thomas S. Foley, announced today that the House sergeant-at-arms would no longer intervene with the District of Columbia government to fix lawmakers' parking tickets.
From now on, Mr.
Foley said, representatives who think they have been issued tickets improperly will have to handle the matter themselves with the local government.


Review/Fashion; In Milan, Rifat Ozbek's Spaghetti Western
The fashion action moved from individual showrooms to the Milan Fairgrounds on Monday, which meant larger audiences and more theatrical presentations.
By Thursday, 26 houses are to introduce their spring ready-to-wear collections in one of five salons that hold up to 1,000 people.
The first floor of the fairgrounds' massive main building has been converted into a street of shops, where 30 manufacturers are presenting their wares between shows.
Beppe Modenese, one of the fair's organizers, predicts the number will double by next year.
The few trends that have developed so far are not revolutionary, though nobody is looking for revolutions.
Long skirts are knocking at the door, biding their time.
Short skirts are thriving.
They tend to be bouffant for evening, puffed out with petticoats, giving even the towering models a prepubescent look.


Debating the Pros and Cons Of Research vs. Creativity
ONE of the longest-running debates in advertising, apart from whether Certs is a breath mint or a candy mint, is whether research can help, rather than stifle, creativity.
According to the participants in a lively seminar on the subject yesterday, the answer is a qualified yes.
The seminar, held at the New York Helmsley Hotel in midtown Manhattan, pitted advocates of focus groups, surveys and advertising tests against disciples of the pure creative process.


Affidavit By Thomas
Following is the text of an affidavit by Judge Clarence Thomas made public here today:
I, Clarence Thomas, having been duly sworn, do hereby swear and affirm the following:


Preacher and Ex-House Whip Enjoys New Pulpit
Since he formally took over as president of the United Negro College Fund last month, William H. Gray 3d, the former majority whip of the House of Representatives and the highest-ranking elected black official in the country, has made it clear that he intends to raise issues about education along with raising money for historically black colleges.
While his predecessors were careful to stay above the political fray for fear of offending donors, Mr.
Gray has waded right in, criticizing current educational policies and suggesting remedies.
At a national education conference in Atlanta this week he accused the Bush Administration of applying a double standard to historically black colleges.
He has met with dozens of corporate leaders and foundation heads, challenging them to do more to improve the nation's educational system.


Personal Health
A WALK down the beverage aisle of any supermarket tells a sad tale about the future of American bones.
The shelves, often on both sides,-- are stacked with canned, bottled and packaged fruit drinks and juices, flavored soda, mineral and plain waters and packets of artificial drink mixes.
The frozen food bins hold more of the same.
The dairy counter pales by comparison.
And the young people who are the primary consumers of calcium-poor nondairy beverages may be on their way to building inadequate bones.


Ex-Jamaican Official Sues Young &amp; Rubicam
In another legal action related to the handling of the Jamaica Tourist Board account by Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., New York, a suit has been filed against the agency and others seeking $10 million in damages.
The suit was filed Monday in Federal District Court in Hartford, said Eileen McGann, attorney for the plaintiff, Eric Anthony Abrahams, a former Minister of Tourism for Jamaica.
Charges in the suit include negligence, unfair trade practices, libel and slander, she added.


VOTE ON THOMAS IS PUT OFF AS SENATE BACKING ERODES OVER HARASSMENT CHARGE
After a day of divisive, emotional debate over one of the most politically charged issues before it in recent years, the Senate tonight agreed to postpone until next Tuesday the vote on the confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.
The White House reluctantly agreed to the delay to allow time for the Judiciary Committee to hold hearings into accusations of sexual harassment that have set off a storm of outrage against the Senate and caused many to demand closer scrutiny of Judge Thomas.


AIR CONTROL ALARM IS CALLED FLAWED
The union representing air traffic controllers told a House subcommittee today that there had been hundreds of incidents in recent months when anti-collision alarms on airliners reportedly malfunctioned, sometimes prompting dangerous maneuvers by pilots.
From May to September, pilots and controllers reported 590 incidents of malfunctioning involving the alarms, which are new cockpit devices designed to automatically warn pilots when they are on a potential collision course with another aircraft, according to data gathered by the union, the National Air Traffic Controllers Association.


Wild West goes Italian:


A Strike Cloud Over Music Groups
Two prominent East Coast musical organizations, the New York Philharmonic and the Washington Opera, are facing the prospect of strikes as their musicians and managements have failed to find common ground in negotiations that have been under way for several weeks.
The Philharmonic's contract expired on Sept. 20, and the musicians voted to continue performing while talks were continuing.
So far, 11 meetings have been held.
The next negotiating session is scheduled for Oct. 21.


Evolution Enters Era of Synthetic Selection; Darwinian U-Turn
To the Editor:
J.
S.
Jones (Op-Ed, Sept. 22) misses the point on evolution.
The Darwin process no longer works by natural selection (that is, forces of the physical environment).
Human evolution today works by social selection.


Metropolitan Diary
QUESTION: A quick-witted driver or simply practice makes perfect?
A friend of Kate Frank Cohen was about to take her seat on the 23d Street crosstown bus when a fellow passenger warned her of an infestation of roaches nearby.
She found another seat and when she was leaving the bus, informed the driver about the bugs.
His response: "Don't worry, lady, I gave them all transfers."
. . .
ZZZZZZZ I slept the whole blessed morning away And it was heavenly, sublime!
Just think, if I hadn't slept half the day I might have wasted all that time!
MAY RICHSTONE
. . .
Gene Kelley, walking along First Avenue early one morning, noticed a huge picture of a young woman in the window of a beauty shop.
The day was made considerably cheerier when a young man, approaching from the opposite direction, passed the shop, looked at the woman in the picture, smiled broadly, blew her a jaunty kiss and, without missing a beat, continued on his way.
. . .
It all depends on the way you look at things: Steven Brinberg was understandably surprised to see a "coming attraction" clip for a movie being shown both backward and upside-down.
A woman in the row behind him took it in stride.
"These crazy movies they make today for the kids!" she said.
. . .
Adrienne H. Murphy could scarcely believe her ears when she overheard the following conversation in an aisle of a Food Emporium:
First Dude:
"Man, I told them I left my gun at home. They were mad and told me to use the extra gun, but Melinda took the extra gun."
Second Dude:
"Man, I don't have my gun, either."
Talk about brazen!
She poked her head around the corner to take a look.
Two young men in supermarket aprons were trying to figure out how to mark soap powder without their price-label guns.
. . .
Dear Diary:
I was walking down a side street in the theater district in Manhattan when I recognized a car parked in front of mine as one belonging to a colleague.
The passenger door was open and a man's feet were sticking over the edge of the seat.
My first reaction was that my colleague had a heart attack.
When I got closer, I saw a strange man trying to hot-wire the car.
"Hey you!" I said.
"That's not your car. Get out of there right now and move on or I'll call a cop."
He leaned up on one elbow, grinned and said, "Hey, chill out," and got out.
"No harm done," he said.
"I didn't bust nothing. Just need some quick wheels. Can't fault a guy for trying."
The car wasn't damaged, so I slammed the door shut.
He watched as I unlocked my car and as I got behind the wheel, he said, "Hey, that your car?"
"Yes."
"You heading uptown or downtown?"
"Why?"
"Give me a lift?" JOHN BOHANNON
. . .
To be filed under: New York, Love It But Don't Try to Leave It.
I went to Seattle over Labor Day.
Since I was hoping for a change of scenery from life in the city, I tried to ignore the man with a Columbia University sweatshirt riding on the ferry across Elliott Bay to Winslow.
Then two college students sitting beside me started debating the relative merits of life in Seattle as opposed to New York City (Verdict: New York is better, because "things happen 24 hours a day.")
But I knew it was impossible to leave New York when, after a three-hour drive along winding mountain roads up Mount Rainier, I stopped for lunch at a lodge.
A woman standing in line in front of me was exclaiming, "But you should see the store now; they have just added a whole new section." She was holding a Zabar's bag.
M.
F.
BERNET
. . .
Betsy B. Cenedella wonders, "Why pay an obstetrician?" when fliers distributed by a Love's drugstore on upper Broadway promise, "Free Baby Delivery."
. . .
Betsy Howard lost 10 pounds, bought a box of chocolates as a reward, then began to get twinges of guilt.
She spotted a homeless man sitting on a crate, pulled out the box and began to offer it to him when an imposing woman stopped and barked: "Don't give that to him. It'll kill him. It's got refined sugar and cholesterol."
The man, seeing Ms.
Howard hesitate, shot back: "Lady, I was a health fanatic once. Look what happened."
. . .
Dear Diary:
My grandparents were visiting me for a New York weekend, and for breakfast on Saturday we went to one of those theater-district delicatessans where the servings are enormous.
Instead of the normal "two eggs any style," the menu advertised "three eggs any style." When the waitress came by to take our order, my grandmother asked with Midwestern politeness and reluctance to waste, "Do you think I could have just two eggs scrambled?"
The waitress sighed and fixed my grandmother with a piercing gaze.
"Lady," she said, "I can scramble you one egg or I can scramble you half an egg. "But," she said, raising her finger, "it's gonna cost you the same."
My grandmother had three. LIESL SCHILLINGER
. . .
A TRIBUTE  He wasn't a doctor the way you might think,
No mixing of mixtures at home in his sink;  No shots or injections or bad tasting goop,
Just rhymes that go round and around in a loop.
There was Yertle the Turtle and also the Grinch,  And the Cat in the Hat, never trust in a pinch.
He gave us a world full of creatures and things;  I always thought elephants hatched and had wings.
So goodbye Dr.
Seuss, adios and farewell,  Ta-ta, cheerio and shalom.
You gave so much pleasure and so much delight,  And to think it was all with a poem!
RUTH YANOFF


Herbert Schainholz, A Manufacturer, 66
Herbert Schainholz, an inventor and manufacturer of medical instruments, died on Saturday at his home in Teaneck, N.J.
He was 66 years old.
He died of stomach cancer, his family said.


Publishers Get New Home
Cornelia and Michael Bessie will begin publishing books under their own imprint for Pantheon Books, a division of Random House, beginning this spring, the publisher announced yesterday.
Last June, the Bessies ended 10 years of publishing under their own name at HarperCollins, where they brought out more than 100 books by a diverse list of authors, including Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Doris Lessing, Kenneth Tynan, Peter Brook, Daniel J. Boorstin and the Dalai Lama


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 4
Sept. 27
Oct. 5
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.0
7.0
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.2
2.9
Gasoline stocks
216.5
213.6
225.7
Distillate stocks
136.8
138.3
133.3
Crude imports, daily
5.4
6.8
5.5
Product imports, daily
2.5
1.5
1.6
Crude stocks
338.3
339.5
349.5
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
87.9
87.3
87.6
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Panel to Hear Allegations Starting Friday
Members of the Senate Judiciary Committee said tonight that public hearings on the sexual harassment allegations against Judge Clarence Thomas would begin Friday and that the panel would immediately move to subpoena witnesses.
The chairman, Joseph R. Biden Jr., said that the Federal Bureau of Investigation probably would be notified about looking more deeply into the allegations made by Prof.
Anita F. Hill, a former aide to Judge Thomas.


Pirates Are Motivated by a Bad Memory
They are the first National League team to repeat as division winners since Los Angeles and Philadelphia each won in 1977 and 1978, but the Pittsburgh Pirates do not want to become the first team in the league to repeat as playoff losers since the Phillies.
"Last year, we had a lot more questions going in," Andy Van Slyke, the Pirates' gifted center fielder, said today.
"This year we know what it's like to lose. I don't think this club feels it has accomplished much."


New Jersey Makes Headway on High Auto Insurance Problem; Pennsylvania Rates
To the Editor:
I take exception to your statement in "Break the Gridlock Over Car Insurance" (editorial, Sept. 24) on Pennsylvania's promising approach to auto insurance.


Space for All in Abortion Debate, Quayle Says
Vice President Dan Quayle, a staunch opponent of legalized abortion, said today that the Republican Party needed to send a strong signal in 1992 that it is a "big tent" with room for differing views on abortion.
Such a signal could come in the party's platform, he suggested.
Mr.
Quayle, in a luncheon with reporters, said he did not believe that the party needed to change the strict anti-abortion position that was in its 1988 platform.
But he said that position needed to be balanced with some gesture acknowledging that there was room for other points of view within the party.
The Vice President's remarks reflect a careful repositioning begun by Lee Atwater, the late Republican national chairman, after the 1989 Supreme Court decision in Webster v.
Reproductive Health Services.
That decision, which allowed states to enact further restrictions on abortion, galvanized supporters of abortion rights, many of them Republicans.
A 'Diversified' Party
The party platform now says "the unborn child has a fundamental individual right to life which cannot be infringed" and calls for an amendment to the Constitution to overturn Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 Supreme Court decision recognizing a constitutional right to abortion.
"It's not necessary to change the position," Mr.
Quayle said today when asked about the platform.
"But it is necessary to restate the President's viewpoint very clearly, and that is that we are a party that is diversified. We are a party that, though we have a position on abortion, that those who disagree with us should not feel excluded because of that issue."
The Vice President added that the "big tent" approach first articulated by Mr.
Atwater "has to be clear."
"Now, how we do that within the platform, the preamble to the platform, or what not, remains to be seen," he said.
"But that message will have to be articulated with great clearness."
Mr.
Quayle later said he was not necessarily calling for "big tent" language within the platform "How we go about communicating that beyond saying it, we'll have to resolve that," he said.
Mr.
Quayle opposes abortion except in cases of rape, or incest or when the life of the woman is endangered.
Support for Term Limitations
In a wide-ranging interview, Mr.
Quayle also said he intended to campaign for measures to limit Congressional terms, and believed that voters were intensely interested in that issue.
"It's more than bouncing checks and free lunches," Mr.
Quayle said, referring to two recent furors on Capitol Hill.
"It goes to the heart of the system itself."
With re-election rates of 96 percent, House members "feel that they're above the law," Mr.
Quayle asserted.
Democrats have controlled the House since 1954, and many of them complain that term-limitation proposals are an effort by Republicans to accomplish the kind of wholesale change they have been unable to gain at the ballot box.
But Mr.
Quayle said the movement had strong bipartisan support.
The Vice President also said the nation needed to proceed cautiously when it came to cuts in military spending.
And he scoffed at the foreign policy credentials of the five major Democratic Presidential candidates, arguing that Democrats "just have a lack of understanding and comprehension for the importance of national security, what it means, how to handle it, how to deal with it."
When asked if he believed the middle class was struggling and worse off than it was four years ago, which is a persistent charge from the Democrats, Mr.
Quayle replied, "I hope not."
He added: "I believe that the middle class still is benefited by the tax cuts that have been implemented. I think that the job market is certainly better today than it was in the late 1970's. But there is some genuine concern out there and that's one of the areas we're going to have to continue to address."


Quotation of the Day
"The Senate is on trial at this point." -- Senator Arlen Specter.  [ A20:1. ]


BRIEFS
*
Alliant Techsystems, Minneapolis, received three production contracts totaling $256 million from the Army's Armament Munitions and Chemical Command. *
Digital Equipment Corp., Maynard, Mass., said it would form an information technology unit in Poland, to be operating by early next month.


Oakley Set to Provide Inside Story
Charles Oakley wants to rebound this season.
He wants to rebound better than anyone in the National Basketball Association.
He wants to rebound from a season that was disappointing both for the Knicks and for himself.
If Oakley accomplishes those goals, he insists he will be content.
That means Oakley will not complain if he is not a major part of the Knicks' offense.
At least, that is what the Knicks' power forward said today.
And Oakley said it like he meant it.


Review/Television; Internal Look at Harvard Medical School
"So You Want to Be a Doctor?," at 9 P.M. on Channels 13 and 49, is the next best thing to going to medical school.
The two-hour report, the second installment of a planned 10-year examination of medical education, is a you-are-there at Harvard Medical School, an anatomy lesson in the school's curriculum, a psychology lesson in the reactions of seven students as they are faced with courses and cadavers, clinics and clients.


Surgery Is Found to Correct Type of Irregular Heartbeat
Researchers have developed a surgical technique that they say appears to cure a common form of heartbeat irregularity by shortcircuiting chaotic electrical impulses.
Doctors at the Washington University School of Medicine and Barnes Hospital in St.
Louis said they could control atrial fibrillation, an abnormal heart rhythm that affects nearly one million Americans, by placing a maze-like pattern of incisions across the surface of the upper part of the heart.


Mixed Job Data in Germany
Eastern German unemployment declined in September for the second consecutive month, an improvement that the Government of Chancellor Helmut Kohl hailed as a sign the region was recovering from the wrenching shift to free-market economics.
But Heinrich Franke, the Labor Office president, warned that the improvement should not be taken as a sign of a turnaround in the eastern German labor market.
"This development, which was certainly surprisingly positive for many, dare not lead to false conclusions," he said.


Saudis Pledge Moscow Aid
Saudi Arabia has agreed to send $1 billion in emergency humanitarian aid to the Soviet Union this fall.
Page A9.


Accounts
*
Sequent Computer Systems, Portland, Ore., to Larsen Colby, Los Angeles, for its advertising account.
Billings are $1 million. *
Safety 1st Inc., Chestnut Hill, Mass., a maker of child safety products, to Lawner Reingold Britton &amp; Partners, Boston.
Billings were not disclosed.


Theater in Review
Damien  Irish Arts Center  553 West 51st Street  Manhattan Through Sunday  By Aldyth Morris; production stage manager, Kurt Wagemann, dialect coach, Joann Dolan.
Presented by Double W Productions, in association with The Irish Arts Center.
WITH: William Walsh
Joseph Damien De Veuster, the protagonist of Aldyth Morris's one-character play "Damien," was a Belgian missionary who for 18 years ministered to the lepers who had been forcibly exiled to the Hawaiian island of Molokai.
From 1871 until 1889, when he himself died of leprosy, Father Damien lived in a place he describes as a "charnel house" and "a community of the living dead." It was a place whose population, lacking medicine, adequate food or housing, died more from ailments related to extreme poverty than from leprosy itself.


Taylor Shakes a Bit, Then Settles Into Debut
After a controversial summer that was less productive than financially rewarding, Brien Taylor finally made it to a mound this afternoon for the competitive business that led the Yankees to pay him $1.55 million.
Taylor, the first choice in the amateur draft last June, pitched two impressive but uncharacteristically nervous innings in a Florida Instructional League game against a team made up of players from the Korean professional league.


U.S. SAYS IT MISSED 2 A-PLANTS IN IRAQ
Allied intelligence failures and bad weather prevented American bombers from destroying two important Iraqi nuclear weapons installations during the Persian Gulf war, senior Pentagon officials said today.
The centers survived the war virtually unscathed.
American planes destroyed some of the buildings at one of the industrial complexes, but only in the waning hours of the war, the officials said.
They added that allied intelligence never identified the other site as part of President Saddam Hussein's weapons development program.


Condoms Issue: Should Children Have Sex?; Bastion of Civility
To the Editor:
As a high school teacher and the parent of two teen-agers, I take issue with Anna Quindlen's "Parental Rites" (column, Sept. 25).
She maintains that it is incumbent upon a parent to accept the distribution of condoms in a school for the future health of a generation.


Hynes to Seek Sanction Against Lawyer
After being named as a defendant in a civil suit involving the Crown Heights case, District Attorney Charles J. Hynes of Brooklyn said yesterday that he would seek a financial sanction against a lawyer, Colin A. Moore, for "bringing a frivolous lawsuit."
The suit was filed for the family of Gavin Cato, the 7-year-old boy killed by a car driven by a Hasidic man in Crown Heights on Aug. 19.
An investigation resulted in no criminal charges.
Among those cited in the suit, besides Mr.
Hynes, were the driver of the car, an ambulance service, the Police Department and Rabbi Menachem Schneerson, the leader of the Lubavitch sect.


Floating Point Bid
Cray Research Inc. said it had signed a letter of intent to buy the business and all other assets except for land, buildings and accounts receivable of Floating Point Systems Inc. for $3.25 million.
Floating Point, in Portland, Ore., which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on Monday, has not been profitable in four years.
It grew rapidly in the 1970's and early 80's by selling add-on boxes that enabled general-purpose computers to perform like Cray's supercomputers.
But Floating Point stumbled in the late 1980's when other companies introduced computers that offered roughly one-fourth the speed of a Cray at one-tenth the price.


Coach Is Out at Jackson St. Amid Inquiry
Amid an inquiry into the Jackson State track and field program, the Mississippi school announced the replacement and reassignment of MARTIN EPPS, the coach whose teams won eight N.A.I.A. national championships and numerous conference championships since he took the post in 1969.
Epps, who could not be reached for comment, was reassigned as an assistant professor of health, physical education and recreation.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
Weatherstripping is the usual cure for drafty doors, windows and other ill-fitting, moveable house components.
But to seal the gaps between nonmoving parts, the remedy is not weatherstripping but caulking compound, a puttylike material that is also called simply caulk, or caulking.
Most houses are caulked during their construction, but for various reasons -- aging, for example, or shoddy workmanship -- old caulking often must be renewed.
Whenever new gaps are discovered or created (for instance, when repairing siding or installing an item like a dryer vent that goes through a wall), new caulking must be applied.


BUSH EMPHASIZES HE BACKS THOMAS IN SPITE OF UPROAR
As the Senate Judiciary Committee prepared to reopen hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas, a determined President Bush rushed to support his Supreme Court nominee today.
The White House plotted a counterattack to present Judge Thomas as a family man with greater credibility than the woman accusing him of sexual harassment.
"I've got strong feelings, but they all end up in support for Clarence Thomas," said Mr.
Bush, who drew Judge Thomas out of the seclusion in which he had been weathering the sudden storm over his nomination and brought him to the White House for a high-profile meeting.


A Pole Asks Urgent Help In Privatizing
The Polish official who heads his country's sweeping privatization program says it has been sharply scaled back and American expertise is urgently needed.
"Our basic problem is that we have no domestic savings, and foreign interest is currently very guarded," Dr.
Jerzy Thieme, the chairman of the Poland's so-called mass privatization program, said during what he described as a private visit to New York.


The King Has No Time for Bush
President Bush, or anyone else, ought not be upset with Michael Jordan for failing to attend a White House reception last week with the Chicago Bulls.
Why should Jordan have traveled all the way to Washington so the President could enjoy such a rare and important photo opportunity?
It seems only fair that Bush visit Michael, a busy man with domestic and global responsibilities, at Michael's house.


Choosing Perennials, Right From the Pot
SOMETHING new is afoot in many of the garden centers I visited last weekend.
They still have pumpkins galore, ranging from 100-pound behemoths to tiny ones that fit nicely into the hands of a child.
They still have bundles of dried corn husks for Halloween decoration.
And they still have potted chrysanthemums in pure whites, deep reds, glowing yellows and golds and shades of purple and lavender, to perk up flower beds that are beginning to decline.
But the chrysanthemums now have a lot of company.
In the last several years, there has been something of a revolution in the nursery business.
Wholesale growers have turned to mass production of perennials grown in one-gallon or larger containers, using soilless potting mixes that contain essential nutrients and are free of weed seeds.


HAITIANS DIVIDED ON NEW PRESIDENT
One day after the Haitian Parliament swore in a President whom few foreign governments appeared likely to recognize, the capital, torn by 10 days of violence and confusion, seemed divided over the move.
In the wealthier neighborhoods of the capital, residents seemed relieved.
Finally, many of them felt, they had found a solution that allowed them to dismiss an elected president whom they saw as a budding dictator and replace him with an interim leader who would lead the country to new elections.


An Inquiry Into Merrill Is Reported
The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating whether Merrill Lynch &amp; Company engaged in trades that helped a Florida insurance company disguise its deteriorating financial condition for years, Government officials said yesterday.
The Merrill inquiry is part of a broader investigation of the activities of the insurer's parent, Transmark USA Inc., which has been accused of essentially looting the insurer.
The agency is also examining the company's relationship with other Wall Street firms.


Facing Issue of Harassment, Washington Slings the Mud
The Capitol is covered in mud.
In an extraordinary political psychodrama, nasty charges are flying in Congress about character assassination, ruined lives, chicanery and sandbagging, a legislative process run amok, sex, lies and raunchy movies.


In Zagreb and Belgrade, the War Is Taking Its Toll
There is no passable road linking this city, the capital of Croatia, with Belgrade, the capital of Serbia and a fractured Yugoslavia.
No airliner, train or river barge now journeys between the two cities, and even a phone call placed from one capital to the other, 230 miles away, yields only an earsplitting busy signal.
For those who have managed to travel between the two cities by roundabout routes that take them through Austria, Hungary and the breakaway Yugoslav republic of Slovenia, Zagreb and Belgrade appear radically different, but in some ways they are unchanged from the days before the war.


Nordstrom Stock Falls On Gloomy Forecast
The share price of Nordstrom Inc. lost 20 percent of its value yesterday, the day after the West Coast retailer announced a disappointing third-quarter earnings forecast because of soft sales.
The shares lost $8.50 each in over-the-counter trading, closing at $33.75.


Cuomo Details His Medicaid Plan, And Reviews Are Less Than Raves
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today filled in the framework of his plan to overhaul the state's Medicaid system with cold numbers that were ridiculed by Republican legislators, rejected by hospital officials and viewed warily at City Hall in New York.
Two weeks ago Mr.
Cuomo proposed that the state assume by the end of the century the full share of Medicaid costs paid by local governments, now totaling $2.8 billion.
In exchange, localities would give up a share of their taxing authority to the state.


Corrections
A diagram in Science Times on Tuesday about humans' influence on Walden Pond, as shown by changes in its sediment, omitted a label for one line in some copies while including an extraneous label for another.
The dotted line referred to grass pollen and the light broken line referred to pollen from rumex, an edible herb that may have been cultivated by the Indians.


Review/City Opera; Madness, Lust and Militarism in 'Die Soldaten'
What can be said about "Die Soldaten," Bernd Alois Zimmermann's opera, which was given a new production by the New York City Opera on Tuesday night?
That its dramatization of the transformation of a bourgeois girl into an army whore was often ugly and horrific; that its screaming, pounding music sometimes strained the bounds of tolerance; that it indulged in the most cliche-ridden ideology, treating soldiers as fascistic rapists; that its production was true to the work's brutal spirit, with the number of body bags hanging from the ceiling growing as the evening progressed?
All that, yes, and one more thing: that this was a stunning performance of a powerful, affecting work, which despite its artifice and extremism and posing should be seen by anyone interested in contemporary opera.
"Die Soldaten" is a triumph for the New York City Opera.


Corrections
The Wine Talk column in The Living Section yesterday, about The Wine Experience, a weekend of tastings and seminars sponsored by The Wine Spectator in New York from Oct. 24 to 28, omitted the telephone number for information.
It is (212) 684-4224.


Louis J. Kaep, Watercolorist, 88
Louis J. Kaep, an art director and watercolorist, died on Saturday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 88 years old and lived in Greenwich.
His wife, Myrthine Herndon Corley Kaep, said he died of a heart attack.


'Baby Bells' Look Good To French
France Telecom, which has announced a big videotex venture with U S West Inc., said today that it would pursue other ventures with the "Baby Bells," especially in the wake of a United States appeals court ruling freeing the regional telephone companies to offer electronic information services.
"Why not, if we have the opportunity?" Marcel Roulet, France Telecom's chairman, said in an interview here at Telecom 91, the industry's largest trade show.
"We need partners, and our agreement with U S West, although they have been our very good partners, is not exclusive."


Montana Out for Season
Joe Montana, the San Francisco 49ers quarterback who has been sidelined all season with a torn tendon in his right elbow, underwent surgery tonight that will force him to miss the rest of the season, the team said.
The announcement ended several weeks of speculation regarding Montana, who was placed on the injured reserve list in August and has not played in the regular season.


Big Hit for the Blue Jays


Questions For Hospital In a Death
The family of a prominent Harlem lawyer blamed Harlem Hospital yesterday for the man's death on Monday, charging that the hospital resisted pleas to admit the 74-year-old man and kept him in the emergency room for 18 hours.
The lawyer, William C. Chance Jr., had been a member of the hospital's community board in the 1970's and 80's.
He was an old friend of Mayor David N. Dinkins, and a former president of the Harlem Lawyers Association and legal counsel for the New York chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
Among his clients were Representative Adam Clayton Powell Jr. and Hulan E. Jack, the late Manhattan Borough President.


CHRONICLE
Former President RONALD REAGAN mystified scholars at Oxford University in England by suddenly canceling an engagement next week to lecture to students who belong to the Lubavitch movement.
Catherine Goldberg, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Reagan in Los Angeles, confirmed yesterday that he had begged off the Oct. 18 speaking date at the Oxford Union Society for the Chabad House of Oxford and its student organization, the L'Chaim Society, because of "an unavoidable schedule change."


Rebates Set By Norcal
The Norcal Mutual Insurance Company has agreed voluntarily to provide $19.9 million in rebates to its policyholders as called for by a rate-cutting ballot initiative passed by California voters nearly three years ago, California's Insurance Commissioner, John Garamendi, said today.


Soviets Establish Diplomatic Relations With Estonia and Lithuania


A Publisher Is Appointed At Mirabella
Rebecca W. Darwin, the publisher of magazine development at Playboy Enterprises Inc., was appointed publisher of Mirabella magazine yesterday.
She replaces Julie Lewit-Nirenberg, who was named publisher of Mademoiselle last month.
In 1986, Ms.
Darwin was named associate publisher of The New Yorker and became its publisher the following year.
She was named publisher of Woman magazine when it was acquired by Conde Nast in 1988.


Bridge
Iceland was a slight favorite to win one of the two title events at the NEC World Team Championships here today, while the United States was well on track to capture the other.
With 64 deals of a scheduled 160 completed in the finals of the Bermuda Bowl for Open Teams, the Icelanders had established a modest lead of 30 imps over Poland, largely by superior bidding.
The possibility that Orn


Roger B. Henkle, 55, Professor of English
Roger B. Henkle, a professor of English and of media and culture at Brown University, died while jogging in Providence, R.I., on Oct. 5.
He was 55 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his wife, Carol Thompson Henkle.


General Sees No Hint of New Soviet Air Shield
The Soviet Union shows no sign of modernizing its extensive network of air defenses to counter radar-evading aircraft like the B-2 Stealth bomber, a top-ranking American general said today.
The Soviets, struggling to reorganize their armed forces, also plan to reduce the military-industrial complex by 30 percent in the next several years, the officer, Gen.
Merrill A. McPeak, the Air Force Chief of Staff, said.


Events: Herbal Recipes, Mums and Hard Work
Eating Herbs and Doing Work  Wave Hill, Independence Avenue and West 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx; (212) 549-3200.
Madeleine Keeve, a gardener, will demonstrate herbal recipes like lemongrass tea during a workshop at 1 P.M. on Sunday.
Fee, $2.
Registration required.


Agreement Reached on Sale of Penguins
The Pittsburgh Penguins' owner, EDWARD DeBARTOLO, said yesterday he has agreed to sell the Stanley Cup champions to a group that includes two former National Hockey League club owners.
DeBartolo has owned the team since 1977.
He is selling assets, including the Penguins, because of real estate losses.
The former Hartford Whalers chairman, HOWARD BALDWIN, and MORRIS BELZBERG, who briefly owned the Minnesota North Stars with Baldwin, and THOMAS RUTA made up the group that hopes to buy the team.


Singapore Journal; Back to Somerset Maugham and Life's Seamy Side
Discovering too late that much of its colonial history was being smothered beneath antiseptic towers of steel and tinted glass, Singapore is trying to restore what remains of its past, both the dignity and the debauchery.
The dignity is embodied in Raffles, the big wedding cake of a hotel once described as having stood "for all the fables of the Exotic East." Raffles reopened in September after a $90 million, two-year renovation intended to return the hotel to the tropical glory that attracted the likes of Somerset Maugham and Rudyard Kipling.


The Hearings On Television
The Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court, starting at 10 A.M.
Friday, will be broadcast on four channels.
The coverage will continue on Saturday and Monday if required.
The Public Broadcasting Service will have gavel-to-gavel coverage with no commercial interruptions.


Let the Patients Know
New York State and the Federal Government disagree sharply on whether patients should be told that their surgeons or other health care providers who perform invasive procedures are infected with the AIDS virus.
State health authorities oppose mandatory notification of patients.
Federal officials would require it.
At bottom, this is a conflict between the patient's right to know about a risk, however small, and the health care worker's right to privacy when infected with a stigmatizing disease.
There are good arguments on both sides.
But the patient's rights are paramount.
The patient should be fully informed and make the final decision on whether to use an infected professional.


Condoms Issue: Should Children Have Sex?
To the Editor:
Re "Parental Rites" by Anna Quindlen (column, Sept. 24):


Comments by Senators On Thomas Nomination
Following are excerpts from statements on the Senate floor on Tuesday by Senators Edward M. Kennedy and Alan K. Simpson on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, as transcribed by the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a private transcription service.
STATEMENT BY SENATOR KENNEDY Democrat of Massachusetts
Mr.
President, in light of the events of the last three days, I urge the Senate to defer its vote on Judge Thomas's confirmation.
We have a constitutional duty to the nation, to the Supreme Court and to the Senate to review Professor Hill's very serious allegations  [ of sexual harassment by Anita F. Hill against Judge Thomas ]  before casting our votes.


Owners Still Do the Checking in Hockey Talks
In the locker room of a New York area hockey team recently, one veteran asked another if he had read any good books lately.
"I just finished the one by Marvin Miller," the teammate answered.
"You should read it. I'll bring it in for you."


New York City Notes Find Big Demand at 4.9% Yield
Investors in the tax-exempt municipal bond market snapped up New York City's $1.25 billion offering of short-term revenue anticipation notes yesterday.
The 5.40 percent notes, which mature June 30, were priced to yield 4.90 percent.


Design Show Turns Colorful in London
There was serious color splashed about the classical, the geometrical, the whimsical, the experimental and the inexplicable preponderance of three-legged chairs at the Contemporary Interior Design Show, running through Oct. 20 at the Design and Decoration Building in Pimlico.
One might begin with the orange and yellow Grand Canal chairs by Bonetti &amp; Garouste in the great hall furnished by David Gill, where visitors also find Brian Irving's witty, wooden pictureless frames shaped like evening-gloved hands rising out of folds of cloth.


Prices of Treasury Bonds Plunge
Treasury bond prices plunged yesterday as credit market participants sold securities after the Federal Reserve Board gave a strong sign it had not yet eased monetary policy.
Results of an auction of new seven-year notes also showed that demand was not nearly as strong as anticipated.
The decline in bond prices was the third in succession, but some market participants did not attach much significance to the drop.


7 Arab Houses Are Seized in Raid By Jewish Settlers in Jerusalem
A group of Jewish nationalistic settlers evaded the police and took over seven Arab houses today in an effort to re-establish a Jewish neighborhood at the former site of the ancient city of King David.
Most were soon evicted by the police.
The incident occurred a few days before Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, is to arrive here for what many hope will be the decisive round of negotiations before the convening of a Middle East peace regional conference at the end of the month.


Corrections
The Pop Life column yesterday carried an erroneous byline.
The columnist was Peter Watrous.


A Bit of Tibet, in Rugs Old and New
KESANG TASHI, a New Yorker who used to work in international banking, decided about six years ago to try to promote the traditional craft of rug weaving in his native Tibet.
Although fine rugs had long been produced there, they had never been exported.
The fruits of Mr.
Tashi's efforts are on display beginning today at ABC Carpet and Home, 888 Broadway at 19th Street.
The store will display antique rugs from Mr.
Tashi's own collection and sell new rugs with designs inspired by traditional patterns.


Business and the Law; Insider Trading, All in the Family
ROBERT CHESTMAN is a name that will long be on the lips of officials with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Although the former stockbroker is one of the lesser-known Wall Street figures convicted on charges of illegal insider trading in the 1980's, his case has resulted in one of the most significant legal decisions in years in the area of securities fraud.
The appeals-court decision limits the scope of who can be charged with illegal insider trading under the general fraud provision used by the S.E.C.
The court ruled that while a corporate officer might have a fiduciary duty not to trade on nonpublic information, a member of his family probably does not.


Chrysler Is Set to Open New Center
While other auto makers are busy promoting their 1992 car and truck models, the Chrysler Corporation is also showing off a building that will consolidate engineers, designers and scientists under one huge roof in hopes of speeding the development of new models.
Four teams assigned to develop four future vehicle "platforms," or wheelbases, each the basis for a family of similar-size models, will occupy one entire floor at a new four-story technology center that officially opens next week in Auburn Hills, Mich., about 30 miles north of Detroit.
Two years ago, Chrysler reorganized its engineering departments into platforms, in line with the structure of most Japanese auto makers.


Ms. Herridge, Manager, Wed
Elizabeth Bennett Herridge, an audit manager at Fidelity Investments, and Roy Douglas Burry, a senior vice president of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, both in New York, were married yesterday at the bridegroom's home in Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
Jonathan Percival, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 32 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Wellesley College, she is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Herridge of Toronto.
Her father is a lawyer and her mother, Ruth Herridge, is a hospital chaplain and religious educator for Ronald McDonald House, both in Toronto.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 27 about a police sergeants' examination in New York City that was discarded because of evidence of cheating misstated the number of people who took the exam and the number of white and black officers who passed.
In all, 1,811 people took the test; and 247 whites and 68 blacks passed.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Senate Judiciary Committee's continuing inquiry into accusations against Judge Clarence Thomas misstated Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr.'s plans for the scope of a hearing scheduled to begin on Friday.
As reported in another article about the committee's plans -- printed in only some copies -- the inquiry will be limited to allegations of sexual harassment and the treatment of employees.


What Nerve! Post-Season Jitters Bedevil the Braves
The clutch performances in the crucible of the weeks leading to the title in the National League West were supposed to have shaped the Braves into an outfit hardened to tension and tumult.
Their nerves had been tested, the Braves claimed, and their talent as a result had matured.
"We've felt the pressure and endured," first baseman Sid Bream said before the opener of the National League Championship Series against the Pirates.
"I can't imagine it can be worse."


BRIEFS
*
Andrew Corp., Orland Park, Ill., a communications concern, signed a joint-venture agreement with the Moscow Metro subway system to develop and provide a fiber-optic telecommunications network for the Moscow metropolitan area.
Moscow Metro will own 69 percent of the joint venture and Andrew 31 percent. *
Associated Natural Gas Corp., Denver, an oil and gas company, entered a $34.2 million agreement with Apache Corp., Denver, an exploration company, to buy certain natural gas processing and pipline components.


Lou Stoumen Is Dead; Photographer Was 75
Lou Stoumen, a photographer and film maker who taught for many years at the University of California in Los Angeles, died in Sebastopol, Calif., on Sept. 13.
He was 75 years old.
He died of cancer, said Barry Singer, a friend and business associate.


U.S.T.A. Optimistic on Lease
The United States Tennis Association has already spent close to $4 million on plans for its proposed $150 million expansion of the National Tennis Center at Flushing Meadows.
However, it does not yet have a business agreement with its landlord, the city of New York.
But David Markin, the former U.S.T.A. president, said an agreement could be signed by Oct. 24.
Markin will present his final 15-page proposal at a U.S.T.A. board meeting on that date.
The U.S.T.A.'s $250,000 yearly lease with the city doesn't expire until 1994, but with a parade of regulatory hearings and land-use reviews in store, the U.S.T.A. must finalize this new agreement with the city if construction is to start in 1992 as planned.
The U.S.T.A. wants to inaugurate the facility at the 1995 United States Open.


It's Practice, but Mason Gives His All
As he was leaving practice recently, Anthony Mason gave Ernie Grunfeld a playful punch.
Grunfeld smiled, but after Mason walked away, Grunfeld grabbed his shoulder as if it hurt.
"That is a strong young man," said Grunfeld, shaking his head and flexing his arm.


Condoms Issue: Should Children Have Sex?; Michigan Case
To the Editor:
"Parents v. Condom Plan" (news analysis, Oct. 1) quotes a lawyer with the New York State Education Department as saying that no court decision has yet addressed whether or not parents can prevent their children from receiving condoms confidentially at a public school.


Yeltsin's Economic Chief Resigns As Plans to Link Republics Fade
Boris N. Yeltsin's hopes to create a new economic community among the Soviet republics appeared in deepening trouble today as his Economics Minister resigned amid continuing bouts of political infighting.
The minister, Yevgeny Saburov, said he would resign from Mr.
Yeltsin's Russian government because the political disarray in the republic, the centerpiece of such an economic community, threatened to doom the proposal and was blocking the progress of free-market innovations.


MIPS Lowers Revenue Forecast
MIPS Computer Systems Inc. said third-quarter revenue from technology licensing would be lower than expected, which would increase its loss from operations anticipated for the quarter ended Sept. 30.
MIPS designs microprocessors that it licenses other companies to make, or to incorporate in computers.
MIPS also makes its own computers, sales of which were on target for the quarter.


Aquino Agrees to Return of Marcos's Body
President Corazon C. Aquino agreed today to reverse a two-year ban on the return of the body of former President Ferdinand E. Marcos, but only if his burial would not be used for political purposes.
In a meeting Wednesday with congressmen from northern Luzon, Mr.
Marcos's home region and political stronghold, Mrs.
Aquino said she welcomed a proposal to bury the former President's body in the Philippines if it was flown directly to Laoag City in Ilocos Norte, where Mr.
Marcos was born.


Ambulance Squad Data Too Often Ignored
To the Editor:
News articles about the case of Yankel Rosenbaum, who died at Kings County Hospital after a stabbing in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, indicate that the cascade of negligence in his care started with the failure of the Kings County emergency-room doctors to read the ambulance report that documented both stab wounds.


Yellow Pages Are Offering Menu Ads
HUNGRY consumers turning to the Yellow Pages to select a restaurant are finding something new on the advertising menu: menus.
A growing number of publishers of Yellow Pages telephone directories are offering restaurant advertisers an opportunity to augment their listings with a different type of ad.
The new ad, which typically takes half a page, displays a copy of a menu, listing specialties, operating hours and which credit cards are accepted.


Review/Television; Rotten Man; A Head Full Of People
The Sondheim lyric tells us that in show business, you gotta have a gimmick.
In television, the word is "concept," preferably one so simple it can be capsulized in a single sentence.
Oddities are not discouraged, and right now two of the oddest can be found on Fox Broadcasting.
In "Drexell's Class," Thursdays at 8:30 P.M., a misanthropic sleaze is forced to pay off a huge I.R.S. debt by teaching a fourth-grade class of smart alecks.
In "Herman's Head," Sundays at 9:30 P.M., viewers get to see not only Herman, a young aspiring writer, but also his inner feelings, played by four actors in what is supposed to be one of his cranial chambers.


Wanna Please McVie? You Gotta Be On Time!
Coach Tom McVie made it clear this morning that he is determined to maintain a strict code of discipline around the Devils, who are unbeaten three games into the season.
Peter Stastny, the 34-year-old Czechoslovak who is virtually assured of a place in hockey's hall of fame, had no place to go but home today after he arrived a few minutes late for practice.
McVie would not allow him to work out with the team because of that lapse.


Europeans Push Peace
Emboldened by the early success of its latest cease-fire in Yugoslavia, the European Community decided today to step up the work of its faltering peace conference in The Hague.
The Netherlands, which holds the rotating presidency of the community, announced that three major leaders from Yugoslavia would travel to The Hague on Thursday for a meeting with Hans van den Broek, the Dutch Foreign Minister.
They are the Serbian leader, Slobodan Milosevic; the President of the Croatian republic, Franjo Tudjman; and Veljko Kadijevic, the Yugoslav Defense Minister.


Not Handicapped
To the Editor:
It is heartening to see society's heightened consciousness about disability reflected in such articles as "When the Disabled Face Rejection From Churches That Nurtured Them" (Sept. 30).
It is discouraging, however, to continue to find the words "handicapped" and "disabled" still used interchangeably.
I find references to "the handicapped" offensive.
While I have a severe disability, I have never considered myself handicapped.
DEBORAH LIVESEY Seattle, Oct. 1, 1991


Pop and Jazz in Review
Crowded House Beacon Theater
Countless pop groups have devised their own refinements of the Beatles' harmonic blend over the last 20 years, but none have elaborated that style more engagingly than Crowded House, which appeared at the Beacon Theater on Oct. 2.


A Replacement for Thomas
There is a solution to the controversy over the Supreme Court vacancy that merits the consideration of all concerned -- the President, the Senate, the American public and the nominee.
Judge Clarence Thomas should step aside and the President should nominate Judge Amalya L. Kearse of the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
Here's why:


WORST OZONE HOLE STIRS HEALTH FEAR
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration reported yesterday that a satellite passing over Antarctica had measured the lowest stratospheric ozone level on record, an ominous indication of potential global health risks.
Dolores Beasley, a spokeswoman for the agency's Goddard Space Flight Center at Greenbelt, Md., said the measurement was made Sunday by the total ozone mapping spectrometer, or TOMS, an instrument aboard the Nimbus-7 satellite.


Brazil Pretends to Have No Race Problem
To the Editor:
"If It's 'Black Brazil,' " the headline on your Sept. 24 "Bahia Journal" asks, "Why Is the Elite so White?" Yet the reference within the article to Brazil's "traditionally harmonious race relations" is absolutely wrong.


Investigation Criticized In Thai Monks' Slaying
The big break in the investigation of the killings of a group of Thai Buddhist monks in August came with a telephone tip from a mental hospital.
But almost every step that officials have taken since then has aroused public astonishment and outrage.
On the basis of the tip, Maricopa County sheriff's deputies seized several men in Tucson, drove them 100 miles to Phoenix, interrogated them, and elicited confessions that the men retracted as soon as they met with their lawyers.


Review/Theater; George C. Scott Has Death Up a Tree In 'Borrowed Time'
George C. Scott, an actor whose calling card has long been gruff irascibility, wants to be lovable in "On Borrowed Time," the 1938 Paul Osborn comedy that brought him back to the Circle in the Square on Broadway last night.
The portly, bearded star looks more like an avuncular Papa Hemingway than ever, albeit one with a cracker-barrel accent.
His costume is the sort of pristine, neatly pressed denim overalls given to actors playing twinkly-eyed heartland bumpkins in television commercials for synthetic old-fashioned lemonade.
As if this were not enough, the character he has chosen to play is known as Gramps, and the closest Gramps ever gets to being a grump is his occasional indulgence in cuss words, like "hell," that are suitable for publication in a family newspaper.


Essay; No Ambush Allowed
Suppose you chair the Senate Judiciary Committee considering the nomination of a woman to be a Justice of the Supreme Court.
You receive a complaint from a young man, apparently an anti-abortion activist opposed to the nominee's liberal views, charging that the woman chosen for the Court has slept her way to the top in her political-legal career; worse, that the nominee used her position of power to seduce him when he was her law clerk.
The accuser demands anonymity.


States' Public Workers Face New Round of Layoffs
Just as state and local governments complete an agonizing round of large-scale layoffs of public employees, many budget directors are predicting that with the economy still faltering and revenue declining, a whole new wave of layoffs may be necessary.
"I think it's going to be a really tough year," said Marcia A. Howard, research director of the National Association of State Budget Directors.
"Most state budgets were based on the premise that a recovery would be well under way by now, and if it is, it certainly hasn't helped state revenues yet."


Finally, a Proper Hearing
It should not have taken a deluge of protest from women all over the country for the U.S.
Senate finally to confront the sex harassment charges against Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court nominee.
Logic alone argued against the senators voting as scheduled Tuesday.
Otherwise they would have contravened any sense of procedural fairness, cavalierly dismissing the complaint of Anita Hill, the Oklahoma law professor who had worked for Mr.
Thomas in Washington.
Now the senators have probably learned a lesson about women's political power, their anger and perhaps even the cause of the anger.
Women drove the point home with calls, telegrams and demonstrations, forcing the vote to be postponed until after the Judiciary Committee gives the charges a proper hearing.


Signals Are Mixed on Bo as a Raider
The Los Angeles Raiders, responding to a report that BO JACKSON'S doctors would recommend he never play football again, said yesterday that they were expecting him to report next week.
"I haven't heard from him," Raiders Coach ART SHELL said yesterday.
"I know the rumors are flying around. I haven't heard anything official from him or his people. As far as I'm concerned, he's coming in next week."


Binoculars Not Enough to Bring Victory
Question: When is stealing no big deal?
Answer: When you win.
Middle Tennessee officials said they won't protest signal-stealing by a former player of theirs during last week's 23-21 victory over Western Kentucky.
The signal thief was JAMES J. JEWELL, a walk-on quarterback for Middle Tennessee last year who is now a walk-on at Western Kentucky.
Both coaches acknowledge Jewell was stealing Middle Tennessee's signals, using binoculars in the press box to read hand signals on the sidelines.
He was able to tell Western coaches whether the Blue Raiders' plays were going to be runs or passes.


Israel's Four Arab Neighbors And P.L.O. Schedule a Parley
The heads of state of four countries bordering Israel and the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization will hold a summit conference soon in the Syrian capital to coordinate their stands in advance of the planned Middle East peace conference, Arab officials said today.
A senior Lebanese official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the foreign ministers of Syria, Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon and the head of the foreign affairs department of the P.L.O. would meet in the coming week to prepare an agenda for the Arab summit conference.
He said the summit meeting of Israel's Arab neighbors would convene in Damascus as soon as the preparations were completed.


With Glory of Past Only a Memory, Rights Panel Searches for New Role
The Unit ed States Commission on Civil Rights was once a robust player in the field of civil rights.
Armed with subpoena powers, it exposed discrimination wherever it was found during the 1960's and 70's, recommended bold initiatives to alleviate bias and monitored the civil rights efforts of the Federal Government.
These days, the agency is a ghostly imitation of what it once was.
Its enemies denounce it as a waste of money.
Its friends say it is ineffective.
And even its chairman, Arthur A. Fletcher, describes the organization as "Mickey Mouse."


U.S. Delays New Mexico Waste Site's Opening
Faces with a lawsuit and growing political opposition in New Mexico, the United States Department of Energy today postponed at least until the end of November the opening of the nation's first permanent nuclear waste repository.
The postponement came one day before the first truckload of waste was to leave a Government nuclear weapons plant in Idaho and head south to Carlsbad, N.M., the site of the repository, the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant.


Woodchuck Prank Now a Rabies Scare
School officials fear that a dead woodchuck placed in a girl's locker at North Rockland High School as a prank may have been rabid.
The county health commissioner is seeking the prankster.
The school's principal, Israel Bordainick, said the female senior, who has not been identified, did not touch the animal after she opened her locker last Thursday, so she was not in danger of getting rabies.


David Budd, 64, Artist, Is Dead; Painted Large Works of One Hue
David Budd, an abstract painter, died yesterday at his home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 64 years old.
He died of heart failure, said a former wife, Corcaita Christiani of Sarasota, who said he had been ill for some time.


New Audit Rule Expected On Updating Worth Figures
A proposal that would require public companies to provide updated information about their worth in their financial statements is expected to become a requirement soon.
The chief rule-making body of the accounting industry said yesterday that four of its six members were expected to vote for it.
If the group, the Financial Accounting Standards Board, can issue the new rule by early December, all 1992 company annual reports would have to add a footnote describing the estimated market value of many financial assets and liabilities that are now shown on their books at original cost.
The effective date would be delayed three years for small companies with fewer than $150 million in assets.


Review/Dance; 'Eyes of the Goddess,' a Fragment Left by Graham
Martha Graham left behind a vibrant fragment of an unfinished work, Mikhail Baryshnikov gave one of the best performances of his entire career and the Martha Graham Dance Company performed with even more emotional fervor than usual.
That was the way things went -- and they went superbly, even exuberantly -- at the opening of the Graham troupe's two-week season at the City Center (131 West 55th Street) on Tuesday night.
Mr.
Baryshnikov, a guest star as in the past, is appearing four times in "El Penitente."


Gillette Rating Up
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation raised the ratings on the commercial paper of the Gillette Company, the razor maker, and its Gillette Capital Corporation yesterday to A-1 from A-2, which affects $300 million in debt.
S.&amp; P. said Gillette had global strength and diversity and was the worldwide holder of the leading market share for razor blades.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Becker Is Back
Boris Becker came back yesterday after a five-week layoff to let a thigh injury heal, and he played as if he had never been away.
Becker slammed 16 service aces past Sweden's Jan Gunnarsson and rolled to a 6-2, 6-4 victory in the second round of the $1 million Seiko Super tournament in Tokyo.
The second-seeded Becker had two games where he fired four aces.
Top-seeded Stefan Edberg and third-seeded Ivan Lendl beat Americans.
Edberg trounced David Pate, 6-2, 6-4, and Lendl defeated Scott Davis, 6-2, 6-3.
In other second-round matches, fifth-seeded David Wheaton outlasted fellow American Jim Grabb, 7-6 (7-2), 3-6, 6-2, in 2 hours 24 minutes.
Sixth-seeded Goran Ivanisevic of Yugoslavia, firing 11 service aces, defeated Dimitri Poliakov of the Soviet Union by 6-4, 6-2 in 59 minutes.
Shuzo Matsuoka, seeded 16th, and Japan's only remaining player in the tournament, outlasted the American Robbie Weiss, 2-6, 6-2, 7-6 (7-5). (AP) Graf Is Victorious: Top-seeded Steffi Graf reached the quarterfinals of the European Indoors tournament in Zurich yesterday with a 6-2, 6-4 victory over unseeded Andrea Strnadova in the second round.
Barbara Wiesner of Austria, seeded seventh, eliminated unseeded Lori McNeil, 4-6, 6-4, 6-1.
Graf's service and forehand were less blistering than usual, apparently because of a wrist inflammation, but she was rarely challenged by the 19-year-old Czechoslovak. (AP) GOLF Sieckmann Takes Lead
Tom Sieckmann, with a par-par-par finish at the Las Vegas Country Club, produced at bogey-free round of 63, nine shots under par, and took a one-stroke lead in the Las Vegas Invitational yesterday.
As usual, the $1.5-million event played on three desert resort courses produced exceptionally low scoring, with more than half the pro field shooting in the 60's. (AP) HOCKEY Bruins and Sabres Tie
Vladimir Ruzicka's power-play goal in the third period lifted the Boston Bruins into a 4-4 tie with the Buffalo Sabres in Buffalo last night.
Ruzicka, who also had two assists, scored on a rebound three and a half minutes after Buffalo took a 4-3 lead on a power-play goal by Keven Haller.
The tie gave the Sabres (0-2-1) their first point of the season.
Boston, which won its season opener, snapped a two-game losing streak despite falling behind four times in the game.
Petri Skriko opened the scoring in the first period when he scooped home a loose puck in the crease behind Sabres goaltender Clint Malarchuk. (AP) Capitals Over Toronto: Nick Kypreos and Sylvain Cote scored goals five minutes apart in the third period in Toronto last night, leading the Washington Capitals to a 5-4 victory that deprived the Toronto Maple Leafs of their first three-game winning streak since the 1989-90 season.
The Capitals, winners of all three games this season, also got goals from Michal Pivonka, Calle Johansson and Kevin Hatcher.
Dale Hunter had three assists as Washington moved into a tie with New Jersey for first place in the Patrick Division.


Sports of The Times; Baseball Weather: Sterile
OUTSIDE, the sugar maples were turning gaudy fall colors, but indoors the sap was running: the springlike energy of 54,000 white handkerchiefs fluttering in unison, 54,000 locals trying to drown out the conference on the pitching mound.
This is the future of baseball -- synthetic, loud and sterile -- and we had better get used to it, even those of us with vestigial memories who know, just know, that baseball was better in the sun and shadows of early October.


Man Shot During Film in Midtown Theater
As gunmen shot it out on the movie screen, an audience member at a 42d Street movie theater was shot last night in a dispute with another man.
When five shots rang out, about 100 patrons in the Harris theater at 226 West 42d Street near Broadway thought the sound was coming from the screen.
Then people in the audience began to scream and duck for cover as one man fell bleeding from the neck and shoulder and another ran from the theater, witnesses said.


Autumn Pleasures Follow Long Summer
To the Editor:
While the New York City Planning Commission gives floor area bonuses to builders so that they can block off more and more sunlight, the changing of the seasons provides a true bonus to those of us with our feet on the ground.


Christopher Who?


Jays Bring Pause in Metrodome Mania
For two games in the 1987 American League playoffs, four in that year's World Series and one on Tuesday night, the Metrodome in the postseason was akin to a giant bowl of chicken soup for the Minnesota Twins: warm, medicinal, the right touch of home, a place in which they were always safe and never, ever at a loss in a big game.
The Toronto Blue Jays, nervy in their determination to upend the Twins in their post-season run, managed to tip over that bowl, de-mystify the Dome and quiet more than 54,000 Twins fans in one blow today by taking Game 2 of the American League Championship Series, 5-2.


That Box On the Wall Is My CD
The compact disk player, usually a small black box on a shelf, may someday resemble an African shield and hang on a wall.
On Monday, five futuristic, albeit nonfunctioning, designs for "audio life styles" earned prizes for six design students in the third annual Sony Design Vision competition.
Monday's presentation at the Hotel Macklowe in Manhattan, was for students from North, Central and South America.
In November, they will go to Tokyo to compete with students from Europe, Asia, the South Pacific and Africa.
The grand prize is $10,000.


U.S. WON'T APPEAL AIDS CASE AWARD
The Federal Government decided today not to appeal a $3.8 million medical malpractice award to a Marine warrant officer who is gravely ill with AIDS.
The man, Martin Gaffney, said he had contracted the disease from his wife after she was given blood tainted with the AIDS virus in a Navy hospital.
The 42-year-old chief warrant officer said he was elated by the Government's decision not to appeal the award, which was granted last June by a Federal district judge, Rya W. Zobel.


Fed Might Create Unit For Complex Inquiries
Reacting to regulatory lapses that contributed to two big bank scandals, the Federal Reserve Board is considering establishing a special investigative unit to handle cases involving complex fraud, especially those that cross national boundaries.
J.
Virgil Mattingly Jr., the Fed's general counsel, told the Senate Banking Committee in written testimony that was made public on Tuesday that such a unit would investigate cases like those involving the Bank of Credit and Commerce International and the Banco Nazionale del Lavoro of Italy.
Such a unit would interview witnesses, track down records and perform other investigative functions.
The Securities and Exchange Commission last year created a separate division to handle international fraud cases, before the scandals involving the two banks were uncovered.


ENVOY OF ROMANIA ABDUCTED IN INDIA
The top Romanian diplomat here was kidnapped today by four armed men in what appears to be a new twist to the Sikh separatist campaign, the police said.
The Romanian diplomat, Acting Ambassador Livia Radu, was abducted less than a quarter mile from his home by four men, some of whom wielded AK-47 rifles, the police said.


Dollar Off Amid Uncertainty Over Trend of Interest Rates
The dollar fell against leading foreign currencies yesterday in trading dominated by largely technical influences and uncertainty over the direction of interest rates in the United States.
Foreign exchange analysts said part of the dollar's drop was a technical correction after the currency's strong advance on Tuesday.


George L. Haskins, 76, Law Professor at Penn
George L. Haskins, a retired professor of law at the University of Pennsylvania, died last Friday at his home in Hancock, Me.
He was 76 years old.
He died of natural causes, said a paralegal with his estate.


KLAN LINK IS CITED IN CHILD KILLINGS
The Georgia judge hearing a request for a new trial for Wayne Williams, the man convicted of killing several black youths in the Atlanta area, said today that he was aware 10 years ago that state law-enforcement officers were investigating possible Ku Klux Klan involvement in the murders.
The judge, William H. Craig of Butts County Superior Court, was an assistant district attorney at the time of the murder investigation.
He said today he had received information about possible Klan involvement at the time.


Yields Fall and Assets Rise For Money Market Funds
Yields of both tax-free and taxable money market funds declined for the week ended yesterday.
Walter S. Frank, chief economist for IBC/Donoghue's, which monitors funds and issues the Money Fund Report, noted that "a huge inflow of funds this past week reflects relative attractiveness of money funds compared with market yields of securities like the 90-day Treasuries."


3 Men Ousted By St. John's In Sex Case
The three male students acquitted in the explosive St.
John's University sexual assault trial were expelled from the university yesterday.
Heeding the recommendation of a disciplinary committee made up of faculty members and students, the university's president, the Rev.
Donald J. Harrington, found that each of the students was guilty of "conduct adversely affecting his suitability as a member of the academic community of St. John's."


The Cost of Not Preventing Crack Babies
There's an obvious moral case for government funding of drug treatment for pregnant addicts.
Now three public health researchers document a powerful economic case as well.
Their work makes Congressional inaction on the issue inexcusable.
Ciaran Phibbs, David Bateman and Rachel Schwartz identified newborn babies at Harlem Hospital testing positive for cocaine and compared the cost of their delivery and care with that of normal babies.
The cocaine-exposed babies were 50 percent more likely to require intensive care and twice as likely to have very low birth weights.
Many of the babies also spent extra "boarder days" in the hospital while social workers decided whether to place them in foster care.


Trooper Indicted And Suspended
A veteran New York State trooper was suspended after he was charged with accepting more than $20,000 worth of building materials and labor from a Peekskill construction company in exchange for helping to resolve traffic tickets, the authorities said yesterday.
A Putnam County grand jury indicted the trooper, Chester Nelson, 38 years old, on charges of second-degree reward-receiving for official misconduct and perjury.


Vacuum Cleaner Fixers
Desco Vacuum Sales and Service  131 West 14th Street (near Seventh Avenue), New York, N.Y. 10011; (212) 989-1800.
Here are some things that should never find their way into a vacuum cleaner: stockings, rope, underwear, toys, tacks, nails, coins and big bunches of pine needles.


Accounts
*
TNT Express Worldwide, Garden City, L.I., to Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, New York.
Billings were not disclosed, Lintas Marketing Communications, New York, had handled the account.


F.D.A. Approves a Second Drug, Still Being Tested, to Treat AIDS
The Federal Food and Drug Administration announced yesterday that it had approved dideoxyinosine, or DDI, as the second treatment to slow the deadly deterioration of the immune system in people with AIDS.
The drug was approved before the completion of tests to fully establish its effectiveness and assess the dangerous side effects that some patients have experienced.
It would be used by patients who are not helped by AZT, which had been the only approved treatment for the AIDS virus.


Getty Center's Design Is Unveiled
On the bulldozed crest of a sunbaked hill above the city, the directors of the J. Paul Getty Trust today unveiled the long-delayed design for one of the most ambitious art complexes in the world, the Getty Center.
Shaded by a giant white tent, they presented a wooden scale model of the center, designed by the architect Richard Meier, that will certainly be one of the most expensive building projects in recent times.
The Getty's announced cost of $360 million does not take into account the cost of the site or its preparation or architectural fees, and some estimates have put the price tag as high as $1 billion, a figure the Getty disputes.
The center will unite the trust's programs in the scholarship, education, conservation and display of the visual arts when it is completed in late 1996.


A New Set of Numbers From Anderson
Hopeful that the recent signings of Dikembe Mutombo by the Denver Nuggets and Steve Smith by the Miami Heat would jump-start stalled negotiations, Kenny Anderson's agent yesterday presented the New Jersey Nets with a new proposal.
"We've moved closer in their direction," Richard Howell said by telephone from his Atlanta office.
"I spoke with Willis Reed today and I'm hopeful of hearing from him soon."


Market Place; A Rich Icing For Turner Broadcasting
AS the Atlanta Braves stormed from well back of the Los Angeles Dodgers this summer, the stock market took notice.
The team's owner, the Turner Broadcasting Company, perhaps better known for such operations as Cable News Network and Turner Network Television, followed right along.
Shares in Turner Broadcasting, which were languishing below $14 in late July, when the Braves were in third place and seemingly headed nowhere, have moved up to nearly $18 as the Braves captured the Western division title in the National League.
Last night they lost the opening game of the playoffs to the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Wall Street analysts say it has been the fate of the Braves that seems to have drawn investors.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The S.E.C. is investigating whether Merrill Lynch engaged in trades that helped a Florida insurance company disguise its deteriorating financial condition for years, Government officials said.
The inquiry is part of a broader investigation of the activities of the insurer's parent, Transmark USA.  [ D1. ]
Apple Computer is quietly negotiating a link with Sony.
Senior executives of both companies have confirmed the talks about a new venture, but the details are closely guarded.  [ D1. ]


Isolation and Connection in Gordimer's Art
On the day of the announcement that Nadine Gordimer would receive the 1991 Nobel Prize in Literature, a tribute to the complex and intimate stories she has written about racism's toll on people's lives in her native South Africa, Nelson Mandela still did not have the right to vote.
It seemed to many people fitting and poetic that the committee should acknowledge the 67-year-old Miss Gordimer's work in a year in which her country had finally begun to dismantle apartheid.
It seemed to Miss Gordimer rather more ironic.


T.V.A. to Offer 10-Year Bonds
The Tennessee Valley Authority announced plans yesterday for the sale of $500 million of 10-year bonds through competitive bidding.
It expects to receive bids on Wednesday for the issue, which will refinance an equal amount of 9.195 percent bonds held by the Federal Financing Bank.
The prospective issue is expected to save several million annually in interest costs.
It is the first since 1989 and the first to be offered for competitive bidding since 1974.


Whose Coast Is This? Foes Tee Up
The Pebble Beach Golf Links, where even slightly errant chip shots can fly off a cliff into the Pacific Ocean below, is being spruced up for next year's U.S.
Open tournament.
Weeds have been removed and new grass placed on the fairways, courtesy of the Japanese businessman who bought the course last year.
But new grass cannot cover the controversy over who will have the right to play here year round.


The 'Old' Man Is the Seer: O. J. Is Giants' Resident Sage
At age 34, Ottis Jerome Anderson is the oldest running back in the National Football League, a proud and regal man.
He is a mellow guru, secure in his ability and his logic.
He can intellectualize a potentially bad situation and turn it into the lesson for the day.
That is what Anderson is doing about his current inactivity.


Henke Adapts To Set-Up Role
The Blue Jays call Tom Henke the Terminator for good reason.
The ninth inning is when Henke usually saunters in from the bullpen, with his glasses hanging on the bridge of his nose, and terminates games.
So why was Henke wandering in to pitch in the sixth inning against the Twins today?
Did he make a wrong turn or something?
Not a chance.
Henke has a new role for Toronto in the American League playoffs.
The right-hander is not expected to terminate just yet because of a nagging injury to his pitching shoulder.


Macy's Sales Up 4.2%
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company said yesterday that its September sales at its stores open at least a year increased 4.2 percent, to $601.5 million, from $577.4 million in September 1990.
The results for Macy, which operates Macy's, I. Magnin and Bullock's stores, were helped by several sales promotions during the month, including a "one day" sale that lasted two days.
Other retailers are expected to report lackluster September sales today.


CHRONICLE
RICHARD GERE may not be 91, but he has an equally grueling schedule.
As chairman and a founding member of Tibet House, he was on hand at John F. Kennedy International Airport yesterday to meet the DALAI LAMA, here for the International Year of Tibet.
Mr.
Gere traveled with him to New Haven and is planning to attend as many of the 62 events related to Tibet between now and Oct. 28 "as my body can take," he said.
The agenda will include an interfaith service at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York tonight, educational sessions, speaches, an art exhibition, a film festival, a sunrise meditation, an opera, folk dances and dinner parties.


Books of The Times; Good Brother, Bad Brother. Which Is Which?
Blue River By Ethan Canin 222 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $19.95.
As Edward, the protagonist of Ethan Canin's promising but flawed first novel, "Blue River," recounts: "On a Sunday morning in the June of my 31st year I open the front door of our house looking for the newspaper and find a man standing out there: stoop-shouldered, bent, blotch-skinned, his hair and beard tangled, staring with the big, wet eyes of an animal. Some kind of bum, I think, stepping back, half-shutting the door, until I recognize him."


Allied Plans Broad Cuts; Stock Jumps
Allied-Signal Inc., whose spending has far outstripped the cash it has been taking in, took strong action yesterday to do something about it, including plans to reduce managerial ranks by 14 percent.
In response, its stock price jumped 12 percent.
The measures reflected the determination of Lawrence A. Bossidy, the chief executive since Aug. 1, to move quickly to make Allied more competitive and cut costs.


EXECUTIVES
*
Alta Gold Co., Salt Lake City, a mining company, named Robert N. Pratt president and chief operating officer. *
American General Corp., Houston, a financial services company, named Robert D. Womack senior vice president-administration, succeeding Wayne D. Baker, who has been named senior vice president-financial services for the company's consumer finance subsidiary.


Van Slyke And Pirates Wake Up, Rip Braves
The Pirates' power pack, deciding to exercise patience, snapped out of its post-season slumber tonight and drove Pittsburgh to a 5-1 victory over the Atlanta Braves in the opening game of the National League pennant playoff.
But Doug Drabek, the Pirates' No. 1 pitcher, was anything but patient.
As a result, he blundered on the bases and was forced out of the game with a leg injury.
Andy Van Slyke and Bobby Bonilla, who with Barry Bonds batted .190 and drove in five runs in the six-game playoff loss to Cincinnati last year, drove in three runs in the first three innings against Tom Glavine.
Van Slyke slugged a home run and a run-scoring double, and Bonilla singled him home.
Bonilla later singled and scored the Pirates' last run.


Designers' Sheets Offer Scenes You Can Dream On
WHAT do Claude Montana, the clothing designer, Paloma Picasso, the jewelry designer, and Robert Metzger, the interior decorator, have in common?
Sheets.
This week in Manhattan, they introduced their first bed-and-bath collections for spring.
Mr.
Montana's Astral, for Royalton, is an indigo print of constellations with the names delicately written on the linens.
Why count sheep?
Count stars.


Much of Public Sees A Corrupt Congress
Members of Congress are widely perceived by the public to be corrupt, pampered by unnecessary perquisites and arrogant about their power, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll finds.
A striking 83 percent of American adults say they believe that the scores of legislators who overdrew their House bank accounts did so not by mistake but because they knew they could get away with doing so.


Dalai Lama Appeals for Help in Going Home
The Dalai Lama, the exiled leader of Tibet, today renewed his efforts to visit his homeland by appealing to the world to put pressure on China to allow his return for a fact-finding mission.
In remarks at Yale University, the Tibetan leader expressed frustration with the protracted negotiations between his representatives and China, stating that he was ready to go "as soon as possible."


Apple Computer's Next Ally May Be Sony
A week after Apple Computer put the finishing touches on a broad strategic alliance with I.B.M., it is quietly negotiating another major linkup, one that could blend American and Japanese technological strengths.
This time the partner would be the iSony Corporation.
Senior executives of both companies have confirmed in recent days that they have discussions under way about a new venture, but the details are closely guarded.


Ohrenstein Asks State To Pay $1.8 Million Bill
The minority leader of the New York State Senate, whose indictment on charges of abusing his power for political ends was dropped last month, has requested that the state pay his lawyers nearly $1.8 million.
A spokesman for State Attorney General Robert Abrams said the claim by the majority leader, Manfred Ohrenstein, was the largest ever filed under a seven-year-old law that covers the legal expenses of public officials if they are cleared.


Fujitsu Names Chiefs In a U.S. Revamping
Fujitsu America Inc. yesterday reorganized its business operations to create two subsidiaries, Fujitsu Computer Products of America Inc. and Fujitsu Network Transmission Systems Inc.
Fujitsu America will now act as a holding company for Fujitsu Ltd.'s businesses in the United States.
Fujitsu named Norman B. Petersen, 60 years old, chairman, and Lewis Frauenfelder, 51, president and chief executive of Fujitsu Computer Products, the larger of the new entities.
To be based in San Jose, Calif., the computer company will combine the marketing operation of Fujitsu America with its engineering research unit, Intellistor, of Longmont, Colo., and manufacturing operations in Hillsboro, Ore.


Credit Report Cases Settled
Four companies have settled charges that they did not tell unsuccessful job applicants that credit information had figured in their rejections, Federal regulators said today.
The Federal Trade Commission said the agreements had been reached with the McDonnell Douglas Corporation; R. H. Macy &amp; Company; the Keystone Carbon Company, a metal parts and bearings manufacturer based in St.
Mary's, Pa., and the Kobacker Company, a retail shoe chain based in Columbus, Ohio.


Germans Seek to Protect Foreigners
When a loud commotion erupted outside Krefeld's city hall this morning, some city officials immediately feared that thugs were attacking a luckless foreigner on the plaza outside.
The truth turned out to be quite different.
Several dozen local residents, angered by the recent wave of racist attacks in Germany, had assembled to demand that city officials give more protection and support to foreigners living here.


Events: Auctions, Tours And Appalachian Crafts
Benefit and Buying  Pier 92, Twelfth Avenue at 52d Street;  (212) 595-9533.
A reception to benefit the Museum of American Folk Art will be held from 6 to 9 P.M. on Wednesday at the Fall Antiques Show.
Tickets start at $150; $100, for people age 30 or younger.
Call for information.


Delaying the Vote: How Senators Reached Accord
To force a delay in the vote on the Clarence Thomas nomination, Senator George J. Mitchell persuaded several of the judge's Democratic backers to agree to vote against him if Republicans would not agree to a postponement.
And after meeting with several of the Democrats in a Capitol conference room overlooking The Mall and the Washington Monument, Mr.
Mitchell gave Senators Bob Dole, the Republican leader, and John C. Danforth, Judge Thomas's chief sponsor, a list of 10 Democrats whose switches would almost certainly doom the nomination if a vote was forced.


Pop and Jazz in Review
808 State  Limelight
Dance-club disk jockeys love 808 State, an instrumental band from Manchester, England.
The music's reliable dance beats, often concocted on a Roland 808 drum machine, are perfect for easing transitions from, say, the disco thump of house music to the brute-force stomp of industrial rock.
Songs have enough individuality to be played at full length, but discrete sections can be used for short inserts.


Sudan Ready to Open Talks With Rebels to End Fighting
Foreign Minister Ali Ahmed Sahloul of the Sudan declared today that his Government was ready to open negotiations with the rebels to find what he called "an African solution" to the longstanding civil war between the Government-controlled Islamic north and the predominantly Christian rebels in the South.
Addressing the General Assembly, the Sudanese minister said there were high-level contacts with the rebels, whom he described as "sons of the same country."


ISRAEL REBUFFS U.S. ON FLIGHTS IN IRAQ
Israeli leaders today rejected United States complaints about Israel's recent reconnaissance flights over Iraq, saying this country would take any steps it considered necessary to defend itself.
The Israelis did not officially acknowledge that such air missions had taken place, even though the Bush Administration says they did and Iraq has filed a formal letter of protest to the United Nations.


Tempus Fugit, but You Can Buy It
After a decade when Americans struggled to find more time for work to increase their earnings, what people now seem to want even more than money is time off -- time away from jobs and chores, to do whatever strikes their fancy.
As a result, many people who can afford it are trading their hard-earned dollars for services that offer hassle-free leisure time.
Sensing that shift, travel and service companies are coming up with new ways to package time, wrap it as neatly as a Big Mac and sell it to the public.


Mets Could Land Torborg This Week
The Mets have decided they want Jeff Torborg, the current manager of the Chicago White Sox, to be their next manager, and are pursuing him as aggressively and as quickly as possible, according to a baseball executive.
To that end, Al Harazin, the general manager of the Mets, met with Torborg today, a meeting that resulted in an agreement to talk again Thursday.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-18
Zagreb and Belgrade have changed since the civil war broke out in Yugoslavia.
The emotional fallout from the war has scoured away much of the charm of both capital cities.
Page A1


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Released Keith Hernandez, first baseman, and Mike York, pitcher.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Fired Tom Trebelhorn, manager.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Exercised its option on Nolan Ryan, pitcher, for the 1992 season.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Signed Rory Sparrow, guard.
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Waived Reggie Hanson, forward, Tito Horford, center, and Mike Morrison and Kevin Williams, guards.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Released Petur Gudmundsson, center, and Mike Kennedy and Bobby Martin, forwards.
FOOTBALL National Football League
BUFFALO BILLS -- Released Chris Oldham, cornerback.
Activated Joe Staysniak, offensive lineman, from the practice roster.
CHICAGO BEARS -- Placed Cap Boso, tight end, on injured reserve.
Signed Keith Jennings, tight end.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Claimed Bernard Clark, linebacker, off waivers from the Seattle Seahawks.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Signed Brian Sochia, nose tackle.
NEW YORK JETS -- Placed Mark Boyer, tight end, on injured reserve.
Signed Pat Kelly, tight end.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed Rick Tuten, punter.


Quotation of the Day
"The best way to be read is posthumously. That way it doesn't matter if you offend a friend or a relative or a lover. It's absolutely fatal to your writing to think about how your work will be received. It's a betrayal of whatever talent you have." -- Nadine Gordimer.  [ C25:1. ]


INSIDE
Germans Call for Tolerance
Angered and embarrassed by racist attacks on foreigners, residents of some German towns are organizing to protect the newcomers.
Page A12.
St.
John's Students Expelled
The president of the Queens university expelled three male students who were acquitted in the sexual assault of a female student.
Page B1.
Fair Play vs.
Fairway
A plan by the Japanese-owned Pebble Beach Golf Links to sell member ships for $150,000 has residents up in arms about shore access.
Page D1.
Blue Jays Make It 1-1
Toronto beat Minnesota, 5-2, tying their American League series and ending the Twins' postseason perfection in the Metrodome.
Page B19.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
HERMAN FEIFEL recalls being 13 years old in New York City and violating the Sabbath by riding the subway to see his school basketball team play.
His parents, Orthodox Jews, were upset.
"I thought the game was more important because it was for the city championship," said Dr.
Feifel, who is now 75 years old and is the chief psychologist at the V. A. Outpatient Clinic in Los Angeles.
"Rebelling like that was so important that I remember it vividly 60 years later."


Dow Declines by 17.44 in Heavy Trading
Stocks fell yesterday in heavy trading, dragged down by concern over corporate earnings, a weak bond market and fading expectations of any imminent interest-rate cut by the Fed.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 17.44 points, to 2,946.33, as Big Board volume reached 186.7 million shares, up from 170.1 million on Tuesday.
Decliners outpaced gaining issues by a ratio of slightly less than 2 to 1.


Prosecutor Is Guilty Of Drunken Driving
The Prosecutor of Cape May County, John Corino, pleaded guilty yesterday to drunken driving and apologized for the poor example he set as a law enforcement officer.
Superior Court Judge Gerald Weinstein revoked Mr.
Corino's license for eight months, fined him a total of $561 and required him to attend 24 hours of alcohol education classes.
The case was moved to Atlantic County because the defendant was so well-known in Cape May County, where he has been Prosecutor since 1982.


Hamilton G. Ford, 78, Realty Panel Executive
Hamilton Gates Ford, a former executive vice president of the Realty Advisory Board on Labor Relations, a group that represents building owners in labor negotiations, died on Sunday at the Courtland Gardens Health Facility in Stamford, Conn.
He was 78 years old and lived in Riverside, Conn.
He died of heart failure after an extended illness, his son Jonathan said.


Reviews/Dance; On Love's Scales, the Pain Outweighs the Pleasure
Ideally, love, work and art should be joys.
All too often, they aren't.
Out of that recognition comes Pina Bausch's "Bandoneon," which received its New York premiere Tuesday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music as an attraction of the Next Wave Festival.
The two-act production dates from 1980; it proved worth waiting for.
Although it loses momentum near its conclusion, most of the work possesses the vivid imagery and bitter humor that have established Miss Bausch as one of the most brilliant of living choreographers.
And, as usual, her Tanztheater Wuppertal was a troupe of decidedly interesting people.
Whereas some directors want dancers to look like beautiful children who have never grown up, this German group is clearly a company of adults.


No Midway Air Move By Northwest Air Yet
A spokesman for Northwest Airlines said yesterday that it could take a month or two to make decisions concerning advertising for Midway Airlines, which a Federal bankruptcy court is allowing Northwest to buy.
Midway's agency is Campbell-Mithun-Esty, Chicago.
A spokeswoman there said, "As far as we're concerned, it's business as usual."


Bush's Hopes Are Dwindling For a Settlement in Cyprus
Frustrated by the entanglements and the age-old resentments of Cyprus, American diplomats are now losing hope that the influence of President Bush could bring a quick resolution to the dispute over this island that has been divided and militarized for the last 17 years.
A peace conference announced for September by President Bush has failed to materialize, and the new talks between Greece and Turkey have only led to more mutual recriminations.


Pop and Jazz in Review
George Benson  Blue Note
When the guitarist George Benson drifted into the pop-jazz world in the early 1970's, his records were fascinating because they were so loaded with inside jokes.
Mr.
Benson was playing instrumental pop music for people who didn't particularly want to be bothered with the complexities of improvisation.
Mr.
Benson, an exceptional guitarist with a complicated harmonic palette, always included runs and lines that flashed how much he knew, adding an intentional tension to his projects.


Between Worlds: New York's Bangladeshis
When Maksouda Bhuiyan, an announcer on a Bangladeshi cable television program in New York City, answered a knock at her front door recently, a Bangladeshi man, his wife and their 5-month-old child were standing outside.
The family, who had arrived in the United States only hours earlier on a flight from Bangladesh, carried a picture of Mrs.
Bhuiyan that they had clipped from a magazine.
The couple, who knew no one in the city when they arrived about three weeks ago, needed a place to stay.
Mrs.
Bhuiyan allowed the family to move in with her.
She did not have the heart to refuse them.
She continues to feed them, and they live with the Bangladeshi family next door.


Mr. Bush's Antarctica Conversion
Three cheers for the nations and the environmental groups that pushed hard for the international agreement, signed last Friday, banning mineral and oil exploration in the Antarctic for the next 50 years.
And two cheers for President Bush, who finally lived up to pledges that some of his aides wished he had never made.
Last year, Congress voted for a long-term ban on commercial activity in Antarctica.
Mr.
Bush first expressed fervent support, but then fell silent when some of his associates argued that a ban would threaten long-term U.S. interests.
After furious negotiations, the 26 voting members of the 30-year-old Antarctic Treaty, including the U.S., agreed to a compromise that would prohibit mining for 50 years, after which the ban could be lifted -- but only if all members of the treaty concurred.


Gold and Platinum Higher After Soviet Supply Report
Gold and platinum futures prices advanced yesterday on further news of dwindling Soviet gold reserves.
A report by Tass, the Soviet press agency, said that Soviet reserves were approaching 240 metric tons, lending credence to similar statements made earlier.


Dinkins Restores Africa Trip But With Revised Financing
Stung by the collapse of his ambitious plans for taking a chartered airplane to South Africa with a large delegation of city officials and business executives, Mayor David N. Dinkins now plans a scaled-down trip on commercial flights, with many members of his entourage paying their own way.
The Mayor postponed the trip last month because, he said, a top aide was too busy working to calm the racial violence in Crown Heights to raise the necessary $500,000 in private funds for the flight for him and several dozen officials, aides and friends.
The fund-raising effort had drawn questions from some civic groups.


Review/Recital; From a Wistful Lucia Popp, the Many Faces of Depression
Lucia Popp's performances in New York City have been few and far between, and it has been a decade since she was last heard at the Metropolitan Opera.
Her recordings, however, have won her a large following, and they have kept her admirers abreast of her repertory explorations and attuned to what has been a steady, fascinating artistic maturation.
There was a degree to which the rarity of Ms.
Popp's appearances hereabouts gave her recital at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday evening a special electricity.
But it takes much more than rarity to make a performance linger in the memory.
Ms.
Popp's recital gave one plenty to consider, not only in terms of the music at hand, the flow of the program and the generally fine state of her voice, but also about the qualities that separate a competent, solid vocal recital from a fully communicative, moving one.


Suing, a Homeless Man Refuses to Yield
On one side is a homeless man with a hair-trigger sense of fairness and a penchant for lawsuits.
On the other are town officials, jittery about the two cases he has won so far and the bills piling up in a third.
Arguing that the only real winners so far are the lawyers, the officials have proposed this settlement: They will give Richard Kreimer $150,000; in return, they want him to agree to leave them alone.


In the Nation; Blaming Anita Hill
It's to the credit of the U.S.
Senate that it has delayed its vote on confirmation of Clarence Thomas for a seat on the Supreme Court.
But that's the only credit the Senate can claim in the sorry mess that has developed around sexual harassment charges against him.
Had the Senate stood on the procedural argument that the vote could not be put off without unanimous consent of its 100 members, neither Judge Thomas nor his accuser would have been fairly served, the Senate would have compounded its original error in treating the accusation lightly, and the public would have had every right to consider the rules preposterous and the Senate ridiculous.


India Official Says Qaddafi Sought Atom-Arms Technology in 70's
Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, offered in the late 1970's to pay India an amount comparable to its foreign debt in exchange for nuclear weapons technology but India declined, India's Ambassador to the United States said today.
The Ambassador, Abid Hussain, and Jon B. Wolfstahl, a senior analyst at the Arms Control Association, a Washington-based research group, said the Libyan proposal had not previously been announced.
But Mr.
Wolfstahl said there had been many other reports of Libya seeking to acquire nuclear and ballistic missile technology from other countries.


Legal System Should Put More Faith in Juries
To the Editor:
"Diverse Group Wants Juries to Follow Natural Law" (Law page, Sept. 27) touches on legislation that I introduced and makes the grandiose claim that fully informing jurors of their right to judge both the facts and the law would nullify bad laws.
Exaggerating the bill's purpose runs the risk of making a thoughtful enterprise look foolish.
It sustains the view of opponents that this change would lead to anarchy.
In making this worst-case analysis, they magically transform jurors into a legislature that repeals laws.


Capturing the Pastel Rays of Autumn


Review/Dance; A Dark Pastorale by a One-Time Cherub
Dan Wagoner has come a long way from his days, not so far gone, as the dance world's resident sweet-spirited cherub.
That was clear from the premieres he presented on Tuesday, when Dan Wagoner and Dancers opened for a weeklong engagement at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street).
It is not that Mr.
Wagoner has become bad-tempered or morose.
But his intriguingly named "Dolly Sods: After the Flood," in particular, is a work of new grandeur, depth and richness.
On one level, and not at all the most superficial one, "Dolly Sods" is a sleek compendium of the homespun fits and starts for which the choreographer is known.
Mr.
Wagoner danced with Martha Graham, Paul Taylor and Merce Cunningham before forming his own company in 1969, and the influence of all three choreographers may be seen in his dances.
But he has taken a Graham contraction, for instance, or a weighted, skittery Taylor run or deliberate Cunningham walk and made them his own.


With No Chicken in the Pot, Cubans' Faith in Castro's Revolution Is Waning
In this city of crumbling beauty and pressing hardship, many Cubans say that only the still-intimidating police apparatus prevents them from openly expressing the hope that their three-decade-long experience with a Communist system is drawing to an end.
Even as the international network of cold war alliances that supported him has dissolved, President Fidel Castro, the country's leader for 32 years, has warned his people that come what may, Cuba will not veer from the Communist path.


Discount Broker Selects Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond
Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York, was awarded the $5 million account of Quick &amp; Reilly Inc., New York, yesterday.
The agency will create direct-response print and broadcast advertising for the discount brokerage.
William A. Coppel, the firm's vice president-director of marketing, attributed a decision to leave its agency of 16 years, Arthur Lockard &amp; Company, New York, to a desire to expand its marketing efforts to include aging baby boomers.
"We're interested in turning up the volume," Mr.
Coppel said, adding that Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, known for its feisty creative work, was well suited for that task.


Home Video
Cher as Body Sculptor
"Preparing for it was a blast," Cher said.
"Doing it, though, was a lot more difficult than I thought it would be." Two weeks ago the actress taped her first exercise video, which will be released in November by CBS/Fox.
"At home you can sweat," she said.
"When you're in front of the camera, you're trying to be motivational and look slick, trying not to make people think, 'It's killing her, so it's killing me.' "


A Seattle Utility Head Takes Bonneville Reins
Randall W. Hardy says he has butted heads with Bonneville Power Administration officials on energy issues affecting the Pacific Northwest, and on Oct. 22 he will take the helm of the influential Federal agency, which wholesales half the electricity the region uses.
Mr.
Hardy, 47, has since 1984 served as superintendent and chief executive of Seattle City Light, the nation's seventh-largest public utility.
He succeeds James J. Jura, who resigned as administrator of Bonneville to become general manager of Associated Electric Cooperative Inc. of Springfield, Mo.


Fourth Avenue Journal; Parents and Little Desks = Learning New Math
In business suits and leather jackets, from corporate board rooms and art studios they descend each Tuesday night on Grace Church School, squeezing into child-sized desks.
Briefcases and designer bags hit the floor.
And for an hour and a half some of the city's best-educated mothers and fathers wrestle with a subject that boggles even the most sophisticated minds: their children's mathematics homework.


Condoms Issue: Should Children Have Sex?; What the Army Did
To the Editor:
The battle over distribution of condoms in high schools is reminiscent of a battle that took place during World War II.
The Pentagon requested the Office of War Information, where I was employed, to produce literature for distribution to army personnel concerning the dangers of venereal disease.
The basic message was the same as that in World War I: practice continence.
I was assigned to work on the project.


Public Calls Lawmakers Corrupt and Pampered
Members of Congress are widely perceived by the public to be corrupt, pampered by unnecessary perquisites and arrogant about their power, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll indicates.
A striking 83 percent of American adults said they believe that the scores of legislators who overdrew their House bank accounts did so not by mistake but "because they knew they could get away with it," the poll found.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.06
5.12
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.01
5.01
7.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.06
5.05
7.16
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.24
7.16
8.77
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.91
7.81
9.07
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.03
8.96
10.08
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.88
6.86
7.87
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellweather bonds, notes and bills


Militant Advocacy Group for Disabled Revels in Role of Agitator
The melee at a meeting of nursing home representatives here was, in many ways, a typical for the demonstrators: After smashing their wheelchairs into police barricades and blocking a hotel entrance, 73 of them were arrested, creating front page headlines and a successful day's work for Adapt, the militant advocacy group for the disabled.
The aim of the action today at the Peabody Hotel in this resort city was to focus attention on the organization's call to divert Federal money from nursing homes to a form of in-home care.
But the means the group uses, like Sunday's chaotic demonstration, have often exasperated its allies as much as its adversaries.


Stark Conflict Marks Accounts Given by Thomas and Professor
Judge Clarence Thomas and Anita F. Hill disagree not just on the basic question of whether he sexually harassed her.
On several fine points -- from whether he sought to date her, to the nature of their telephone conversations in later years -- the accounts of Judge Thomas, President Bush's nominee for the Supreme Court, and Ms.
Hill, a former aide and an Oklahoma law professor, are in stark and seemingly irreconcilable conflict.


Sony and Philips End Rift Over Recording Formats
The Sony Corporation and Philips Consumer Electronics International said today that they were ending their bitter dispute over what technology should be used in the next generation of audio equipment and agreed to jointly license each other's two newest products.
The agreement, announced in Tokyo today, appeared to be an effort to end the dispute over whether Sony's new mini-disk system or Philip's new digital compact cassette -- or DCC -- tape should prevail as an industry standard.
The mini-disk, or MD, is a new size and format for compact disks.
It would play on a Walkman-like personal stereo.
Despite being half the size, MD has the same playing time of a conventional CD.
But unlike conventional disks, MD can be "rewritten" -- meaning that it can record music, much as a tape does.


Bush Said to Order China Import-Barrier Inquiry
President Bush has ordered a wide-ranging investigation into Chinese import barriers that could lead to punitive duties on imports from China, Administration officials said today.
Scheduled for announcement on Thursday, the President's decision reflected a broad consensus among Federal agencies that China is discriminating against American products and shows no willingness to change its policies, they said.


Case Against Cone Weakens
The rape investigation involving David Cone is not likely to result in the filing of criminal charges against the pitcher for the Mets, an officer who has helped in coordinating the investigation in the Philadelphia Police Department said yesterday.
"The case doesn't sound as good as it did in the beginning," said the officer.
"We still are going to pursue it seriously and to its conclusion, but I don't see it leading to an arrest."


The Search for Romance In the Shadow of AIDS
Last spring, George K., a 43-year-old family therapist from Brooklyn, placed a personal ad, describing himself as heterosexual, white, professional, spiritual, healthy and infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
"If you love warm sandy beaches, pure white snow and fireplaces, let's connect," the ad read.


Moon Is Blue Over Money Deal
With bonuses, incentives, deferred payments and whatnot, there is some question about just who is the highest-paid quarterback in the National Football League.
There is good reason to believe however, that the highest "unpaid" quarterback this year is Warren Moon of the Houston Oilers.
Moon, one of two quarterbacks to lead his respective team to the playoffs for the last five years, has been refusing his paycheck since the beginning of the season because of a salary dispute with the Oilers.


Rangers Win Third in Row as the Islanders Cry Foul
The Rangers' third straight victory did not require an overtime last night, just two goals by the city's resident superstar and a scrappy score by Kris King with 15.8 seconds left in the game.
"A guy comes off the bench to do a special thing at a special time," Mark Messier said of King, his fellow Ranger hero at the Garden.
"That's how a team shows it has character."


Buttons, Buttons, Everywhere Attest to a Mania for 27 Years
ONE might say that Diana Epstein and Millicent Safro were just lucky.
Twenty-seven years ago, they found their calling, followed their instincts and have been happy ever since.
Ms.
Epstein and Ms.
Safro found buttons.
They own Tender Buttons, a shop at 143 East 62d Street in Manhattan with a branch store in Chicago.
They travel a lot, in search of one or many buttons.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Burlington Resources priced $150 million of 9.125 percent notes, due 2021, at 99.433 to yield 9.18 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The issue, which is noncallable, has been rated A3 by Moody's and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's.


CHRONICLE
HELEN HAYES turns 91 years old today, but that is no excuse for her to take things easy.
Last night she was scheduled to present awards at the American Celtic Ball of the Ireland Chamber of Commerce in the United States.
Tonight she is to receive the Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy Leadership Award at a dinner of the Kennedy Child Study Center.
And tomorrow in Washington, the Washington Theater Awards Society will celebrate her birthday at a dinner dance and benefit auction.
She will take with her something for the auction, "a Mickey Mouse watch with the letters of my name instead of numbers, that Walt Disney made for me," she said yesterday.


Review/Fashion; Missoni Mission: Ease in Dressing
It is a time of excess and of understatement.
A time of pale colors and strident prints.
As the spring ready-to-wear openings continue here, it is clear that there is no single look to Italian fashion this season.
Some clothes are childlike, some sophisticated.
This diversification is not necessarily bad, though it is disturbing to people who prefer to place everything in crisp categories.
It offers plenty of options to women who know what they like.
But it also represents some confusion among retailers and designers, who are not at all sure what will tempt women to spend money in a tight economy.


Japan Markets Closed
Banks, government offices, financial markets and many businesses are closed in Japan today because of Sports Day, a national holiday.


Chief Quits B.A.T.'s Insurance Unit
B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C., the British financial services and tobacco company, has announced the resignation of Michael Butt as chairman and chief executive of Eagle Star Holdings, P.L.C., B.A.T.'s insurance subsidiary, and from the parent's board.
Mr.
Butt's resignation after five years in the post, is by mutual agreement and comes in the wake of Eagle Star's $329 million first-half loss, of which $288 million was attributable to underwriting losses on Eagle Star's troubled financial insurance lines.
In September, Eagle Star announced 1,000 jobs would be pared over the next three years.


Corrections
An article yesterday about exchanges between men and women in Congress over the sexual harassment accusation against Judge Clarence Thomas referred erroneously in some copies to a lawmaker, Hank Brown of Colorado.
He is a Senator, not a Representative.


Review/Folk Opera; Buddhist Rectitude From Tibet
By the esthetics of European-style opera, Tibetan Lhamo folk opera singing could be a nightmare from another world.
It's not just that singers are also expected to be dancers.
The vocal tone is rough and nasalized, the pitch quavery and ululating; phrases, or even single notes, crack partway through and resume; groups singing the same line simultaneously don't aim for exact unison.
The accompaniment is utterly austere, just drum and cymbals.
But there's more than one way to convey emotion and tell stories through music, as the Tibetan Institute of Performing Arts showed on Wednesday in its first performance at Symphony Space.
"The Story of Sugki Nyima," a two-hour excerpt from an opera that traditionally extends for a full day, is about the travails of rectitude, a kind of Cinderella via the Book of Job.
Sugki Nyima, daughter of a Buddhist holy man, is destined to marry a king.
He first marries a false princess, and after his marriage to Sugki Nyima, the first queen plots against her until the king orders Sugki Nyima's execution.
She is saved and retreats to meditate; she becomes a Buddhist nun and eventually returns to reign and spread Buddhism.
The characters include princes, a holy man, a witch, intelligent animals, an oracle and a hunter.


Brentwood, Tenn., Bonds Upgraded
At a time when many municipalities worry about bond ratings being lowered, Brentwood, Tenn., has no such problem.
The Moody's Investors Service said yesterday that its rating on the city's $25,995,000 general obligation bond issue had been revised upward a notch, from A to A-1.
Moody's said that the affluent suburban Nashville community had had a strong tax-base expansion along with solid population growth.
Maria Matesanz, an assistant vice president for the Southeast regional group at Moody's, said that Brentwood's population was 16,392 in the 1990 census, an increase of 73.8 percent since 1980.
"The per-capita income is 198 percent above the state average," she said.
Brentwood also has a somewhat high debt burden of $1,585 per capita, well above the median for Tennessee of $575, Ms.
Matesanz said.
But she said the city was well run, maintained "healthy surpluses in key operating funds" and continued to grow.


CBS Unleashes Crews For Baseball Coverage
CBS's baseball production crews have been going wild during the American League and National League Championship Series, providing a cornucopia of angles and replays thanks to a fattened complement of cameras and tape machines.
Producers and directors have had their financial straitjackets loosened, a sure relief for them, but a certain pain for Larry Tisch, the CBS chairman, who wants his network to be a lean, mean, bean-counting machine.


Laxity on Boycott Act
The Commerce Department has found that it has been lax in its enforcement of legislation that bars American companies from participating in the Arab boycott of Israel, according to an internal department report released today by a member of Congress.
Given that the agency's antiboycott office receives 80 cases of violations a year, "the office's record of no successful criminal prosecutions in its 12-year history may be a record that is difficult to defend," said the report, which was distributed by Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn.


Review/Film; Urban America in Microcosm, by John Sayles
"City of Hope" is the seventh and most invigorating achievement to date by John Sayles, the godfather of independent film makers in this country.
Here is a tumultuous evocation of urban America in the final decade of the 20th century, when old systems don't work, reason is in short supply, money is running out and opportunism draws more votes than equal opportunities.
"City of Hope" is as contemporary as slumlords and cut-rate appliance stores, but classic in its methods.
Mr.
Sayles shares Ibsen's appreciation for the ways in which the past makes a hostage of the present, as well as Arthur Miller's crazy fearlessness in writing the big melodramatic scene that often pays off.


Potamkin, Cadillac Maven, Is Back
Cadillac executives never questioned Victor Potamkin's ability to sell cars during his 15 years as a Cadillac dealer.
But his flashy, low-price pitches to New Yorkers did not always square with the auto maker's high-style marketing approach.
Now, after Mr Potamkin sat it out for four years while Cadillac floundered with a more refined approach, Cadillac officials have decided that the 80-year-old Mr.
Potamkin knows New Yorkers.
Potamkin Cadillac-Buick-Chevrolet is scheduled to open Tuesday at the same stand where Mr.
Potamkin sold Cadillacs from 1972 to 1987.


Players Applaud the Move
Word that the oganization had hired Jeff Torborg to be its next manager had filtered out to players on the Mets by yesterday afternoon, and a number of them pronounced the move a sound and encouraging one.
"It's clearly a guy the front office wanted and flat-out went out and got," said Howard Johnson.
"That sends a message to the players that management is intent on addressing what went wrong last season.


Review/Theater; Mom, Dad, Meet My Boyfriend, The Doctor
In "Beau Jest," James Sherman's breezy but formulaic new comedy at the Lamb's Theater, a young unmarried Jewish woman (Laura Patinkin) hires an unemployed actor to play her parent's idea of an ideal mate.
He pretends to be -- what else? -- a Jewish doctor.
As a former member of Chicago's Second City, the actor (Tom Hewitt) has learned to improvise under pressure, and in a series of skitlike scenes, he proves to be completely convincing as the daughter's suitor.
Though he himself is a WASP, the actor has learned a bit about Jewish customs and traditions from playing in "Fiddler on the Roof." As he confides to Ms.
Patinkin, "Topol thought I was Jewish." At a family dinner, he is called upon to say the prayer over wine, and to the daughter's amazement, his Hebrew turns out to be word perfect, and it is immediately followed by a remembered chorus of the song "L'Chaim."


C&amp;S/Sovran Resignation
Dennis C. Bottorff, president and chief operating officer of the C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation, announced yesterday that he would resign from the company to become chairman of the First American Corporation in Nashville.
When the 48-year-old Mr.
Bottorff became president of C&amp;S/Sovran in September 1990 he was regarded as a potential candidate for the top position in the nation's 12th largest bank holding company.


Doris Lilly, 69, Gossip Columnist Who Wrote of Millionaires, Dies
Doris Lilly, the author of "How to Marry a Millionaire" and a former newspaper society columnist, died on Wednesday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of cancer, said Kurt von Schuschnigg, a friend and the executor of her estate.


Tashkent Journal; A Dream of One Central Asia Under Islam's Banner
The young mullah bowed one more time on his knees, finished praying, sat on the edge of the mosque's expansive prayer mats and began talking in a hushed voice, his eyes often scanning the faces of those who passed through the hand-carved gates to the place of worship.
"We want an Islamic state," he said, his rarely tried English carrying him slowly through his ideas.
"Every person in their heart wants this. They want Islam in their homes. We want to live in a Muslim way."


The 49ers Miss Montana, But Know Life Goes On
Joe Montana is gone for this season, at least -- but life apparently still goes on at the San Francisco 49er camp.
There were television cameras everywhere, and there was even a news conference this morning to explain in detail the surgery in which a tendon was reattached to the 49er quarterback's right elbow.


Reynolds Case Spotlights Battle of the Regulators
An appeals panel finding last week that Butch Reynolds might be innocent of charges that he used an anabolic steroid before a race last year has raised important questions about an apparent conflict between United States law governing athletes' rights and the regulations of an international sports federation.
For Reynolds, the world-record holder at 400 meters, who was suspended for two years in August 1990 by the International Amateur Athletic Federation, attempts to overturn the ban through courts and the United States Olympic Committee have cost him more than a year of competition so far and untold thousands of dollars.


Corporate Economists Urge Further Easing by the Fed
A panel of economists from a score of the nation's biggest corporations recommended today that the Federal Reserve cut interest rates further to keep the recovery from stalling.
"Some further reduction in interest rates would be a prudent policy step to help assure that adequate growth does in fact occur," the economists said.
"Preventive action now is preferable to waiting until new weakness becomes apparent."


Cuomo Medicaid Plan: No Free Lunch
The beauty of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's ambitious plan to restructure the state's insatiable Medicaid system, at least according to the Governor and his aides, is that every county in the state would come out a winner.
"This is a plan that's very good for local governments," Mr.
Cuomo said today.
"You've got to come out at least even and probably make money."


An Invitation to New Bank Irregularities
To the Editor:
According to a House Banking Committee report, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency's decreased supervision of smaller banks and other questionable practices have resulted in billions of dollars in losses to this country's deposit insurance fund.


For Children
Golden-Headed Lion Tamarins
Central Park Zoo  64th Street and Fifth Avenue  (212) 439-6500  All ages
Two female golden-headed lion tamarins -- at two pounds each -- recently arrived at the Central Park Zoo.
The monkeys were donated by the Riverbanks Zoo in South Carolina to enlighten New Yorkers about this endangered species.
The best time to see BeBe and Peg is in the morning, when they're full of vim and vigor.
After lunch (crickets, worms, fruit and vegetables), the pair tend to get window shy and it becomes difficult to make their acquaintance.
Their home is behind a large glass exhibition in the zoo's Tropic Zone.
Their native habitat is in Brazil's southeastern coastal rain forest (these two, however, have always been in captivity), where this tamarins species is in peril.
Less than 1,000 are believed to exist worldwide; an international consortium of conservation groups has been working to save the remaining population.
What makes them so special?
They move like sparrows, have disproportionately long, delicate nails, fashionably coiffed orange manes and eyes that seem to bear the weight of the world.
The zoo is open daily from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Mondays through Fridays, 11 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. on weekends and holidays.
Starting in November and through March, the zoo is open from 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. daily.
Strollers are welcome and a cafeteria is on the premises.
Admission: $2.50 for adults, 50 cents for children 3 to 12.
Greenburgh Nature Center
Dromore Road, off Central Avenue  Greenburgh, N.Y.  (914) 723-3470  All ages
The 32.5-acre Greenburgh Nature Center is fond of boasting about its "animal museum," home to 126 animals, according to a recent census.
Most of the menagerie is inside the center's 1918 manor home, a rustic stone-and-shingle house.
This is virtually an indoor petting zoo, though the animal collection is indeed eclectic: no ponies here.
In two former bedrooms on the second floor (there is no elevator and visitors are asked to leave strollers downstairs), you can hold, stroke, even wrap around your neck in some cases, snakes, a ferret (who also likes to kiss), rats, mice, a chinchilla and turtles, among others.
There is also an African hedgehog, Yashka, whose back feels like a Brillo pad.
Yashka is old, having suffered a stroke and lost the use of her hind legs.
Squiggy, the snapping turtle, is not meant to be touched, unlike most of the other animals, and that goes for the baby timber rattlesnake and copperhead, both of which were found in Westchester County.
The iguanas are, of course, enigmatic, but the Burmese python is larger than one would expect.
On the grounds outside are a pet cemetery, chickens, rabbits, turkeys, hawks and a great horned owl whose brown eyes blink and mouth clicks when greeted.
The glass and wire cages indoors are arranged at a child's-eye level; most of the animals are meant to be touched and they all have names.
But that can be superfluous.
As a 4-year-old said, pointing to one resident: "It's a wattlesnake." The nature center is also ideal for a long walk along the bosky trails and for birthday parties in the house's sunny party room.
Restrooms and a water fountain are on the first floor.
The museum is open Mondays through Thursdays from 9:30 A.M. to noon and 1 to 4:30 P.M. and on Saturdays and Sundays from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Suggested contributions are $2 for adults and $1 for children. 'To Preserve Tibetan Culture'  'Monks Demonstrate a Modern Craft'
American Museum of Natural History  Central Park West at 79th Street  (212) 769-5800  Recommended ages: 3 and up  Through Nov. 8
Four Tibetan monks, sitting cross-legged on raised platforms, are diligently fashioning dolls to raise funds for the growing Buddhist monks' migration from Tibet into India.
Families can see the dolls being created -- from the carving and painting of the clay and paper heads to the sewing and beading of their elaborate silk brocade costumes -- every day except Monday, Columbus Day, from 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M., through Nov. 8.
The monks, from the Drepung Loseling monastery, formerly in Tibet but now in India, are paid a small stipend for their work.
They are here to tell New Yorkers about their plight after the Chinese takeover.
In addition to observing the monks busily working, four display cases of finished Losel dolls can be seen.
The "Picnic Scene" display, for example, shows noblemen and noblewomen relishing their picnic, a valued pastime in Tibet that can last up to 10 days.
The noble characters sit resplendent in costume and poise; their faces, like all the other dolls', are sensual, serene and unflappable, including the nurse's, who is busy taking care of the noble baby.
The noblemen even sport one earring, just like the women.
And the Lhasa apso in this picnic scene reminds viewers that these tiny dogss hail from a high plateau on the cusp of the Himalayas.
The suggested admission fee to the museum is $5 for adults and $2.50 for children.
The museum is open from 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
Sundays through Thursdays and until 8:45 P.M. on Fridays and Saturdays.
Information on purchasing the dolls, which cost about $500, can be obtained through the museum gift shop. 'Wild Lives'
Leo Castelli Gallery  420 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  (212) 431-5160  Recommended ages: 3 and up  Through tomorrow
Over two years, the artist Dianne Blell photographed Africa's vanishing wildlife, trekking alone or with African rangers and native trackers through the bush, savannahs and deserts of Kenya, Namibia, Mali, Rwanda, Tanzania and Zimbabwe.
The photographs she took of such endangered species as the elephant, mountain gorilla, rhinoceros and African painted wolf can be seen in this exhibition.
The color photographs are huge; many are close-up shots, allowing young viewers to see, for example, just how wrinkled an elephant's skin really is.
A detailed photograph of a female gorilla shows her caring but frightened eyes; a shot of a bull giraffe's snout reveals its similarities to a camel's.
Some youngsters get very excited over the lion pictures: in one, a lioness is devouring a buffalo, while another is sitting pretty after dinner.
This photograph may be slightly scary because of the blood, though children seem to accept it matter-of-factly.
Another photograph of youths forcing an elephant herd to retreat might stir children to cheer for the Africans, but also to empathize with the animals.
The second-floor gallery, reachable by elevator, is open from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Tuesdays through Saturdays.
KEEP IN MIND
"COLUMBUS," a new Theaterworks/USA musical about the explorer's life, with the focus on his passionate pursuit to find a new sea route to the East.
For children ages 8 and up.
Tomorrow and Sunday and Oct. 19, 20 and 26, at 12:30 P.M., Promenade Theater, Broadway at 76th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets, $15 and $13.
Information: (212) 677-5959.
THE BUGS BUNNY WORLD TOUR, featuring Bugs, Marvin the Martian and other Looney Tunes characters who travel around the planets and such Earth cities as Paris and San Francisco.
With computer-generated scenic productions and special props.
Tomorrow at 10:30 A.M., 2:30 and 7:30 P.M. and Sunday at 1:30 and 5:30 P.M.
At Madison Square Garden, 2 Pennsylvania Plaza, Manhattan.
Tickets, $20, $16, $10.
Information: (212) 465-6000 or (212) 307-7171.
THE POTATO PEOPLE, a musical camping adventure with Momma, Poppa and 3-year-old Nancy -- "Potato People" who look like potatoes but act like humans.
For children ages 3 to 8.
Sunday at 1:30 P.M. at the 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
Tickets, $12.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
"YOU WON'T BELIEVE THIS, BUT," a sneak preview of the Paper Bag Players' newest show, about a runaway leak that is chased by a plumber and caught when the audience lends a hand.
Featuring a little girl, a crocodile and a mystery at a country fair.
For children ages 4 to 9.
Sunday at 2 P.M. at the Henry Street Settlement, Louis Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand Street, Manhattan.
Tickets, $3 for adults; $2.50 for children.
Information: (212) 598-0400.
"JEWELS OF AUTUMN," the 87th annual flower and landscape fair at the Planting Fields Arboretum, featuring, for children, a scarecrow competition, hay rides, pumpkin sales, a petting zoo, a magician and a storyteller.
Today, tomorrow, Sunday and Monday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., at the arboretum, Planting Fields Road, Brookville, L.I.
Tickets, $5 on weekdays, $6 on weekends; children under 12 free.
Parking is free.
Information: (516) 922-9206.
CIRCUS VAUDEVILLE, with Michael Trautman showing off his vaudeville skills, which combine clowning, mime, magic, storytelling and juggling.
Sponsored by the Riverside Shakespeare Company; tomorrow and Oct. 19 at noon.
Tickets, $5 for adults, $4 for children 6 years old and up.
Information: (212) 307-7171.


Arrangers? What're They? Just Ask Rosemary Clooney
Rosemary Clooney's appearance at Carnegie Hall tomorrow evening has a significance that goes well beyond the fact that it marks her solo debut at the prestigious concert hall.
The singer will be joined by a 40-piece orchestra in a program that pays tribute to the unsung heroes of pre-rock music, the arrangers who wrapped the pop singers of the 1950's and 60's in the musical equivalent of silk, velvet and diamonds.


Libya Denies India Atom Link
Libya denied today that it had sought to buy nuclear weapons technology from India in the late 1970's.
Dr.
Abid Hussain, India's Ambassador to the United States, had said on Wednesday that Libya had offered a sum comparable to India's foreign debt in exchange for the technology.
But the Libyan Mission to the United Nations said this evening in a statement that Libya "has always firmly adhered" to arms control treaties and agreements.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the tone of the debate over Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court referred incorrectly in some copies to the year Geraldine Ferraro was the Democratic nominee for vice president.
It was 1984, not 1988.


U.N. Maps Plan to Nab Atomic Cheats
Stunned by Iraq's extensive violations of its pledge never to acquire nuclear weapons, the United Nations official charged with stopping the spread of such arms has asked government intelligence agencies to report suspected cheating by other countries and announced plans to check suspicious installations more agressively.
Hans Blix, the Director General of the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency, which is charged with enforcing the 1970 Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, said in an interview that he wants governments to give him any evidence they have of other countries violating the treaty.


Silver-Lining Deal Has Publisher Staying
After considering a move out of New York City, a major publishing concern, the Macmillan/McGraw-Hill School Division, has decided to relocate from Third Avenue to Union Square, long ago the hub of the nation's publishing industry.
The publisher, which has some 400 employees, is close to signing a lease for about one-third of the commercial base of Zeckendorf Towers, at 10 Union Square East, between 14th and 15th Streets.
The agreement may be the salvation of the office portion of the condominium building, whose sole tenant, Integrated Resources, filed for bankruptcy last year.


Quotations of the Day
"It's almost as if you're saying we have a serious disease and we'll spread it so everybody will suffer from it." -- Peter F. Vallone, the City Council Speaker, on the Dinkins plan for homeless shelters.  [ A1:2. ] "My job is not simply to do the politically palatable thing, but to do that which is in the interests of our city." -- Mayor Dinkins.  [ B2:1. ]


Corrections
A diagram in Science Times on Tuesday about humans' influence on Walden Pond, as shown by changes in its sediment -- and a correction in this space yesterday -- misidentified two lines showing measurements of different substances.
The dotted line referred to pollen from rumex, an edible herb that may have been cultivated by the Indians, and the light broken line referred to grass pollen.


Abroad at Home; Wages of Cynicism
There will be no happy ending to the Thomas nomination drama.
Not for the individuals involved.
Not for the institutions.
And not for us.
All have been hurt by what has happened in this extraordinary week, and all are likely to be hurt further: Judge Thomas.
His accuser, Prof.
Anita Hill.
President Bush.
The Senate.
And not least, the Supreme Court.


Trouble With Math
For someone who passed for more than a third of a mile in a game last Friday, JESSE WATTS is having a hard time making it into the high school record book.
Nobody seriously doubts that the Sheldon Clark High School quarterback from Inez, Ky., eclipsed the 636-yard mark set in 1966 by JAMES HOGAN JR.  of Newport News, Va.
It's just that its been a little hard to figure out exactly how far Watts did throw in the 61-16 victory over Allen Central and to prove it to the National Federation of State High Schools.
Some reports after the game said the total was 751 yards, but that may have been a simple error of arithmetic.


Art in Review
Elaine de Kooning  Washburn Gallery 41 West 57th Street Through Nov. 2
This remarkable group of 17 small and middle-size paintings on paper, discovered in Elaine de Kooning's studio after her death in 1989, was made during the summer of 1948, when the artist and her husband, Willem, were living and working at Black Mountain College in Asheville, N.C.
Fresh and lively, newly mounted on canvas and framed, they look almost too good to be true, adding to the history of Abstract Expressionism more than a footnote, if less than a whole new chapter.
Their carefully fitted forms -- half Cubist, half Surrealist -- reflect the influence of Arshile Gorky, John Graham and Mr. de Kooning himself, but they brim with a confidence entirely their own.
Their colors are clean and bright, with reds, pinks and yellows frequently dominating and, in the best, brushy whites or dark blues filling the interstices.
The smaller ones are especially good; in their fluid curves, several are eerily similar to Mr. de Kooning's most recent canvases.


Film Industry Portrays New York and Provides It With Jobs
To the Editor:
As a professional working member of New York City's film-making community, I am distressed by "Street Gangs From Hollywood" (Op-Ed, Sept. 30) by S. W. Stout.


Phone Logs Leave a Trail of Questions
To Senator John C. Danforth, the list of telephone calls that Anita F. Hill is said to have made to Judge Clarence Thomas in the last seven years is proof that their relationship was not embittered by a history of sexual harassment.
Professor Hill, in turn, has denounced the records to a reporter as "garbage" that proves nothing.
Their merits in the debate over Judge Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court remain to be determined.
But those parts of the disputed records that can be checked do appear to involve people, offices and telephone numbers known to Professor Hill, and, in some cases, events that are familiar to her as well.


Review/Art; Brooklyn Retrospective of the Mercurial Sigmar Polke
The retrospective of the German painter Sigmar Polke at the Brooklyn Museum is a Cinderella event.
On first impression, the show seems quiet and plain, even a little drab, but with time it reveals itself as an occasion of rather stunning beauty.
This is not too surprising.
Mr.
Polke, one of the most important artists of the postwar period, is known for works that at first appear inconsequential -- thin, chaotic and somewhat unfinished -- that seem to subvert and ridicule the very notion of making a painting, much less a masterpiece.
Adding to the initial ugly-duckling effect of many of the paintings is a general air of inconsistency and contradiction.
Mr.
Polke, whose achievement comes out of 60's Pop Art and sets the stage for 80's Neo-Expressionism, is an incorrigible quick-change artist; and thus the unfinished look that can momentarily unsettle his individual efforts is intensified throughout by a bewildering array of styles, techniques and materials.
As the 55 paintings in this show attest, he can move from abstraction to representation, from popular-culture images to art-historical motifs, from printed or stenciled scenes to expressionistic brushwork in a twinkling, and often within the same work.


Our Towns
Nearly nine years ago Lillian Chance's young nephew perished in a senseless auto accident.
His dying, actually prolonged by technologically amazing but vain attempts to resuscitate his body over many weeks, emotionally shattered the family on that sad second day of November.
Months later Ms.
Chance found herself sometimes unusually quick to anger, depression and frustration.
But as a psychiatric nurse, she was also intrigued.
She began tracking the course of her grief.
"It is a process," she says.
"We grieve piecemeal with steps forward and backward. It's not something anyone tidies up in a week."


Review/Fashion; Versace's Sexy Excess
Let the grandeur begin.
In the first days of the week of spring fashion showings, the emphasis was on secondary, more moderately priced collections by the big Italian houses.
There were also modest shows by companies that specialize in one area of fashion, like knitwear.
On Wednesday evening, Gianfranco Ferre, who also designs the Christian Dior collection, was the first of the grand-scale players to come to bat.
Krizia, which helped develop this city as Italy's fashion center, opened the games this morning.
But at noon, it was Gianni Versace who set off the first explosion of the season.
He showed a collection of gorgeous excess, mixing 18th-century romanticism with modern jeans.
Where other designers were tentative, he was forceful.
He displayed a complete understanding of what makes fashion work, both the rational and the irrational elements.
And so this collection will have a powerful influence.
Presented with such authority and conviction, it is destined to attract its own stream of followers.
Here is what to watch for.


New Witness Says She Is Willing to Corroborate Accusations by Professor
The new witness to emerge against Judge Clarence Thomas says he pressured her for dates, asked about the size of her breasts at a dinner and one night appeared unannounced at her apartment.
The witness, 37-year-old Angela Wright, is an assistant metropolitan editor at The Charlotte Observer in North Carolina and a former aide to Judge Thomas.
In an article in Friday's issue of The Observer, she said she did not want to derail Judge Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court but was willing to corroborate some of the behavior that formed the basis of Anita F. Hill's accusations.


AC&amp;R Losing Foster's As Conflict Issue Arises
AC&amp;R Advertising, New York, is losing its Foster's beer account, Bob Wilson, an executive vice president of Molson Breweries U.S.A., the United States importer of the Australian beer, said yesterday.
Mr.
Wilson attributed the decision to a possible conflict arising from last week's realignment of AC&amp;R with a sibling Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. agency, Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide.
AC&amp;R had been producing creative work for Foster's, while Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, Backer's domestic division, is an agency of the Miller Brewing Company.


Mets Make a Good Catch: Torborg as Manager
In what amounts to a significant and startling coup, the Mets will announce today that they have hired Jeff Torborg to be their next manager.
The hiring means that the organization not only kept its search for a replacement for Bud Harrelson short, but also landed one of the more highly regarded managers in baseball.
Torborg, who was under contract to the Chicago White Sox but who had received that organization's blessing to negotiate with the Mets, met with Mets officials on Wednesday and completed the terms of his deal yesterday.


Why Wait? Messier for Mayor, and Anything Else He Wants to Be
Here in New York, sports superstars are not dropped on our doorstep or stuffed down our chimney nearly often enough.
For putting up with alternate-side-of-the-street parking and a decaying public school system, we deserve Michael Jordan, Jose Canseco and Rocket Ismail, at the very least.
But in recent decades, there simply have not been enough teams out there like the 1920 Boston Red Sox, anxious to hand over Babe Ruth for $125,000, no draft picks and the rights to nobody.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
September sales were even weaker than expected, the nation's largest retailers reported, heightening concern that consumer spending would not pick up in time to prevent a third disappointing Christmas in a row.  [ Page D1. ]
The Fed should cut interest rates further to keep the recovery from stalling, a panel of economists from a score of big corporations recommended.  [ D5. ]
New applications for unemployment insurance rose again in late September, by 5,000, the Labor Dept. said.  [ D5. ] Markets
The S.E.C. approved early-morning trading in over-the-counter stocks.
The new session, from 3:30 A.M. to 9 A.M., is a step toward round-the-clock trading in the U.S. and is aimed at recapturing business now on the London markets.  [ D1. ]
Stock prices rose strongly, despite growing concern about earnings.
The Dow gained 30.19, to 2,976.52.  [ D6. ]
The sell-off in the Treasury bond market continued, as inflation worries prompted speculators and retail accounts alike to sell long-term securities.  [ D13. ]
Grain traders were stunned by a U.S. report that put the soybean crop nearly 70 million bushels above estimates.  [ D14. ]  The dollar settled mostly higher.  [ D14. ] Companies
J.
P.
Morgan announced a record profit, largely as the result of increased earnings in a wide range of trading activities.
Bank of New York announced lower profits, and Wachovia reported slightly improved earnings.  [ D1. ]
The bidding for Executive Life of California heated up as two new bids were announced, bringing the total to four.  [ D1. ]
Intel said its earnings for the quarter rose 17 percent from a year ago but were down from the second quarter, because of sluggish demand for some products.  [ D4. ]
Potamkin Cadillac-Buick-Chevrolet is scheduled to open on Tuesday at the same stand where Victor Potamkin sold Cadillacs from 1972 to 1987.
Cadillac officials have decided that the 80-year-old Potamkin, with his flashy pitch, knows New Yorkers.  [ D1. ]
The California Coastal Commission rejected a proposal to allow Pebble Beach's Japanese owner to sell costly memberships.  [ D2. ]
Michael Rooney has been appointed publisher of Discover, Disney said.
He is now publisher of Men's Health.  [ D15. ]
Staff members of The Arkansas Gazette, a pair of Hollywood producers and some others are trying to put together a last-minute buyout of the paper from Gannett.  [ D15. ]
Texas Instruments said more employees than expected had accepted a voluntary retirement program and the higher costs would result in a $55 million charge.  [ D4. ] International
Kuwait announced that it would borrow $5 billion as a first phase of a loan program to pay for rebuilding the war-ravaged country.  [ D1. ]
The Group of Seven plans to discuss Soviet aid at a meeting of finance ministers in Bangkok.  [ A10. ] Today's Columns
With the end of the cold war, hundreds of thousands of men and women in the armed forces will be looking for jobs in the private economy.
Leonard Silk: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
William E. Simon has backed out of his most recent venture because of growing differences with Gerald L. Parsky, a longtime partner.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]
Chiat/Day/Mojo named Joel Babbit, president of Babbit &amp; Reiman in Atlanta, as executive vice president and general manager in New York.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D15. ]


Group in Last-Minute Effort To Buy Arkansas Gazette
Some staff members of The Arkansas Gazette plus a pair of Hollywood producers who have a home in Little Rock, Ark., and some other local people are trying to put together a last-minute buyout of the paper from the Gannett Company.
The Gazette is Arkansas's liberal voice and, founded in 1819, is an institution older than the state itself.


SYRIA TO BOYCOTT REGIONAL SEGMENT OF MIDEAST TALKS
Syria has informed the United States that it does not intend to participate in one of the three phases of the American-crafted Middle East peace talks, a move that American officials fear may induce other Arab countries to remain on the sidelines and make the negotiations less appealing for Israel.
According to Middle Eastern diplomats and American officials, the Syrians told Washington that they do not plan to take part in the negotiations involving Israel and other countries about regional problems -- like water rights, economic development and arms control.
The United States had envisioned these discussons as an important accompaniment to the direct, one-to-one negotiations between Jerusalem and Damascus.


Barrington Journal; Family of 3 Vanished, Town Loses Tranquillity
It has not been an ordinary autumn for residents of this exclusive Providence suburb, known for its colonial mansions lining the pristine shores of Narragansett Bay.
In the last two weeks, Coast Guard helicopters have hovered overhead as body-sniffing police dogs, Federal Bureau of Investigation agents and state and the local police combed tree-lined streets, wooded areas and ponds in search of a family that has been missing since Sept. 20.


Review/Photography; Computer Alterations: Control for the Artist
Everyone, it seems, expects computers to change photography, but no one is really sure just how -- or whether the change will be a good thing.
Some people contend that because altering photographs is becoming much easier with computers, the medium is losing its authority as a record of reality.
In the future, the argument goes, no one will know for sure whether news photographs have been changed or how.
Other observers, concerned less with journalistic uses of photography than with its role as an art medium, are more optimistic.
Many see computers as a powerful new artistic tool that will enable photographers to shape their images with unprecedented control.


Dollar Is Higher on Concern Over Yeltsin's Whereabouts
The dollar settled mostly higher in volatile trading yesterday as a result of rumors that the Russian President was missing.
Gold prices declined after rising overseas.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold bullion for current delivery slipped 70 cents to settle at $358.80.
The Republic National Bank quoted a late bid price of $358.30, off 70 cents an ounce from Wednesday.


Books of The Times; Why the Dreyfus Affair Rings Through History
Dreyfus  A Family Affair, 1789-1945  By Michael Burns  576 pages. HarperCollins. $30.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Penguins Win on Road Larry Murphy scored two goals as the Pittsburgh Penguins defeated the Flyers, 6-3, last night in Philadelphia.
Pittsburgh led by 4-2 at 7 minutes 40 seconds of the third period when Murphy was given credit for a power-play goal off the skates of Philadelphia's Steve Duchesne. (AP) Blues 3, Oilers 2: Brett Hull scored with 29 seconds left in overtime, but the hero in the home victory for St.
Louis was Paul Cavallini, who had two third-period goals to tie the score and had an assist on the game-winner.
The second of Cavallini's two power-play goals came with 6:05 left in regulation. ws(AP) Blackhawks 7, Canucks 6: Steve Larmer scored three times as Chicago won at home for its first victory this season.
Larmer scored in the first period, then twice in a five-goal second period that rallied the Blackhawks from a 3-1 deficit. (AP) Canadiens 4, Red Wings 1: Montreal's Denis Savard and Guy Carbonneau scored breakaway goals in the third period to hand Detroit the loss in its home opener. (AP) North Stars 3, Nordiques 2: Stewart Gavin, who scored only four goals last season, scored twice for Minnesota in Bloomington, Minn. (AP) GOLF Daly and Lietzke, Again In what looked like a replay of their P.G.A.
Championship competition two months ago, John Daly was in the lead and Bruce Lietzke in pursuit yesterday after two rounds of the five-day 90-hole Las Vegas Invitational.
Daly, who the P.G.A. over Lietzke, finished birdie-birdie-birdie-eagle-birdie -- six under par over the last five holes -- for a nine-under round of 63 at the Las Vegas Country Club.
That put him two strokes ahead with a 36-hole total of 129.
Lietzke also shot a 63, at the Sunrise Golf Club, and was tied at 131 with Craig Stadler, who shot 64 at Desert Inn. (AP) U.S.
Advances in Dunhill Cup: Fred Couples and Steve Pate lifted the top-seeded United States to a 2-1 victory over Korea in the first round of the Dunhill Cup tournament in St.
Andrews, Scotland.
Couples shot a one-under-par 71 to defeat Kang Sun Lee by five strokes, while Pate edged Nam Sin Park, 70-71.
Team captain Curtis Strange lost the other match, 72-74, to Sang Ho Choi.
The Americans advanced to a second-round match against South Africa, which edged Switzerland in a playoff. (AP) HORSE RACING A Case of Who Won It?
Robert Spiegel's Club Champ, a 9-1 shot, took the lead in midstretch and went on to a 2 1/4-length victory in the Whodunit Handicap at Belmont Park yesterday.
Carrying 112 pounds with Angel Cordero Jr. aboard, the winner covered six furlongs on the Widener turf course in 1:081/5 .
Hadif finished second in the nine-horse field, a half-length ahead of Kate's Valentine. (AP) World Record for Eton Lad: British-bred Eton Lad set a world record in his American debut by winning the $46,000 Oak Tree turf feature by two lengths at Santa Anita Park in Arcadia, Calif.
The 4-year-old colt was ridden by Gary Stevens and covered a mile and an eighth on a firm course in 1:44, breaking by four-fifths of a second the mark set by Frosty the Snowman at Woodbine in 1989 and tied by Exclusive Partner at Santa Anita last year. (AP)


Columbus Day Parades
Three Columbus Day parades are planned in New York City.
On Sunday in the Bronx, a parade will set off at noon from White Plains Road and Morris Park Avenue and will travel up Morris Park Avenue and Williamsbridge Road to Pelham Parkway South in the Morris Park section.
The Hispanic Columbus Day Parade, in Manhattan on Sunday, marches up Fifth Avenue from 44th Street to 72d Street, starting at 12:30 P.M.
On Monday in Manhattan, Joe DiMaggio will lead the city's biggest Columbus Day Parade.
It will start at 11:30 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street and will march up the avenue to 86th Street.


A Historic Lodge Is Protected From Forest Fire


BRIEFS
*
Acentech Inc., Cambridge, Mass., a company specializing in architectural acoustics, said its senior management had purchased a majority interest in the company from Bolt, Beranek &amp; Newman Inc., Cambridge, a communications, research and phsyical sciences concern.
Terms were not disclosed.
Bolt, Beranek still holds a 20 percent stake. *
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., New York, the pharmaceuticals and personal-care products company, reached an agreement with 10 states to stop making claims that certain hair sprays and cleaning products are environmentally safe.


Bridge
The United States captured one title at the NEC World Championships here tonight while Iceland headed confidently for another.
Winners of the Venice Cup for Women's Teams were Lynn Deas, Stasha Cohen, Sue Picus, Sharon Osberg, Nancy Passell and Nell Cahn, with Kathie Wei as nonplaying captain.
Their winning margin over Austria was exactly 100 imps at the end of a match of 128 deals.
Deas gained her third straight Venice Cup title.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption in Business Day on Wednesday about the effects of recession on Presidential elections referred incorrectly to the voting of 1876, during a recession.
The incumbent party was re-elected: Rutherford B. Hayes, a Republican, received the most electoral votes and succeeded Ulysses S. Grant.
But Samuel J. Tilden, a Democrat, received more popular votes, fitting the pattern in which challengers receive more votes during recessions.


GERMANS CONSIDER REFUGEES' CAMPS
German politicians failed today to resolve their differences over how to deal with the wave of asylum-seekers arriving here, but raised the possibility of temporarily housing them in enclosed camps.
A Government spokesman said the Interior Ministry had already drawn up lists of sites that "theoretically could be used as collection camps for asylum-seekers." Most are now being used as German, American, French, British and Soviet military bases.


Queens Man Is Held in Rape At St. John's Athletic Center
A 17-year-old freshman at St.
John's University said she was raped Wednesday in the school's student athletic center by a man whom she had known for several weeks, the police said yesterday.
The lawyer for the 21-year-old suspect, who was arrested early yesterday morning, said in court that his client had told him he was a St.
John's student on leave from the school for the current semester.
But a spokesman for the university said a search of school records showed that nobody with the arrested man's name, Keith Howie, had ever been a student there.


Jacques August Mitchell 3d; Realtor, 57
Jacques August Mitchell 3d, a Westchester County realtor who was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II for his work with the Episcopal Church, died yesterday at his home in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 57 years old.
He died after a long illness, said Lesa Janklow, a spokeswoman for Houlihan-Lawrence Inc.
Mr.
Mitchell was chairman of the company.


Review/Art; At New Gallery, 19th-Century Works
There is a new gallery in town, and its inaugural exhibition of drawings is giving great pleasure to visitors who know that in spite of its universal popularity, the French 19th century in many of its aspects is still one of the great undiscovered periods in European art.
The gallery in question is called Hazlitt, Gooden &amp; Fox, and it can be found at 125 East 62d Street. (The location is owed to a friendly association with Wheelock Whitney, the scholar and dealer who has been in business for some years at 123 East 62d.)


Metro Datelines; Police Detective Hurt in Shootout
A New York City police detective was seriously wounded yesterday afternoon in a shootout in Brooklyn with a suspect in a bank robbery.
The officer, Detective Charles Jardines, 30 years old, was shot three times.
He in turn wounded the man he was chasing, shooting him in the buttocks, said First Deputy Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly.


Major Networks to Cover Hearings on Judge Thomas
The Senate hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court will be broadcast by the three major networks starting 10 A.M.
Eastern time today, a move the networks said could be costly because the decision means pre-empting their daytime shows for coverage of the hearings.
Depending on how long the networks choose to keep the hearings on the air, they each could lose up to $2 million.


U.S. Policy Drove Chaplin Into His Exile
To the Editor:
Your obituary article on Oona O'Neill Chaplin (Sept. 28) contained one factual error and one extremely misleading statement that borders on the rewriting of history.
Chaplin returned in triumph to the United States in 1972, not 1975.
The circumstances of his leaving in 1952, however, were far more complicated than going "into self-imposed exile," as you suggest.


Sports of The Times; Torborg Not Enough For Mets
THROUGH his years in baseball as a manager, coach and catcher, Jeff Torborg has been poised and polished.
But until now, nobody realized he was so brave.
As the Mets' new manager, with a reported four-year, $1.5 million contract, Jeff Torborg has a team that needs more than a new manager.
If the Mets are to compete for the National League East title next season, the entire team must be retooled, if not reconstructed.


Metro Datelines; Parade Chairman Is Re-elected
Frank Beirne, a retired Transit Authority worker who has resisted efforts by an Irish gay group to march in the St.
Patrick's Day parade, was elected last night to a third term as chairman of the parade committee.
Mr.
Beirne and the nine other members of the committee were chosen without opposition at a meeting of the Ancient Order of Hibernians and other groups affiliated with the parade.


Accounts
*
Celestial Seasonings Inc., Boulder, Colo., to Ally &amp; Gargano Inc., New York, for its $5 million advertising account.
The company said the assignment followed a mutual agreement by Celestial and its previous agency, Goldberg Moser O'Neill Advertising, San Francisco, to terminate the relationship because of what it called "strategic differences."  *
Pactel Cellular's Atlanta and North Georgia service areas to Fitzgerald &amp; Co., Atlanta, which estimated billings at $2 million to $3 million.
The account previously was handled by Babbit &amp; Reiman Advertising Inc., Atlanta, the agency said.


Bo Jackson Flunks His Raiders Physical
BO JACKSON, the two-sport star who played the final month of the baseball season for the Chicago White Sox while recovering from a hip injury, has flunked his physical with the Los Angeles Raiders and will not play football this season.
Or maybe ever again.
"Our doctors are not optimistic," Raiders executive assistant AL LoCASALE said yesterday.
"His doctor has not closed the door on 1992; our doctors are less optimistic. He will continue the physical rehabilitation program that he has been going through. His rehabilitation will be monitored."


Short-Order Cookery And Dreams of Love
"FRANKIE AND JOHNNY IN THE CLAIR DE LUNE," the one-set, two-character play by Terrence McNally, starts out where most love stories end up: in bed, with its newly united hero and heroine apparently in a position to start living happily ever after.
In a more traditional play they might do that, but Mr.
McNally regards the process of finding one's knight in shining armor as a lot more problematic than it used to be.
And these days both men and women are likely to resist taking off their armor anyhow.
"Are you keeping some big secret from me?" Frankie asks during the play.
"It's more like I'm keeping several thousand little ones," Johnny answers.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.06
5.06
7.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.02
5.01
7.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.06
5.06
7.15
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.28
7.24
8.66
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.95
7.91
8.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.06
9.03
10
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.89
6.88
7.84
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellweather bonds, notes and bills


J. P. Morgan Posts Record Earnings
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company yesterday announced a record quarterly profit, largely as the result of increased earnings in a wide range of trading activities.
Among other banking companies to report earnings, the Bank of New York Company announced lower profits as it charged off a loss on more bad loans.
But the company said its holdings of troubled loans fell for the second consecutive quarter.


Metro Datelines; A Suspect in Slaying Arrested in Georgia
A Florida man charged with speeding in a white van in Georgia has been arrested in the execution-style slaying of an Israeli visitor in New York, the New York City police said last night.
A routine computer check by the Georgia authorities had shown that the van, with New York plates, had been identified by witnesses as the killer's getaway car.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-11
Syria partially withdrew from talks crafted by America to promote peace in the Middle East, in a move that U.S. officials fear may induce other Arab countries to remain on the sidelines and make the negotiations less appealing for Israel.
Page A1
Iraq's nuclear weapons program has spurred the United Nations to redouble its efforts in checking whether countries are complying with their pledge not to develop nuclear weapons.
A10


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Fireman's Fund Mortgage Corp. priced $160 million in notes due 2001 through Lehman Brothers to yield 8.881 percent.
Noncallable, the insurance company unit's bonds are rated A-3 by Moody's and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Profits Rise At Microsoft And at Intel
The Intel Corporation, the leading supplier of microprocessors for personal computers, said today that its earnings for the third quarter of 1991 rose 17 percent from a year ago but were down from the second quarter, because of sluggish demand for some microprocessors and other products.
The earnings were better than expected, and Intel's stock rose $3.50 today, to $42, in over-the-counter trading.
Last month, when Intel said it expected disappointing earnings, its stock fell $6.75 in one day, to $43, and has not traded above that level since.


A Private Person in a Storm: Anita Faye Hill
Anita Faye Hill, the Oklahoma law professor who has ignited a firestorm over Washington is a product of both a dusty farm at the end of a dirt road and the neo-Gothic courtyards of the Yale Law School.
She worked for the Reagan Administration, yet she holds up Eleanor Roosevelt as an example of moral courage.


Port Authority Gives Orders to Strengthen Its Plane Noise Rules
Setting the stage for a possible confrontation with the Bush Administration, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey yesterday ordered its staff to draft noise rules for airplanes that are stiffer than those issued last month by Federal regulators.
The Port Authority's board of commissioners acted although the Federal Transportation Department has warned local governments that it would not welcome such efforts.


Coach's Loose Lips Could Sink Steelers
One of the first things a coach in any sport tells his players is to say nothing to incite the opposition.
Chuck Noll, the Pittsburgh Steelers' coach, violated that rule in his Monday news conference.
Noll was asked about this Monday night's game in Pittsburgh between the Steelers and the Super Bowl champion Giants.


The Spoken Word
OPERA DISCUSSION, Lincoln Center, Samuel B. and David Rose Building, 165 West 65th Street, Manhattan.
The director and choreographer Bill T. Jones, the composer Leroy Jenkins and the librettist Ann T. Greene will discuss "The Mother of Three Sons," today at 6 P.M.
Their work is to have its premiere at the New York City Opera on Oct. 19.
Tickets, $13.
Information: (212) 875-5440.
WALKING TOURS AND LECTURE, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Peddler's Pack" walking tour, Sunday at noon, followed at 1 P.M. by "La Dolce Via," a walk through Little Italy, and at 2 P.M., "House of Heritage," a slide presentation about the history of the museum building and its inhabitants.
Fee for each walking tour: $12 ($10 for the elderly and students); lecture, $4.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"American Life in American Art" by Amy Winter, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "John Baldessari" by Ms.
Winter, tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.
GALLERY TALKS, Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street.
"Looking at Modern Art: Abstraction" by Wendy Belser, today at noon; "Matisse" by Gail Stavitsky, today at 1 P.M.; "Primitivism in Modern Art" by Ms.
Stavitsky, today at 3 P.M.; "American Art After World War II" by Julie Reiss, tomorrow at 1 P.M.; "The 1960's: Art and Rebellion" by Ms.
Reiss, tomorrow at 3 P.M.; "American Art: 1940-1960" by Ms.
Stavitsky, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "Selections From the Drawings Collection" by Ms.
Stavitsky, Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free under age 16).
Information: (212) 708-9480.


Economic Scene; Army of Veterans Will Need Jobs
WITH the end of the cold war, hundreds of thousands of men and women attached to the United States armed forces will be looking for jobs in the private economy.
Before President Bush took the initiative for sharp reductions in tactical nuclear forces, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney had laid out a plan for reducing the armed forces by more than half a million from its present level of about two million.
Of that total, the Army would cut military personnel by 245,000, the Navy by 77,000, the Marine Corps by 28,000 and the Air Force by 170,000.


INSIDE
Stock Trading With a Yawn
To restore global competitiveness to the nation's stock markets, the S.E.C. approved over-the-counter trading starting at 3:30 A.M Page D1.
Anemic Sales in September
Raising concern about the Christmas season, the nation's biggest retailers mostly reported weaker-than-expected sales last month.
Page D1.
Kuwait Seeking $5 Billion
In what would be the largest single loan to a country ever, Kuwait plans to borrow $5 billion to help rebuild the war-ravaged land.
Page D1.
Old Master Acquisition
A group of Old Master drawings from the collection of the late real estate developer Ian Woodner has gone to the National Gallery of Art.
Page C3.
Braves Get Even
Steve Avery pitched Atlanta to a 1-0 victory, tying the National League playoff series with Pittsburgh at 1-1.
SportsFriday, page B9.


Fills No. 2 Job In New York
CHIAT/DAY/MOJO INC. has turned South to find an advertising executive it hopes will sustain the comeback momentum of its New York office.
Jay Chiat, chairman and chief executive at Chiat/Day's Venice, Calif., headquarters, announced yesterday that Joel Babbit, president of Babbit &amp; Reiman Advertising Inc. in Atlanta, would become the agency's executive vice president and general manager in New York.
Mr.
Babbit, whose appointment surprised many advertising people, is expected to arrive at the agency's Manhattan office in about a month.


2 More Groups Submit Bids For Troubled Executive Life
The bidding for the troubled Executive Life Insurance Company of California heated up yesterday, as two new bids were announced.
That brought the total number of announced bidders to four.
At least two more bidders are expected to submit offers by the deadline today at 4 P.M., Pacific time, set by the California Department of Insurance, which took over Executive Life in April amid its mounting losses in junk bonds.


Abbado Quits Vienna Opera
The conductor Claudio Abbado resigned yesterday as music director of the Vienna State Opera for what he described in his resignation letter as "health reasons." Mr.
Abbado has been director of the company since 1986.
His contract runs through 1997.
Mr.
Abbado canceled performances of Wagner's "Lohengrin" in September because of what a company associate described as exhaustion, but he continued rehearsing a new production of Mussorgsky's "Boris Godunov" and conducted the opening performance on Sunday.


Publisher of Men's Health Appointed to Discover Post
Michael Rooney, the publisher of Men's Health, has been appointed publisher of Discover, the Walt Disney Company said yesterday.
The general-interest science magazine, a monthly, was acquired in September by Disney after Family Media Inc. went out of business.
In 1986, Mr.
Rooney was involved in the start-up of Men's Health, a Rodale Press publication aimed at the baby-boom generation, which is marching toward its 40's with increasing awareness of its own mortality.
The magazine struck a chord and despite the industry slump has grown steadily in circulation and advertising.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Named Don Zimmer third base coach and Rich Gale pitching coach.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Sent Garland Kiser and Eric Stone, pitchers, outright to Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Placed Rick Dempsey, catcher, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Fired Jim Lefebvre, manager, and Mike Paul, pitching coach.
National League
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Sent Greg McCarthy, pitcher, outright to Indianapolis of the American Association.
NEW YORK METS -- Announced that Rick Cerone, catcher, refused assignment and became a free agent.
Midwest League
QUAD CITY ANGELS -- Announced they are changing their name to the Quad City River Bandits.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Agreed on a contract extension with Jeff Turner, forward.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Signed Hersey Hawkins, guard, to a 4-year contract extension.
Waived Mike Goodson, guard.
Continental Basketball Association
FORT WAYNE FURY -- Signed Tony Karesek, center.
LA CROSSE CATBIRDS -- Signed Baskerville Holmes, forward.
WICHITA FALLS -- Signed Robert Youngblood, forward.
COLLEGE  NEW YORK COLLEGIATE ATHLETIC CONFERENCE -- Elected Christopher Bledsoe chairman; Robert Hartwell vice chairman; Clyde Doughty secretary, and Vin Salamone treasurer.
COLLEGIATE TRACK CONFERENCE -- Announced the addition of St.
Francis, N.Y. to its membership.
GRACE -- Named Don Gordon baseball coach.
STONY BROOK -- Named Bernard Tomlin men's basketball coach.


At the Bar; In a confirmation battle filled with Yaliles, the law school's dean is caught in the crossfire.
Judge Clarence Thomas went to Yale Law School.
So did John C. Danforth, his chief sponsor in the United States Senate.
So did Anita F. Hill, the law professor who has accused Judge Thomas of sexual harassment.
So did Guido Calabresi, the law school's dean.
If Yale Law School, a place that hasn't always deigned to deal with anything as prosaic as life on earth, is all over the still-unfolding Thomas drama, Mr.
Calabresi is at its epicenter.
He is perhaps the only person who can attest to the sterling characters of both Judge Thomas and Professor Hill, and has done so.


Dentists' Group Offers No List For AIDS Risk
The nation's largest organization of dentists said yesterday that it was unable to draw up a list of procedures believed to pose a high risk of transmitting the AIDS virus to patients as Federal health officials had requested.
The group, the American Dental Association, said there was no scientifically valid way of defining certain surgical procedures as more likely to transmit the AIDS virus to patients than others.
When Federal health officials issued guidelines for health-care workers last July, they asked all organizations of health professionals to list what they considered high-risk "exposure-prone" procedures.


No Charges Against Cone
The Phialdelphia police yesterday ended their rape investigation involving David Cone and said no charges would be filed against the Mets pitcher.
"The sex crimes unit of the Philadelphia Police Department has completed an extensive investigation of rape against David Cone," said Capt.
Richard Bullick, commanding officer of the sex crimes unit.
"It has concluded, as has the District Attorney's office, that the allegations made by a New Jersey woman are unfounded and that no arrest will be made."


A Word of Advice To Managers: Duck
It started way back in April, when Nick Leyva of the Phillies, very much against his will, was fired and replaced as manager by Jim Fregosi.
Then it was Zimmer to Essian, Rodgers to Runnells, Robinson to Oates, Wathan to McRae, McNamara to Hargrove, Rader to Rodgers, and for a week, Harrelson to Cubbage.
Quite a handoff, but as far as major league baseball was concerned, we hadn't seen anything yet.
This week, supposedly one in which baseball's best and brightest alone hold center stage, has been a carnage when it comes to managerial changes.
Four in four days bit the dust, starting with Stump Merrill of the Yankees on Monday, then Joe Morgan of the Red Sox on Tuesday, Tom Trebelhorn of the Brewers on Wednesday and Jim Lefebvre of the Mariners yesterday.


Payoff Charge In Buyout Case
A former portfolio manager for Fidelity Investments, the nation's biggest mutual fund company, was indicted yesterday for taking payoffs from Drexel Burnham Lambert in exchange for buying junk bonds through Drexel for her customers.
Patricia Ostrander, 53 years old, of Brookline, Mass., was named in a three-count indictment charging her with taking the unlawful payments, receiving valuable property in connection with her management of pension plan investments and failing to report her personal purchase of securities to Boston-based Fidelity.


Review/Art; Splendors of Spain's Monarchs
THE tapestry depicts a parade of hundreds of armored troops on horseback, their lances turning the empty plains of the foreground into a forest extending toward the city of Barcelona and the snow-capped mountains beyond.
At the center of the scene rides Charles V, gilded mace in his right hand, an imperturbable leader surveying the events unfolding around him.
"The Review of the Troops at Barcelona" is the second in the series of 12 tapestries celebrating his victorious expedition in 1535 against the Turks and their powerful Sultan, Suleyman the Magnificent.
Made of Granada silks, French wool and threads of gold and silver, the tapestries were the most expensive that Charles ever commissioned.
They were on a scale to match the grandeur of his position as King of Spain and Holy Roman Emperor.
"The Review of the Troops" stretches more than 23 feet across and is more than 17 feet high.


An Iraqi's Dying Plea Goes Unheeded


Dow Climbs 30.19; Program Trading Cited
Stock prices rose strongly yesterday, despite growing investor concern about the prospect of lower corporate earnings.
After a lackluster morning and early afternoon, the Dow Jones industrial average surged to close at 2,976.52, up 30.19 points.
Analysts said the increase was largely a result of program trading.
Indeed, Birinyi Associates, which tracks program trading, said computer-driven trading accounted for about 87 percent of the Dow's ascent.


Knicks and Fans Face Test in Exhibition Tonight
In a game that will feature more intrigue than the typical preseason game, the Knicks will open their exhibition season at Madison Square Garden on Friday night against the Dallas Mavericks.
It will be Pat Riley's first game as the Knicks' coach.
Xavier McDaniel, Greg Anthony and Tim McCormick will make their Knick debuts.
And Patrick Ewing will appear before a home crowd for the first time since his unsettling off season, in which he lost an arbitration case against the Knicks and turned down the Knicks' six-year, $33 million contract offer.


Biden, Women's Rights Advocate, Finds His Sensitivity Questioned
Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. plays down the notion that his career could be damaged by the outcome of the Senate Judiciary Committee's hearings into the sexual harassment accusations against Judge Clarence Thomas.
"When you are in public office long enough, you get people to see a motion picture of you and not just stills," said Mr.
Biden, the chairman of the Judiciary Committee.
"If it is concluded at the end of the process that I did not do well, I believe that would not guarantee my demise with women anymore than if I did brilliantly." Credibility Gap on Sensitivity
Senator Biden's personal life and career have had many ups and downs, from his election to the Senate at the age of 29, to a car accident that killed his first wife and 1-year-old daughter, to a Presidential candidacy that capsized under doubts cast about his character, to two life-threatening aneurysms on his brain.
Now the Senate's champion of women's rights at home and in the workplace is confronted with a credibility gap on his personal sensitivity.
He faces widespread criticism among women inside and outside Congress that he did not take seriously enough the accusations of sexual harassment against Judge Thomas by a former aide, Anita F. Hill.
And he faces irritation on the part of some colleagues that his handling of the issue left them in the dark to cast votes they might have deeply regretted later.
In a telephone interview Wednesday night, Mr.
Biden made it clear that he viewed the problem before him as how to walk the fine line between guaranteeing that a person who sexually harassed a colleague did not acquire a lifetime appointment to the Supreme Court and fairly treating both Mr.
Thomas and Ms.
Hill.
"I must start off with a presumption of giving the person accused the benefit of the doubt," he said.
"I must seek the truth and I must ask straightforward and tough questions and in my heart I know if that woman is telling the truth it will be almost unfair to her. On the other hand, if I don't ask legitimate questions, then I am doing a great injustice to someone who might be totally innocent. It's a horrible dilemma because you have two lives at stake here."
Others see his problem, and that of the male-dominated Senate, differently.
Critics and female lawmakers on Capitol Hill say even such a supporter of liberal tenets as the Delaware Democrat can be myopic when dealing with the realities of daily life.
"I think Senator Biden has a very good track record on many issues concerning women," said Representative Nita M. Lowey, Democrat of New York.
"But too often men who may be very caring don't understand the severity of sexual harassment."
Mr.
Biden insisted that in not making Ms.
Hill's charges public he was only trying to respect Ms.
Hill's pleas to his staff in early September that she remain anonymous.
Noting that Ms.
Hill requested that he not even tell Judge Thomas the identity of the person making the accusations, he said: "The fundamental thing comes down to this: Does any senator have the right to play God with this woman's life? She knows that this is going to significantly change her life. And she chose not to be willing to undergo that." Mr.
Biden also said he felt strongly that Judge Thomas should be protected against anonymous allegations. 'Seems He Made Wrong Choice'
Ms.
Hill has said she tried to persuade Senate aides to notify all Judiciary Committee members of her accusations for weeks before the Senate was scheduled to vote on Judge Thomas's confirmation on Tuesday, and not at the 11th hour as Mr.
Biden has suggested.
Mr.
Biden told reporters today that if he had to conduct the hearings again, he would not change the decisions he made.
Mr.
Biden said the Thomas case had created the toughest ethical choice he had faced that came to light publicly.
On other occasions as Judiciary Committee chairman, he said he had been made aware of unsubstantiated reports of wrongdoings by nominees that he did not divulge in order to protect their reputations.


Re-evaluating Smith
Buffalo Bills defensive end BRUCE SMITH, who has played in only one game since undergoing preseason knee surgery, has gone back to Alabama to be re-evaluated by the surgeon, JAMES ANDREWS.
Smith, whose knee was inflamed after the Bears game two weeks ago, hasn't practiced or played since. (AP)


Palestinians Should Accept Israeli Settlers
To the Editor:
I heartily endorse President Bush's decision, and your support of that decision ("President Bush Is Right," editorial, Sept. 17), to delay the $10 billion loan guarantees to Israel by tying them to restrictions on Israeli settlements in the occupied territories.
However, I believe it would be a very wise move on the part of the Arabs -- of Palestinians in particular -- to express readiness to accept the Jewish settlers domiciled in the occupied territories, under international guarantees of basic human rights and their ultimate acceptance as citizens of a sovereign Palestinian state on more or less the same conditions under which nearly 600,000 Palestinian Arabs have been granted full-fledged citizenship in Israel.


A Case Study of Sexual Harassment
The sexual harassment case that brought Patricia Kidd a $300,000 jury verdict last year was an egregious one: She complained that her supervisor at the District of Columbia's Department of Administrative Services, Melvin Carter, had threatened to fire her if she would not have sex with him.
Ms.
Kidd, a single mother with two children, submitted.
Lindsey Allison, a dog handler for the Long Beach, Calif., Police Department, won a $1.4 million verdict last month after showing that her fellow officers had told graphic sex stories, kept pornographic magazines and films at work and urinated in her presence.


On My Mind; Israeli Missions Over Iraq
This time, Israeli generals insisted.
They were of course polite with the Prime Minister but this time they pushed hard.
Less than a year ago, Yitzhak Shamir had turned them down when Scuds launched from Iraq began to fall in Israel.
They asked for permission to hit back.
They said they could not remember any time that Israel had won by sitting with its hands over its head.


Kiam Deadline Passes
The deadline for the New England Patriots' owner, VICTOR KIAM, to make a $38 million payment to buy out FRAN MURRAY, the minority owner, passed yesterday without resolution, leaving the ownership issue in the hands of the National Football League, according to Murray.
The ownership contract, signed when Kiam and Murray purchased the Patriots from founder WILLIAM SULLIVAN three years ago, stated that Kiam had until Oct. 10, 1991, to come up with the money.


Retailers' Sales Poor Last Month
The nation's largest retailers said yesterday that their September sales were even weaker than expected, heightening concern that consumer spending would not pick up in time to prevent a third disappointing Christmas in a row.
Merchandise sales at Sears slipped, while those at J. C. Penney were essentially flat.
Even K Mart's discount stores, which generally turned in robust sales during the recession, showed a decline last month.


No Headline
The fourth annual Benson &amp; Hedges Blues festival starts off modestly this weekend, builds momentum through next week and ends with major concerts next weekend.
As always, the festival is divided among unusual small-scale events devoted to blues traditions and well-known performers wielding electric guitars.
One of the festival's best features is a series of free concerts, weekdays at noon, at the atrium of the Philip Morris Building, 120 Park Avenue, at 42d Street, in Manhattan.
The series is devoted to Mississippi Delta blues, in which percussive guitar picking and rough-hewn vocals balance desolate tidings and the will to fight back.
The performers include John Campbell (today), Lonnie Pitchford (Monday), Tabby Thomas (Tuesday), R. L. Burnside (Wednesday), Henry Townsend and Leroy Pierson (Thursday) and Satan and Adam (next Friday).
This weekend's other free event is bound to be packed.
It's a five-hour festival of Jimi Hendrix's filmed performances, beginning at noon tomorrow at Anthology Film Archives, 32 Second Avenue, at Second Street, in Manhattan.
Information: (212) 505-5181.
The big names arrive next weekend at the Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, in Manhattan.
Next Friday at 7 P.M. and midnight, a quadruple bill includes the celebrated bluesman B. B. King, the soul singer Johnnie Taylor, the British bluesman John Mayall and the jump-blues revivalists Roomful of Blues.
Next Saturday at 8 P.M., the gospel-soul connection will be sparked with the aching, teasing vocals of Al Green (the Memphis soul master who turned to gospel messages) and Bobby (Blue) Bland, the model for a generation of long-suffering love men, along with the gospel-rock of the Staple Singers.
And a week from Sunday at 8 P.M., the guitarist and singer Buddy Guy, whose speed-crazed guitar solos and snarling, howling singing have finally been captured on one of the best albums of his career, will share a bill with the deep-voiced master of boogie, John Lee Hooker, and a young Texas blues singer, John Campbell.
Tickets for all three shows are $25 and $30.
Information: (212) 496-7070.


CHRONICLE
It was a bittersweet moment for JEHAN EL-SADAT , the widow of ANWAR EL-SADAT , the President of Egypt.
To commemorate the 10th anniversary of her husband's assassination on Oct. 6, 1981, she came to New York for a screening last night of a documentary entitled "Sadat's Eternal Egypt."
The event, at the Dag Hammer skjold Library, was sponsored by the New York-Cairo Committee of the Sister City Program of New York City.
A panel discussion followed, and the participants included WALTER CRONKITE .


Merrill Memo Defends Trades
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company acted yesterday to quell the fallout from a Federal investigation into junk bond trades with a failed Florida insurer, telling employees the transactions were legal and disclosed.
The firm said in a memorandum to employees that Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accountant for the Guarantee Security Life Insurance Company, was aware of the trades and told the insurer how to represent them.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in some editions yesterday about a reported offer to buy nuclear weapons technology from India referred incorrectly at one point to the reported source of the offer.
As the article noted elsewhere, it was Libya, not Iraq.


Auctions
A Few Eccentricities
Wendell Cherry's collection of highly expressive ancient to modern art was known to his friends, a few dealers and some auction-house executives with whom he dealt for more than 24 years.
Now the public will be able to view a small sampling of those holdings.
Sixty objects from his estate are to be auctioned at Sotheby's in New York in 16 different sales from October to May.
The presale estimate for these works is $6 million to $8 million.
Mr.
Cherry was the vice chairman of Humana Inc., of Louisville, Ky., the hospital and health-insurance company that he founded in 1961 with David A. Jones, the chairman.
He was 55 years old at his death on July 16 at his home in Louisville.


Review/Film; Trying to Rebuild One's Past
The hotly coveted Nuttiest Plot of 1991 citation will almost certainly go to "Shattered," a thriller that adopts the currently popular accident-amnesia premise (e.g. "Regarding Henry") and takes it about as far as it can go.
No, further.
Tom Berenger plays the bewildered victim who tries to reconstruct his past and discovers what is, in films of this sort, the obvious: that he is a rich, powerful businessman with an impressive office and a very big house.
"Oh wow!" he exclaims, upon being brought home to the latter.
Mr.
Berenger's Dan Merrick also learns that Judith (Greta Scacchi), the loving wife helping him to regain his health, is a faithless tramp who miraculously managed not even to chip her nail polish in the car crash that robbed him of his memory.
And he unearths an indescribably weird murder mystery, one that turns out to involve formaldehyde, a sunken ship and a fax machine, among other essentials.
Wolfgang Petersen, who directed, maximizes the situation's lurid possibilities by returning periodically to Dan's memories of shattering car windows and sex with Judith on a beach in Mexico.


Review/Film; The Beauty of the Silents
Peter Delpeut's "Lyrical Nitrate," opening a one-week engagement today at Film Forum 2, is an homage to the esthetics of the silent film.
The 50-minute work is composed entirely of fragments of unidentified silent film stock, which were found in the attic of Jean Desmet (1875-1956), an early distributor of films in the Netherlands.
"Lyrical Nitrate" is the kind of homage that is best appreciated by people who are at a loss for words to express their appreciation for silent movies.
As source material, Mr.
Delpeut uses clips from short fiction features, documentaries, travelogues and what seem to be screen tests, many color-tinted in the manner in which they were first exhibited.


CONFLICT EMERGES OVER A 2D WITNESS
Despite a White House complaint, the Senate Judiciary Committee is prepared to hear a new witness against Clarence Thomas in crucial public hearings beginning Friday on a sexual harassment accusation against the Supreme Court nominee.
The new witness is Angela Wright, a former press secretary at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, when Judge Thomas was chairman of the commission, Republican senators said.
Criticism From White House
Anita F. Hill, a former aide to Judge Thomas at the commission, has accused him of sexual harassment.
The Charlotte Observer, where Ms.
Wright now works as an editor, said in Friday's editions that Ms.
Wright had told Senate investigators that Mr.
Thomas "pressured her for dates, asked her breast size, and showed up at her apartment uninvited." But the newspaper also reported that she said in an interview that she did not consider this behavior to be sexual harassment.


President Denounces Pornography in Address to Religious Group
President Bush today denounced pornography, particularly child pornography, as a "horror" that must be stopped by parents and law-enforcement authorities.
The White House said Mr.
Bush's speech, delivered to the Religious Alliance Against Pornography, was not related to the debate over the Supreme Court nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas, who has been accused by a former aide of telling her about graphic scenes from pornographic movies in the early 1980's.


Panicky Guy May Be With Twins
Panic?
Did any Twins or Blue Jays say panic?
Could someone even suggest it in a four-of-seven-game series that is tied at one victory each?
Well, two Twins uttered the untimely word today.
On the eve of the third game of the American League Championship Series, which has shifted from the Metrodome to the Skydome, Kirby Puckett and Kent Hrbek unveiled the frightening word, but they used it to suggest that the Twins were cool and loose and preceded it with an emphatic "not."


New Shelter Looms, and Some Riverdale Residents Cringe
Alice Pyne stood in a tiny Bronx playground yesterday, her arms crossed and her expression incredulous.
The 32-year-old mother had just learned that the lot beside her apartment building's playground in Riverdale, one of the city's most affluent areas, was one of 35 potential sites to shelter New York City's homeless single men and women.
Clearly, Mrs.
Pyne was not happy: not with the news and not with Beverly Orth, a baby sitter who lives in the neighborhood and who was standing nearby.


Majority in Poll Fault Focus by Bush On Global Policy but Back New Order
A sizable majority of Americans say President Bush has been spending too much time on foreign policy and should pay more attention to domestic matters, especially the economy, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
A major reason for those beliefs may well be a widespread conviction that many key foreign-policy problems have been solved.
Among respondents in the poll, which was conducted by telephone from Saturday to Monday, 70 percent said nuclear war is unlikely in the next decade, 50 percent said the cold war has ended and 44 percent said no country posed a serious military threat to the the United States.


Embargo Starts to Worry Haitian Business People
On Rue Pavee, the sweltering commercial street whose traffic has long been a barometer of Haiti's economic life, the chaotic return today of newspaper hawkers, whiskey vendors and Crazy Glue salesmen nearly two weeks after a violent coup belies the deep worries of business people working in air-conditioned offices.
After their euphoria at seeing Haiti's first elected president, the leftist priest Jean-Bertrand Aristide, forced out of office by soldiers, many in this poor country's small commercial community are awakening to the realization that the outside world is likely to exact a high price for bucking the hemispheric trend toward democracy.


RAM in Deal With BellSouth
The BellSouth Corporation said today that it would invest $300 million in equity financing in a joint venture with the privately owned RAM Broadcasting Corporation to operate mobile data communications networks worldwide.
With the new venture, BellSouth, the Atlanta-based regional Bell company, moves into direct competition with the Ardis system owned by I.B.M. and Motorola, currently the only other American mobile data system.


Water Squatters' Rights
New York City's 79th Street Boat Basin ought to be an amenity; instead it's an embarrassment.
Physical dilapidation is one problem.
The other is that boat owners have turned a marina into a private housing project.
During the 1970's, New Yorkers began renting slips at the basin and setting up boats as permanent residences.
For an average rent of $233 per month plus the price of a boat, the setting offers a sense of escape from the bustle of the city plus spectacular sunsets.
Today about 150 "live-aboards" occupy at least two-thirds of the basin's 120 slips.
Many of their boats are no longer seaworthy, their engines having rusted out from lack of use.


World Economies


CHRONICLE
In his public life, Gov.
MARIO M. CUOMO has had numerous occasions to tackle perplexing topics, but he may have to outdo himself on Tuesday when he answers the question, "Who is God?" at the 92d Street Y.
He is to be a panelist, along with MADELEINE L'ENGLE , the author of the classic children's book "A Wrinkle in Time," and ARI L. GOLDMAN, a New York Times reporter who covers religion and who is the author of "The Search for God at Harvard."


Art in Review
Alan Sonfist  LedisFlam Gallery 584 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through tomorrow
Alan Sonfist's ideas about natural history and organic growth don't translate well into portable objects.
A slatted-wood volume in the shape of a park bench and full of oak leaves dominates one sculpture; a wall relief consists of core drillings taken at different depths below the earth's surface; a large paintinglike piece titled "Icon of Houston" is made of gold leaf and what one assumes are different soils from that city.
Without exception, these works seem contrived and distracted, as if the artist were just marking time, waiting for something bigger to come along.
The best work on view could be something a lot bigger.
It is an enormous drawing laying out some of the particulars of a 10-mile-long park that Mr.
Sonfist would like to build in Paris, if the proper authorities approve his plan.
Titled "Natural/Cultural History of Paris: A Narrative Environmental Landscape," this park would include several gardens, elevated enclosures the same size and shape as the foundations of famous French landmarks (Notre Dame, the original Louvre and Chartres are depicted here).
The gardens' walls would be made of the same material as the structures they are modeled on; they would be planted with trees, grasses or wildflowers, whatever was indigenous to each landmark's original site.
Finally, these walled, elevated gardens would be connected by hedges planted in curved lines, arcs and arrows based on different Napoleonic battles.
So far, this grandiose scheme is only a drawing, but it dominates Mr.
Sonfist's show, confirming that he is at his best outdoors, where the sky is the limit.


Elliott Abrams Is Guilty
It would have saved the public a lot of time and money if Elliott Abrams, the former Assistant Secretary of State, had not waited till Monday to plead guilty to withholding Iran-contra information from Congress.
His plea, and agreement to cooperate further with the independent prosecutor, are nonetheless a welcome admission that stonewalling Congress is a crime.
This guilty plea shames the State Department in the same way that the plea of Alan Fiers last July shamed the Central Intelligence Agency.
Both agencies were deeply involved in covering up illicit aid to the rebels in Nicaragua.
But Mr.
Fiers at least recognized the wrongfulness of his conduct; even now, after pleading guilty, Mr.
Abrams arrogantly continues to trumpet his defiance of duly constituted authority.


Holiday on Monday
Columbus Day is observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK Parade: Begins at 11:30 at 46th Street and Fifth Avenue, going north on Fifth Avenue to 86th Street.
Government offices: Federal, state and municipal are closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed.
Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.
Sanitation: No collections or street cleanings.
Schools: Closed.
Financial markets: Open.
Transportation: Regular schedules.
NEW JERSEY Government offices: Federal and state closed; municipal option to close.
Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Banks: Closed.
Schools: Local option.
Transportation: Regular schedules.
CONNECTICUT Government offices: Federal, State and municipal closed.
Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Banks: Closed.
Schools: Closed.
Transportation: Regular schedules.


Judge Blocks Bid to Release Crown Heights Testimony
A state judge yesterday rejected arguments by the Brooklyn District Attorney to have the minutes of a grand jury investigation into the death of 7-year-old Gavin Cato in Crown Heights released, saying to do so would not help ease racial tensions.
The judge, Theodore Jones of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, added that the release of the minutes would also subject the grand jury to unnecessary second guessing.


Service for Morton Smith
A memorial service for Morton Smith, an authority on ancient religion and magic who taught at Columbia University for almost three decades, will be held next Thursday at 5 P.M. at St.
Paul's Chapel on the Columbia campus.
He died July 11 at the age of 76. .


Corrections
An article on the Business Technology page on Wednesday about tooth implants referred incorrectly to a company that markets a Swiss implant technique in the United States.
It is the Straumann Company.


At the Movies
Tibet Festival
More than 20 films, including Frank Capra's "Lost Horizon" and the American premieres of seven films, will be presented beginning tomorrow in the Tibet Film Festival in Manhattan.
The event, running through Nov. 3 and comprising feature films, documentaries, television and video art, is part of the International Year of Tibet, an effort to promote understanding and appreciation of the culture of Tibet, which was taken over by China four decades ago.
"Lost Horizon," introduced by the actor Richard Gere, the chairman of the festival, is to be shown on Channel 13 on Nov. 2 at 9:30 P.M. and on Nov. 3 at 5:30 P.M.
Other elements of the film festival are to be shown at the Asia Society, Anthology Film Archives and on the Sony Jumbotron in Times Sqaure.
Beginning in January, a package of highlights from the Tibet Film Festival will tour 15 cities in the United States.
Among these films are "Lung Ta: The Forgotten Tibet," an introduction to the Tibetan political situation; "Shigatse: One Injection Is Never Enough," a look at modernism and tradition in Tibetan medical practices, and "Tibet: Survival of the Spirit," a study of contemporary Tibet in the form of interviews with Tibetans from all walks of life.
Information and festival schedule: (212) 505-5181.  Patsy Kensit Is Busy
At the age of 23, Patsy Kensit is starring in "Twenty-One."
The English actress, perhaps best known as Mel Gibson's love interest in "Lethal Weapon 2," has been having a busy year in which "Twenty-One," which opened last week, is only one aspect of her work.
"The film is a portrait of a 21-year-old girl living in New York at this point and looking back over her 21st year in London," Miss Kensit said.
"It's kind of like a female 'Alfie,' " she observed, referring to the 1966 Lewis Gilbert film that starred Michael Caine as a philandering cockney playboy, "but from a woman's point of view.
"It follows her relationships with four men, one being her father; one being her boyfriend, who is a drug addict; her best friend, who is a Jamaican guy, and a married man she's having an affair with."
Miss Kensit said she was drawn to the role by the opportunity it offered to exhibit a range of emotions.
"Those kinds of parts are generally reserved for the thirtysomething actresses," Miss Kensit said.
"A lot of it is monologue to the camera, sort of sitting there. The dialogue is quite frank and really quite shocking at times. I enjoyed being that person for six weeks. I'm nothing like that in real life."
After making "Twenty-One" in the summer of 1990, Miss Kensit went off to Spain in January to play a weak-willed prostitute opposite Terence Stamp in "Beltenabros," a political thriller set in the 1960's in Spain under the Franco dictatorship.
No sooner had she finished that film than she was bound east for Venice for the first of three pictures under a contract with the Disney Studios, signed after "Twenty-One" was shown early this year at the Sundance Film Festival.
In Venice, she made a black comedy called "Blame It on the Bellboy," with Bryan Brown and Dudley Moore.
"I play a real estate agent, really ruthless," Miss Kensit said.
"She wants her own red speedboat, and if she sells this very dodgy house that everything's wrong with, she gets a triple commission."
Fresh from "Blame It on the Bellboy," she went to work for the BBC, starring as Hetty Sorrel, the ill-fated milkmaid in the George Eliot novel "Adam Bede."
"I just want to become a better actress," Miss Kensit said.
"I think by taking these different roles and having the opportunity to play these different kinds of people, I'm stretching myself." 'Wages of Fear'
In the mood for a thriller? How about "The Wages of Fear"?
The 1953 Henri-Georges Clouzot classic starring Yves Montand is to be presented in its original, uncut 148-minute version for two weeks beginning next Friday at Film Forum 2.
Figuratively speaking, this movie is dynamite, or more accurately, nitroglycerine.
It is the story of four outcasts hired to transport two truckloads of unstable nitro to an oil fire at a United States-owned drilling site in Central America.
"The Wages of Fear," by the director whose bathtub scene in the 1955 thriller "Diabolique" was, to put it gently, quoted in "Fatal Attraction," won the prizes as best film at the Cannes and Berlin film festivals and from the British Academy.
But by the time "The Wages of Fear" reached the United States, more than 30 deletions, totaling 43 minutes, had been made, not only shortening the film, but removing some of its anti-American sentiments, references to homosexuality and scenes of third-world squalor.
The version to be seen at Film Forum 2, 209 West Houston Street, has been made from the original negative and is to be presented with subtitles newly translated from the French.


Buddhism and Manhattan: An Unlikely Joining Together
There may be few things as incompatible as Manhattan and Buddhism.
One means competition, self-fulfillment and the fast track; the other means contemplation, self-abnegation and savoring the moment.
But all around Manhattan these days are little oases of Buddhism, part of a celebration of religion and culture called the Year of Tibet.
The Dalai Lama arrived earlier this week to take part.


Pebble Beach Rebuffed On Membership Plan
The California Coastal Commission today soundly rejected a proposal to allow the new Japanese owner of the Pebble Beach golf course to sell high-priced memberships.
The commission's 10-1 vote represents a stunning blow to Minoru Isutani, the Japanese golf course tycoon who was counting on selling the memberships to pay back much of the $574 million he borrowed to purchase the Pebble Beach Company last year.
The company had hoped to sell as many as 2,000 memberships for about $150,000 apiece, raising $300 million.


Sounds Around Town
Pianists at Merkin
Walter Norris with Hal Galper: "Maybeck at Merkin," Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 362-8719.
"Maybeck at Merkin," the title of a concert that the pianists Walter Norris and Hal Galper will present tomorrow night at 8, combines the concert hall where they will play and Maybeck Hall in San Francisco, where Concorde Records has been recording solo pianists in concert for more than two years.
Both Mr.
Norris and Mr.
Galper have been part of that series, and now, leaping from those West Coast engagements to the East Coast, they will join forces for the first time in both solo and duo performances.
Mr.
Norris, who played at Ornette Coleman's first recording session in 1958 and was later in the Thad Jones-Mel Lewis Band, has lived in Berlin since 1977 and makes annual trips to the United States, while Mr.
Galper, who was with Cannonball Adderley's Quintet in the 1970's, recently ended a decade with Phil Woods's groups.
Tickets for tomorrow's concert are $18; $10 for students and the elderly.


Staff Cuts More Costly At Texas Instruments
Texas Instruments Inc. said today that more employees had accepted a voluntary retirement program than expected and that the higher costs would result in a special charge of $55 million against operating income for the third quarter.
But the company said that even more jobs would have to be cut than it had forecast when it announced the voluntary programs in July.
It said continued weakness in orders for computer chips and military equipment was forcing the extra cuts.


Croat and Serb Chiefs Meet but Fail to Bridge Gap
The leaders of Croatia and Serbia met here for five hours today under the auspices of the European Community, but they left for Yugoslavia afterward apparently no closer to agreement than before.
Foreign Minister Hans van den Broek of the Netherlands, acting for the community-sponsored peace conference, outlined at a news conference a proposed settlement under which Yugoslav Army forces would withdraw from Croatia "hopefully within one month from now" while political negotiations were conducted on the future shape of Yugoslavia.
This optimistic scenario is similar to the one the community has been advancing since it began taking an interest in the Yugoslav civil war at the end of June.


Phone Harassment
To the Editor:
The same technology that allows telephone companies to offer Caller ID service makes it easy to protect everyone without additional customer equipment or invasions of privacy ("FCC Proposes Limited Privacy for Callers in Number ID System," front page, Sept. 27).


New Audit Rule Expected On Updating Worth Figures
A proposal that would require public companies to provide updated information about their worth in their financial statements is expected to become a requirement soon.
The chief rule-making body of the accounting industry said on Wednesday that four of its six members were expected to vote for it.
If the group, the Financial Accounting Standards Board, can issue the new rule by early December, all 1992 company annual reports would have to add a footnote describing the estimated market value of many financial assets and liabilities that are now shown on their books at original cost.
The effective date would be delayed three years for small companies with fewer than $150 million in assets.


Report Says Lawyer Died From Bleeding
A prominent lawyer and friend of Mayor David N. Dinkins who died after spending 18 hours in the Harlem Hospital emergency room bled to death internally from an ulcer, the City Medical Examiner's Office ruled yesterday.
The autopsy report raised new questions about whether the attending physician in the emergency room made critical mistakes in diagnosing the 74-year-old civil rights lawyer, William C. Chance Jr., his personal doctor and family members charged yesterday.


Palestinians Should Accept Israeli Settlers; Extending Rights
To the Editor:
"Peace or Annexation?" by Anthony Lewis (column, Sept. 20) blurs an important distinction between Israeli settlement of the occupied territories and Israel's treatment of Palestinians within their borders.


A Strong Voice for California Latinos
When her chief antagonist on the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors called her an anarchist at a hearing last month, Gloria Molina, the newest rising star among the nation's Hispanic elected officials, made no objection.
"You can't just join the club and tell people, 'Be patient, things will change,' " Ms.
Molina said in an interview at her office a few days later.
"You need to confront issues. I got here and I better start getting to work. And very frankly, that usually means stepping on the toes of my colleagues."


Palestinians Should Accept Israeli Settlers; A Contributing Partner
To the Editor:
Your shortsighted Sept. 17 editorial approving President Bush's arm-twisting of Israel is a disappointment.
Let me pose a question to you:


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 562 money market mutual funds increased by $7.34 billion, to $466.93 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 204 institutional funds increased by $5.67 billion, to $145.26 billion.
The assets of the 266 general-purpose funds were up by $955.3 million, to $174.34 billion.
The 92 broker-dealer funds increased by $721.1 million, to $147.33 billion, the institute said.


4 Slain in 2 New Jersey Attacks And Former Postal Clerk Is Held
A former postal clerk, apparently seeking revenge for his dismissal, killed his former supervisor and her boyfriend and then invaded the post office here early today with a small arsenal and killed two mail handlers, the authorities said.
Before setting out from his Paterson apartment dressed in black military fatigues, black combat boots and a black silk Ninja-style hood, the man left a handwritten two-page letter there complaining about postal authorities and vowing revenge, officials said.


Diner's Journal
Chef Returns to the Royalton
Geoffrey Zakarian, who was dismissed from his position as chef at 44 in the Royalton Hotel on West 44th Street in Manhattan in March 1990, has returned.
His departure, along with that of two others from the kitchen, stemmed from a dispute with the restaurant's management.
Mr.
Zakarian and his partner, Brian McNally, the owner of Indochine, have now returned to take over the restaurant in the hotel's lobby.
"The food will be a little bit along the lines I was planning the last time I was here," Mr.
Zakarian said.
"It will be mostly eclectic American and French." A Movie With the Meal
TriBeCa Grill, the American restaurant owned by Robert De Niro and several film star partners at 375 Greenwich Street, has begun a Dinner and a Movie series.
The $50 prix fixe dinner (meal, movie, tax and gratuity included) created to tie in with the evening's movie will be held in a loft dining room adjacent to a screening room.
Screenings are at 7 P.M., dinner at 9 P.M.
Tonight, the film is "Truth or Dare," starring Madonna (vegetarian variations); on Oct. 18, it is "Rage in Harlem" (1950's soul food), and on Oct. 25, Pedro Almodovar's "Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!" (Spanish fare).
Telephone: (212) 941-3900.


More Talk From Anderson, More Talk From the Nets
Training camp workouts continued swimmingly for the New Jersey Nets here today, but negotiations with Kenny Anderson, their No. 1 draft pick, remained as buoyant as a boulder in a pool.
"We're still at a standstill," Willis Reed, the Nets' vice president of basketball operations, reported after a brief conversation with Anderson's Atlanta-based agent, Richard Howell.


Main Tracks Change Their Schedules
Racing attendance may be falling and costs may be rising, but New York's three main tracks announced yesterday that they would charge into 1992 with a full but somewhat realigned schedule that features 166 stakes races, 37 of them Grade I events.
They will be worth a combined total of $24 million in purses.
The year's calendar for Aqueduct, Belmont and Saratoga will include 11 races with purses of $500,000 or more and 26 worth $200,000 or more.
And it will be marked by one major switch: the Sword Dancer Handicap, usually staged in the spring at Belmont, will be held at Saratoga on Saturday, Aug. 8, a switch that bestows an important grass race on the upstate track.


Woodner Drawings Go To the National Gallery
The National Gallery of Art in Washington has acquired a group of Old Master drawings that belonged to Ian Woodner, the New York City and Washington real estate developer whose drawings collection was one of the finest put together in recent years.
Among the works going to the museum are perhaps the two most precious drawings from the extensive holdings of Mr.
Woodner, who died in November at the age of 87.
One is a figure of a standing satyr by Benvenuto Cellini, the Renaissance goldsmith and sculptor, the other a large double-sided sheet on which Giorgio Vasari, the 16th-century painter and historian, assembled 10 Florentine Renaissance drawings attributed to Filippino Lippi and Sandro Botticelli.
They were among the premier Old Master drawings in private hands.


Art in Review
Eve Andree Laramee  John Gibson Gallery 568 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through tomorrow
In Eve Andree Laramee's small sculptural works, nature is anything but nurturing.
Ms.
Laramee bases most of the pieces in this quirky and enjoyable show on the fact that various liquids can generate mild electrical currents.
In one, a plate of salt water serves as the electrolytic fluid, with a tangle of bare copper wires snaking over to a stack of leaves pressed between sheets of glass that forms a kind of natural battery.
Ms.
Laramee uses ferns, tar, bee pollen and moss in various works here, and in one instance even generates electricity with her own blood.
This isn't pure Process Art, where artists accept whatever results come out of the system they have set up.
Ms.
Laramee presents several plates encrusted with crystals produced by the electrolytic process simply for the way they look, and describes a piece consisting of a dozen roses mounted on the wall as a "metaphorical circuit." In other works, she strains too hard for significance, as in a "DNA battery" made up of a stack of her fingerprints on tiny plates of glass.
But the impact of these works depends on the mystery of electricity itself, the natural force that industrial society is built on.
Her work can be seen as simply another interpretation of the faceoff between nature and culture, but in fact she undercuts the notion of the natural world as a bounteous Eden.
In her work, nature grows teeth, and regains some of its lost power.
At a time when attempts at human control threatens to strangle nature, Ms.
Laramee's modest but menacing constructions are a healthy reminder of the danger inherent in it.
Her works are a little like unruly pets, ready to bite the leg of an absent-minded owner.


Rare Drama -- and Rare Restraint
At 10 A.M., the Senate Judiciary Committee will begin one of the great television dramas in Washington's history.
The inquiry into Anita Hill's sexual harassment charges against Judge Clarence Thomas involves the highest stakes, appointment to the Supreme Court, and an array of tormenting social issues.
These hearings probably rank with the Army-McCarthy hearings of 1954, the Watergate hearings of 1973 and the Iran-contra hearings of 1987.
Is the committee up to the task?
History gives little cause for optimism.
These 14 senators, all men, will need rare and unaccustomed discipline to focus hour after hour on
facts.
Senators rarely deny themselves the luxury of turning questions into occasions for speeches and posturing.


Topics of The Times; The Mayor's Trip: Who's Paying?
Mayor David Dinkins of New York City has scaled down his proposed trip to South Africa.
Instead of traveling by chartered plane Mr.
Dinkins will travel commercially, and many in the entourage will pay their own way.
These moves make good sense.
But disquieting questions still remain about who's footing the rest of the bill.
Mr.
Dinkins isn't the first mayor to venture abroad, and it's hard to quarrel with his effort to forge cultural and economic ties between New York and any post-apartheid regime.
But the administration still delays in disclosing the list of donors.


Ronald Lauder Forms Venture-Capital Firm
Ronald S. Lauder, the former United States Ambassador to Austria and New York City mayoral candidate, has announced the formation of a venture-capital partnership with a former executive of E. M. Warburg, Pincus &amp; Company.
The new firm, R. S. Lauder, Gaspar &amp; Company L.P., has $50 million in capital commitments so far and intends to invest in government assets being privatized in Eastern Europe.
The partners plan to join with experienced domestic business executives, who they feel can develop substantial businesses there.


Hawkins Is Signed
The Philadelphia 76ers signed guard HERSEY HAWKINS to a contract extension that will reportedly keep him with the team for four more years and pay him $9 million.
Hawkins, a fourth-year pro who was a collegiate scoring star at Bradley, made the Eastern Conference All-Star team while averaging 22.1 points a game last season. (AP)


Canada Ending Anti-Gay Army Rules
Responding to the pressure of court cases, the Government is about to end a policy of barring homosexuals from joining the armed forces, senior military officials say.
The officials, who include the Defense Minister, Marcel Masse, the Chief of the Defense Staff, Gen.
John de Chastelain, and the Associate Defense Minister, Mary Collins, informed members of Parliament of the impending change in recent days, parliamentary officials said.


Market Place; Investment Team Is Broken Up
WILLIAM E. SIMON, the former Treasury Secretary with the golden investment touch, has backed out of his most recent venture because of growing differences with a longtime partner.
Mr.
Simon's withdrawal appears to end his years of close association with Gerald L. Parsky, a Los Angeles lawyer who served as a top aide to Mr.
Simon during his days in Washington.


Kuwait Seeks $5 Billion To Repair War Damage
Kuwait announced today that it would borrow $5 billion as a first phase of a loan program to pay for rebuilding the war-ravaged country.
The planned five-year borrowing would be the largest single loan to a country in history, surpassing the $4.5 billion recently borrowed by Saudi Arabia.
Kuwait's Ministry of Finance has appointed J. P. Morgan &amp; Company to coordinate the formation of a group of banks worldwide to act as lead managers in arranging the loan.
Plans call for the group to begin later this month to line up other lending banks, which will probably number in the hundreds.
"Early indications from banks in Japan, Europe and North America have been very encouraging," said John T. Hompe, a London-based Morgan spokesman.
Analysts do not anticipate that Kuwait will have any difficulty borrowing the money and noted that the world's financial community had been expecting the Kuwaitis to seek a large loan.
"Despite significant demands for capital from other parts of the world like Eastern Europe and Latin America, this is a productive type of lending which is likely to be well received by the international banking community," said Keith Brown, an analyst at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, the investment bank.
Bankers said they had heard that the annual interest rate Kuwait would have to pay would be half a percentage point above the London interbank offered rate.
Based on the current rate, Kuwait would have to pay about 6 percent.
Saudi Arabia had to pay three-eighths of a point above the London rate, which is often used as a benchmark for loans.
One thing that surprised some analysts was that the $5 billion loan will be unsecured.
Kuwait is not using its oil or vast foreign investments as collateral.
Had it done so, it could have had a lower rate.
But bankers said Kuwait had still done fairly well.
Kuwait plans to use the money for rebuilding its oil industry, ports, water-desalting plants, roads and telecommunications and power systems, among other things.
Kuwaiti officials have estimated that it would cost about $20 billion to repair the damage inflicted during the seven-month occupation by the Iraqis and the war to remove them.
The United Nations, which is maintaining an embargo against Iraq, is seeking to force the Iraqis to pay reparations for the fighting, but Baghdad has not yet agreed to do so.
In July, Kuwait said Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah, the country's ruler, had authorized the Government to borrow up to 10 billion Kuwaiti dinars, or $34.7 billion, on world financial markets.
But analysts do not expect the Government to borrow anything near that amount.
Some who have had contact with Kuwaiti officials said the Government did not know how much it might have to borrow ultimately since it was still unsure of how long reconstruction would take and the final cost.
But the J. P. Morgan statement made it sound as if Kuwait envisions having to borrow more, since the $5 billion was described as part of its borrowing program.
Restoring Extensive Damage
The amount of additional borrowing will obviously depend on how fast Kuwait can repair its oilfields.
Kuwait's production is rising, but given the extensive damage to the fields, it looks as if it will be a while before production and export revenues return to normal.
Analysts estimate that Kuwaiti production in the fourth quarter will average 400,000 to 450,000 barrels a day, or about a quarter of the prewar level.
Kuwait has indicated that its target is for production to reach 950,000 barrels a day by mid-1992, including its 150,000-barrels-a-day share from the Neutral Zone, the fields shared with Saudi Arabia.
But Mehdi Varzi, an analyst at Kleinwort Benson Securities Ltd., says this target is overly optimistic.
He says 750,000 barrels is more likely.
While Kuwait is believed to have liquidated some short-term assets, it has not sold any large portions of its foreign investments, whose total value is believed to be $100 billion.
Kuwait's Overseas Investments
Kuwait owns America's Santa Fe International and is believed to own sizable stakes in big European corporations like Britain's Midland Bank and British Petroleum; Germany's Daimler-Benz, Hoechst and Metallgesellschaft, and Spain's Ebro Agricolas and Torras Papel.
It is also believed to own billions of dollars' worth of American and European real estate.
"They haven't sold off much," said Andrew Cunningham, associate editor of the Middle East Economic Survey, a Cyprus-based newsletter.
J.
P.
Morgan said lead managers of the syndicated loan would be chosen from the banks with which Kuwait has had a relationship.
Analysts said some banks in that circle are Citicorp, Germany's Deutsche Bank, Japan's Dai-ichi Kangyo Bank and the Industrial Bank of Japan, and France's Banque Nationale de Parisei.


Anti-Mobutu Protests Set Off Violence
Demonstrations and sporadic violence aimed at ousting the Government of President Mobutu Sese Seko erupted here today as efforts to form a new coalition government continued.
Soldiers used tear gas, gunfire and truncheons to break up some of the protests.
Later, about 100 troops briefly surrounded the headquarters of the main opposition party, the Union for Democracy and Social Progress, whose leader, Etienne Tshisekedi, was named Prime Minister two weeks ago.


Dinkins Lists Possible Shelter Sites To Irate Protests on Many Fronts
Opening a bitter political debate, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday released a list of 35 potential sites across New York City -- many in middle-class areas -- to build up to 24 special shelters for homeless single men and women that would replace the cavernous armory-style shelters it now uses.
The Mayor's goal is to better serve the health and mental needs of homeless people by building smaller settings of up to 150 beds each.
The shelters would provide drug and alcohol counseling, mental health programs and employment training to equip people to live on their own.


Review/Film; Crackups And Downs
"The Boy Who Cried Bitch," a more serious film than its terrible title suggests, tries to examine family dynamics between the deeply troubled 12-year-old Dan Love (Harley Cross) and his skittish, defensive mother Candice (Karen Young), who is clearly a huge part of Dan's problem.
In the film's disturbing opening sequence, Candice comes home with a male friend only to have Dan and his two younger brothers pelt the stranger with dirt and address their mother as "slutbitch" and "the happy hooker," insults that soon have her retaliating in kind.
Dan, who is clearly out of control and scares himself as much as he scares others, spends most of his time at a private school that keeps him out of his mother's hair.
The film, which plays like an earnest, watered-down case study, observes Dan's growing inability to get along with his peers.
Violent and erratic, he finds fellowship with the school's maintenance man, Jim (Gene Canfield), a haunting Vietnam veteran who shares his back issues of Soldier of Fortune with the boy.
Jim is well on his way toward child molestation when he himself shows severe signs of mental strain.
The older man's crackup, eerily rendered here, prompts a similar breakdown for Dan, who is consequently moved to a private psychiatric hospital.


4 Men, 4,529 Yards: It's Still Not Enough
They have attempted more than 500 passes this season, completing more than 300.
Together they have passed for 4,529 yards and made 39 touchdown passes.
But for all of their glowing statistics, Tony Sacca of Penn State, Gino Torretta of Miami, Alex Van Pelt of Pittsburgh and Rick Mirer of Notre Dame, will be shouldering burdens tomorrow as they lead their teams into pivotal confrontations.
As the teams contend for a national championship, perhaps the greatest burden each will face is still having to prove his ability.


Restaurants
Sandro's
In his leaner days, Sandro Fioriti might have been a soccer goalie, thrashing his towering frame in front of the net while deflecting leather cannonballs.
Today his goal is less perilous but equally challenging: endearing New Yorkers to the multifaceted cuisine of his native region around Rome.
Sandro's cadre of regular patrons offers proof that to some extent he is succeeding.
Six-year-old Sandro's is not the kind of place you stumble upon.
It is well concealed in the lobby of a high-rise apartment building on far East 59th Street, hard under the rumbling 59th Street Bridge.
The big, casual dining room has a terra-cotta floor, palm trees and walls covered with framed posters of Italian food products.
In such a neighborhood setting, captains in black tie seem incongruous.
Upon being seated, you are presented a basket of terrific rosemary bread and "dare you to eat just one" sage-and-rosemary breadsticks.
You will find that the wine list is strongest among Italian reds and whites, with a smattering of American labels, all on the moderate to high side.
As we were discussing the wine and other matters, a captain barged in -- a common and annoying occurrence -- and recited his daily specials.
When we wanted him, though, he was nowhere to be found.
Another captain took the wine order and, a mere 20 minutes later, returned with it.
Service in general was maladroit.
The amiable Mr.
Fioriti, though, was a most cordial host, stopping by every table to ask how the food turned out.
We had no complaints about the ravioli filled with spinach and ricotta afloat in a beautifully balanced tomato-cream sauce, nor with the crisply fried artichokes, their dark golden leaves as brittle as puff pastry.
The most compelling pasta dish was ravioli filled with sea urchin roe in a subtle tomato sauce studded with minced baby scallops.
The oceanic sea urchin flavor burst through with every bite, and the light tomato sauce allowed it to shine.
Quality pancetta and pecorino cheese were the foundation of a dish recommended by our captain, but the sauce was not integrated and the pasta was unevenly sauced.
Spaghetti with clams on the half shell, a touch of tomato and herbs had a lusty shellfish flavor.
Penne tossed with mild Italian sausage and cream was too timorous and lacking pepper for my taste.
Among nonpasta starters, tender sauteed baby calamari with radicchio and tomato had everything going for it but flavor.
Garlic or hot pepper would have helped.
Ice cold carpaccio with olive oil and slices of Parmesan was hard to judge until it warmed on the plate.
Then it was pleasing.
Main courses here could sustain a pair of soccer players for the day.
The roast suckling pig, a special, has a wonderful burnished skin concealing a thin layer of fat that adds moisture to the succulent meat.
Equally good, if not better, was roasted baby lamb with a blackened crust and aroma of rosemary.
One of the house favorites seems to be straccetti, grilled slices of beef that had been coated in olive oil, garlic and lemon.
The vibrantly flavored meat is exceptionally tender.
Fennel sausages with bitter broccoli were a fine combination, too.
Butterflied Cornish hen, though, which can be savory when grilled, is fried here, which leaves it a bit heavy and bland.
Among the seafood, salt cod cooked with potatoes, onions and tomatoes is firm and flavorful, reminiscent of traditional Portuguese recipes.
Grilled swordfish, a special, was lustrous in a pool of white wine sauce scented with lemon and basil.
It came with grilled endive.
Only grouper braised with artichokes in a lemony wine sauce came out flat and one-dimensional.
Another one of Mr.
Fioriti's regional dishes is the polenta pudding with raspberry sauce.
Surprisingly, the pudding was ultra-smooth with no grain detected.
We later learned that a fine grade of polenta, almost flourlike, is used.
Chocolate mousse cake is relatively light and intense with good bittersweet chocolate.
And chocolate-dusted tartuffo is a special treat, as is granita of expresso (although granita of lemon is watered down).
The first time we visited the restaurant, we were victims of Mr.
Fioriti's puckish sense of humor.
Toward the end of our main courses, he came by and insisted we try a platter of his favorite pasta.
We groaned.
As we finished our desserts, he came over holding a platter over his head.
"Pasta, Pasta!" he announced as we all cringed.
He then placed in front of us a platter of warm sugar cookies.
Then came a selection of his homemade fruit grappas.
Peach was our favorite.
Sandro Fioriti is the type of host who makes sure you never leave hungry.
And if you order wisely, you'll leave happy, too.
Pamir
Afghan food, which not long ago was as obscure as it was exotic, has moved into the dining mainstream in major cities.
In New York City, for example, diners can choose from more than a half-dozen serious Afghan restaurants and many more living-room-size family cafes.
Pamir, a congenial spot on Second Avenue in Manhattan, has always been one of my favorites.
Afghan food is a melange of Middle Eastern cuisine with some spicy Indian accents tossed in.
Lamb, chicken, rice and vegetables are the primary ingredients.
Exotic herbs and spices give the food its allure.
Pamir's dining room is a long, shadowy expanse with a bar at one end.
Oriental rugs, assorted wall hangings and soft Eastern music contribute to its mysterious feeling.
Candlelit tables are tightly arranged to accommodate the enthusiastic nightly crowds.
Over the course of three visits, I found that service is not as sharp as it used to be.
Orders are occasionally confused and servers are not always as diligent about getting drinks, bread, water and the like.
The menu rarely changes, so it takes only one visit to become familiar with the specialties.
Starters include sambosa goushti, triangles of greaseless fried pastry stuffed with a mixture of ground beef and chickpeas redolent of cinnamon and cumin; bulanee gandana, thin, blistered turnovers filled with scallions and herbs that are eaten with a tart yogurt sauce; bulanee kachalou, another turnover, stuffed with mashed potatoes, onions and spices, and aushak, crisp flat scallion-filled raviolis under a lovely yogurt sauce with ground meat and mint.
All of the turnovers go well with some fiery cumin and coriander sauce.
Beer is probably the most suitable beverage with this tangy food, although certain full-bodied red wines from the perfunctory list might stand up to the spices.
Oddly enough, Pamir has a menu of tropical cocktails.
The barman makes a mean margarita, although I wouldn't try it with a spicy yogurt sauce.
Two popular main-course dishes are badenjan chalaw, a spicy mixture of cubed lamb, eggplant, tomatoes and onions, and sabsi-chalaw, lamb in a mellow spinach sauce flavored with onions and garlic.
A daily special was a winner, too: zardak chalaw, stewed lamb with carrots, onions, garlic and ginger.
One of my favorites has always been a colorful creation called norange palaw, a circular mound of saffron rice laced with almonds, pistachios and thin strips of orange zest.
Beneath the rice is an aromatic lamb stew that, when mixed with the rice, can yield a complex and subtle melange of flavors and textures.
A recent sampling, however, was woefully unbalanced.
The rice was overloaded with sweet orange zest and cloying with rosewater.
Quabilli palaw, a similar lamb dish made with brown rice, almonds, pistachios, raisins and carrot strips instead of orange, was better balanced, but some of the lamb was mushy from overmarination.
Among meat entrees, there is only one escape from lamb.
Kabab-e-murgh features skewered marinated chicken cubes with vegetables.
On two samplings, the chicken was dryish, ameliorated somewhat by the coriander dipping sauce.
Side dishes to consider are sabsi, a puree of spinach with onions and assorted spices (ours arrived at room temperature); buranee kadu, sauteed chunks of pumpkin topped with yogurt and ground beef, and buranee badenjan, delicious sauteed eggplant with a garnish of the same yogurt meat sauce.
Desserts take some getting used to.
Firnee is a firm, semisweet pudding studded with almonds and pistachios.
Baghlawa is a form of baklava, made with brittle layers of pastry and sweetened walnuts.
Gosh-e-feel is the most exotic, a pizza-size piece of fried dough dusted with cardamon, pistachios and confectioners' sugar.
While Pamir still has exotic (and economic) appeal, the lapses in service and food merit a reduction from two stars, which it received in 1987, to one star.
Sandro's **
420 East 59th Street, Manhattan, (212) 355-5150.
Atmosphere: Big, open casual room with Italian posters on the walls.
Moderate noise level.
Service: Boorish and inattentive.
Recommended dishes: Fried artichokes, ravioli stuffed with sea urchin roe, ravioli stuffed with spinach and ricotta, spaghetti with clams, roast suckling pig, roast lamb, sausages with bitter broccoli, cod cooked with potatoes and onions, straccetti (grilled slices of beef), swordfish in white wine, chocolate mousse cake, polenta pudding.
Wine: Good Italian selection; smattering of American. Prices moderately high.
Price range: Dinner: appetizers $8.75, main courses $11 to $23.50.
Credit cards: All major cards.
Hours: Dinner: 5:30 to 11 P.M. Monday to Saturday, 5 to 10 P.M. Sunday.
Reservations: Suggested.
Wheelchair accessibility: Three steps up into the restaurant; everything on one level.
Pamir *
1437 Second Avenue, between 74th and 75th Street, Manhattan, (212) 734-3791.
Atmosphere: Dim neighborly room with candlelit tables and Oriental rugs on the walls.
Service: Functional but sometimes forgetful.
Wine: Token list.
Price range: Dinner: appetizers $3.25 to $3.45; main courses $11.25 to $15.95.
Credit cards: Mastercard, Visa.
Hours: Dinner: 5:30 to 11 P.M. Tuesday to Sunday; closed Monday.
Reservations: Necessary.
Wheelchair accessibility: Front dining room on ground level; restrooms downstairs.
What the stars mean: (None) Poor to Satisfactory *
Good **
Very Good ***
Excellent ****
Extraordinary
Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction primarily to food, with ambiance and service taken into consideration.
Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
The Times Restaurant Line offers capsule reviews by cuisine, price and location (in New York City and suburbs), published in the last 18 months.
Touch-line telephones only: 1-900-988-0101 (75 cents a minute).


House Modifies Transportation Bill; Administration Remains Unsatisfied
House leaders today proposed revised transportation legislation that would provide $150 billion for highway and mass-transit programs but stretch it over six years rather than five.
The leaders of the Committee on Public Works and Transportation had to make the change because of the death of their proposal to increase transportation spending by raising the Federal gasoline tax by five cents.


Toys 'R' Us Offers Its First Catalogue
In trying to lure consumers into its stores, Toys "R" Us Inc. is for the first time offering a catalogue.
The catalogue comes with coupons that offer savings on toys sold by the company.
But shoppers must come to a Toys "R" Us store to get the catalogue and the coupons, which the Paramus, N.J., company says are worth $173.


Topics of The Times; Pulling Together
At a recent meeting, the state governments of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut agreed with New York City to find ways to press economic development as a regional unit.
Although separate efforts to attract business will continue, competition will henceforth be downplayed while joint efforts to attract jobs and tourism will be stressed.
It's an excellent strategy, especially in these difficult economic times.
No one expects that all competition will stop.
But the rival governments seem finally to have acknowledged that bringing new employment to the New York metropolitan region is far better for the region as a whole than having the same development take place a thousand miles away.


The Braves Get Even, Thanks to Avery
Steve Avery wasn't even born when the major leagues staged their first divisional playoffs in 1969.
The blessed event for the Avery family came six months later.
For the Atlanta Braves, the blessed event came 21 1/2 years after that.
Avery, who is too young to know much Braves history, put on a pitching exhibition tonight that prompted Jim Leyland, the Pittsburgh manager, to describe it as "the finest performance of the whole season, just an awesome performance."


EXECUTIVES
*
Downey Savings and Loan Association, Newport Beach, Calif., named Robert L. Kemper chief executive and F. Anthony Kurtz president. *
First Federal Bancorp Inc., Pontiac, Mich., said the Office of Thrift Supervision had approved the appointment of Josh C. Cox Jr. as president and chief executive. *
First Interstate Bank of California, Los Angeles, a First Interstate Bancorp subsidiary, named Linda S. Salzman senior vice president in the financial planning department.


New Stock Trading Approved
Moving to restore the global competitiveness of the nation's stock markets, the Securities and Exchange Commission today approved early-morning trading in over-the-counter stocks.
The new trading session, from 3:30 A.M. to 9 A.M., is a step toward round-the-clock trading in the United States and is specifically aimed at recapturing business now on the London markets.
Investors who want to trade after the American markets close now often take their business to foreign exchanges.


Review/Dance; Only a Footfall Is Heard, Then the Ritual Begins
At the end of the second program of their current season, the dancers of the Martha Graham Dance Company repeated what they did on opening night.
In unison, they bowed slightly toward the wings at stage right where Graham always sat to watch their performances at the City Center.
This tribute to the company's founding genius was brief to the point of discretion.
The real tribute is embodied in the commitment displayed by the Graham dancers.


Jets Won't Run and Hide From the Run-and-Shoot
Eliminating the jitters is not part of the Jets' preparation for Sunday's game against the Houston Oilers at the Meadowlands.
Nervousness would be a natural response, considering the Jets are face-to-face with a loaded run-and-shoot offense that has been firing from both barrels this season.
The Jets aren't nervous because they know exactly what Houston is going to do and they stopped the Oilers last year.
The trick will be stopping them again.


Sexual Harassment at Work Is Pervasive, Survey Suggests
Four of 10 women say they have encountered unwanted sexual advances or remarks from men they work for, but very few of them say they reported the incident at the time, according to the latest New York Times/ CBS News poll.
The poll suggests that sexual harassment, even if largely unreported, is a pervasive problem in the workplace.
Five of 10 men said that at some point while on the job, they had said or done something that could have been construed by a female colleague as harassment.


Columbia Workers Strike for Pay and Benefits Increases


On Stage, and Off
Sondheim in Britain
Stephen Sondheim has a new show, but for now at least you need a plane ticket to see it.
"Putting It Together" will open in January at the Old Fire Station Theater in Oxford, England.
Cameron Mackintosh, who built that theater, is also the show's producer.
It is something of a sequel to "Side by Side by Sondheim," the 1977 revue.
Julia McKenzie, who won a Tony nomination for her performance in "Side by Side," will direct the cast of five, including Claire Moore, Clarke Peters, Clive Carter and Kit Hesketh-Harvey.
The fifth may very well be Lindsay Duncan, whom most Broadway theatergoers remember from her performance in "Les Liaisons Dangereuses."
Mr.
Mackintosh says that Mr.
Sondheim is choosing the material for the revue, which will come "mostly from the period of 'Sweeney Todd' (1979) on, with a few throwbacks." Scott Ellis Wins
Who says there are no hot directors anymore?
Scott Ellis, who directed "And the World Goes 'Round," the John Kander and Fred Ebb revue Off Broadway, and "A Little Night Music" at the New York City Opera, is so in demand that the creators of the 1963 Broadway show "110 in the Shade" have declined to let the Goodspeed Opera House revive the musical next June because Mr.
Ellis wants it exclusively for City Opera.
The musical is adapted from "The Rainmaker," which is about a spinster who falls in love with a drifter.
Goodspeed, in East Haddam, Conn., and City Opera have gone head to head this season over "Most Happy Fella," a race that Goodspeed seems to have won.
Its production of the Frank Loesser musical, directed by Gerald Gutierrez, received rave reviews and is to open on Broadway in late January.
By contrast, City Opera's production received mixed reviews, and Mr.
Ellis says that because of Goodspeed's success, City Opera's "Most Happy Fella" will not be televised by PBS as had been hoped.
"I approached Tom Jones, Harvey Schmidt and Richard Nash about doing '110' at least six months ago," Mr.
Ellis says.
"I told them I didn't want to just do a revival but maybe add some songs they had taken out, rearrange some scenes in the second act. It's nothing against Goodspeed, but we want the chance to concentrate on the show ourselves."
Mr.
Jones says, "We haven't heard from anyone about the show for the last 28 years, and in the past three weeks everyone wants it. After we committed to Scott, Goodspeed called and wanted it at the same time, which seemed to confuse matters. We can't be in two places at once, and we wanted to do it the way that would make Scott happy."
Michael Price, the executive producer of Goodspeed, says: "Our entire theater would fit into the lobby of City Opera. We don't see ourselves as competition for them." 'M.
Butterfly' Movie
Plans are moving forward on the film version of "M. Butterfly," David Henry Hwang's Tony Award-winning play.
David Cronenberg, best known for "Dead Ringers" and "The Fly," will direct the film for the David Geffen Company, and Mr.
Hwang will write the screenplay.
Although he would not confirm the casting yet, one executive close to the deal predicts that Jeremy Irons, who starred in "Dead Ringers," will play the role of a diplomat who had a 20-year love affair with an Asian woman who turned out to be a man.
John Lithgow originated the role on Broadway.
As for the role of the lover, played on Broadway by B. D. Wong, who won a Tony Award, the executive says Mr.
Wong's chances of being cast in the movie are slim, but he would not elaborate further.
The role is expected to go instead to Alec Mapa, who has co-starred in the national touring company for the last year with Philip Anglim.
"M. Butterfly" is to start filming in the spring.
Meanwhile, Mr.
Hwang says he is working on a new play called "Face Value," which he describes as "a farce about mistaken racial identity." Domingo on Broadway
And now, the reason you won't have to buy that special someone a tie this Christmas: "Placido Domingo: The Broadway I Love." This new album from Atlantic Records is due out next month.
It features 85 members of the London Symphony Orchestra accompanying the opera star on such tunes as "Tonight," "Send In the Clowns" and "You'll Never Walk Alone." For a duet, "The Last Night of the World" from "Miss Saigon," he sings with -- yes, it's true -- Carly Simon.
This song will be released as the album's single.
Who thought up such a duo?
The veteran record producer Thomas Z. Shepard.
In the small-world category, he is also producing the cast album of "The Secret Garden" for Columbia Records.
Lucy Simon, who wrote its score, recommended her sister.
Another duet on the album pairs Mr.
Domingo with Rebecca Luker -- also from the cast of "The Secret Garden" -- singing "All I Ask of You" from "The Phantom of the Opera."
Mr.
Shepard says he also wishes the world could hear Mr.
Domingo on his recording of "Man of La Mancha." The other voices on that unreleased album include Julia Migenes, Mandy Patinkin and Samuel Ramey.
Mr.
Shepard says the rights have not been cleared with the show's creators, Mitch Leigh, Joe Darion and Dale Wasserman.
Mr.
Wasserman has just filed suit against his co-creators over the rights to a 25th-anniversary production of the musical starring Raul Julia and Sheena Easton.
"They're not talking to each other," Mr.
Shepard says.
"So we just have to wait." Promoting Tommy Tune
No one sells Tommy Tune like Tommy Tune.
When New York fans of "Bye Bye Birdie" trekked to Boston to see the revival of the classic musical that Mr.
Tune has toured with since May, they were treated to a little ad-lib.
Mr.
Tune manages to slip in a reference to the movie version of "Grand Hotel" to raucous effect.
All the "Birdie" Playbills are stuffed with fliers for Mr.
Tune's "Grand Hotel: The Musical," which opens there on Nov. 5.
On Monday, Mr.
Tune was in New York to be honored by the Society of Stage Directors and Choreographers.
On his way, he stopped into Fox 5 News, plugged "Birdie," "Grand Hotel" and his "Will Rogers Follies," then did the weather.
Meanwhile, Marilyn Cooper, the Tony Award-winning actress who plays Mr.
Tune's mother in "Birdie," managed to steal enough spotlight for herself to be cast as Bebe Neuwirth's mother on "Cheers" in episodes later this season.


A Couple of Babes And Their Shadows
The stereotypical shadows of our two Babes, Ruth and Didrikson, two big, tough, crude, jock icons, seem ed to be growing shorter these days as the David Cone case briefly flared, St.
John's University did the right thing, and Mayor Dinkins inched ever closer to declaring New York the next capital of gay and lesbian athletics.
A few years ago, Cone, the young Mets pitcher accused by a young woman of raping her last weekend in Philadelphia, might have been protected by the police and press; his accuser would have been harassed off the stage and the story buried.
St.
John's might have done nothing after several of its athletes were acquitted of sexual assault, claiming that legal innocence precluded moral action.
And a New York Mayor might not be so quick to start beating the drums for the 1994 Gay Games, an event one hopes will continue the process of shrinking those shadows.


Lemke Gets Down And Dirty For Braves
His manager calls him "the original dirt player," and he says it's his "scrappin' " that has put him into the major leagues, and into the playoffs as a starting player.
So to those like Manager Bobby Cox of the Atlanta Braves, it comes as no surprise that if Mark Lemke is going to make a defensive play to save a game, as he did tonight, it would be by diving into the dirt, head-first.
It was also that uniform-grimy quality of Lemke, the Braves' second baseman, that saved a run in the eighth inning and saved the game, a 1-0 victory against the Pirates in the second game of the National League playoffs.


At the Theater: The Manners to Mind
HERE'S one for the books: At a recent performance of "Lips Together, Teeth Apart," the new Terrence McNally play at the Manhattan Theater Club, I sat next to a man who apparently thought he was at home watching "Jeopardy." In a scene when music started to play offstage, he straightened in his seat and cried out: "Ben Hur! Ben Hur! Ben Hur!" By the time he had finished, the unmistakable melody of "Everything's Coming Up Roses," had kicked in.
"Gypsy! Gypsy! Gypsy!" he amended.
All of which, I suppose, was meant to impress his wife, who seemed quite used to ignoring him.
She occupied herself instead by noisily digging through her purse for eyedrops, which she applied, but only after removing her glasses and dropping them on the floor.
At a second recent performance of the same play, the man behind me seemed confused about the location of his seat; he didn't seem to realize it was in the audience, not on the stage.
When a character complimented her husband on doing the crossword puzzle in ink, this man piped up, "Doesn't everybody?" followed by a lengthy critique of the puzzle that ran the previous Sunday.
When another character wondered what the word "fecund" meant, this man suffered an immediate flashback to third-grade English when calling out was still allowed.
And then, as if establishing such extensive linguistic prowess might have somehow obscured his machismo, he burped.


Major Aid to Soviets Tops Agenda At Economic Meeting in Bangkok
The seven major industrial nations, impressed by the worsening financial condition of the Soviet Union and in particular its growing foreign debt, are expected to discuss the granting of substantial foreign aid at a meeting of their finance ministers and central bank chiefs that will begin here Friday.
American officials, traveling to Thailand after an overnight stop in Tokyo, said the agenda at the meeting would be almost completely devoted to the prospect of a Soviet debt crisis and how to solve it before it undermines the country's ability to trade with the West, a critical need.


Review/Music; A Mysterious 'Television Opera'
I think I may have dozed off a bit sometime during Robert Ashley's "El Aficionado" at Merkin Concert Hall on Wednesday night, the third of four nights devoted to the avant-gardist's "television operas." I'm not quite sure because throughout the 80-minute work an array of four singers stood still before their microphones, accompanied by two pianos and a flute that also stayed pretty much in the same position.
So there was no stagecraft I might have missed.
Moreover, the musical accompaniment never went above a demure mezzo-piano, the textures were constructed of repeated chordal and melodic patterns, and even the vocal parts seemed to be improvisations on the notes of tonal chords.
There was, apart from this, no dramatic musical structure, no attempt to create anticipation or suspense or a sense of musical narrative.
There were shifts in mood, perhaps, in a narrow range from the homey to the slightly homesick, but it would have been silly to apply one's conscious mind to keeping track of melodic or harmonic transformations.
The point was to drift along with the words.
And drift I did.


Treasury Bond Selloff Continues
The selloff in the Treasury bond market continued yesterday, as inflation worries prompted speculators and retail accounts alike to sell long-term securities.
Traders feared that the economic recovery sought by the Bush Administration and the Federal Reserve Board may push up inflation.
The rise in bond yields, which continued to move toward 8 percent, came on a day when the nation's leading retail chains reported that sales were weak in September.


Cuban Party Congress Opens With a Call to 'Save the Revolution'


Palestinians Should Accept Israeli Settlers; Private-Sector Plan
To the Editor:
The disagreement over the loan guarantees to Israel can be resolved by extending the guarantees to private-sector investments in Israel, rather than to the Israeli Government.
The loan guarantees to the private sector will facilitate raising capital to build the infrastructure and plants, and to buy the equipment needed to provide employment to the incoming immigrants.


CHRONICLE
When George Bush said, "Read my lips" during the 1988 Presidential campaign, was he aware that the wife of his running mate could actually do so?
If he didn't know then, he probably will soon, because Vice President DAN QUAYLE and his wife, MARILYN QUAYLE , divulged it during an interview with BARBARA WALTERS to be telecast by ABC on "20/20" tonight.
During the course of the interview, Mrs.
Quayle explains that she learned the skill when she went to classes with her younger sister, who is severely hearing impaired.


New Josephthal Owner Moves Closer to Goal
If Dan D. Purjes has a goal, he says it is to preside over "the leading investment bank in this country for small- to medium-sized companies."
Earlier this week, Mr.
Purjes moved a step closer to that claim when Rosenkrantz Lyon &amp; Ross Inc., the investment bank he headed, completed its acquisition of the assets of Josephthal &amp; Company, a struggling brokerage.
Mr.
Purjes, 41 years old, was named chairman and chief executive of the new firm, Josephthal Lyon &amp; Ross Inc.


Governor Offers Plan to Preserve Wilderness Site
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today formally unveiled his decidedly moderated plan for preserving the Adirondack Park Wilderness.
The proposal has drawn less enthusiasm from environmentalists but also less rancor from local officials than the far more aggressive preservation blueprint advanced last year by the Governor's Commission on the Adirondacks.
Mr.
Cuomo's plan focuses on state-financed tax breaks and other incentives to keep back-country forest tracts out of development.
It amounts to the most significant gubernatorial package of legislation affecting the Adirondacks since the early 1970's.
A Better Chance of Passage
The Governor, speaking to a meeting here of the Adirondack North Country Association, a local citizens group, staunchly defended his recommendation as having a much better chance of passing the Republican-controlled State Senate than his commission's package.


Cover-Up Charged in School Official's Sex-Abuse Case
In what investigators described as a cover-up by an "old boys' network," two current and two former officials of the New York City Board of Education were accused yesterday of conducting a cursory investigation of a colleague's conviction for sexually abusing a child and then letting him keep his job.
The two current officials are James T. Stein, who was dismissed by Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez as the $68,394-a-year head of the office that hears appeals by teachers disciplined for misconduct, and Howard S. Tames, the $95,000-a-year head of the office that tests and licenses teachers.
Mr.
Tames, who received a "severe reprimand" from Mr.
Fernandez, heads the office that replaced the Board of Examiners last year.


Seven Troubled Banks Shut in New Hampshire
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation yesterday closed a group of seven New Hamphire banks owned by five diffferent banking companies, and said the banks would open today under new ownership.
The failed banks, which account for about a quarter of the New Hampshire market, were closed and sold as a group rather than individually, to limit disruption of the local economy, L. William Seidman, chairman of the F.D.I.C. said.
Officials at the agency have said they may consider similar treatment of other clusters of weak banks.


William P. Reilly, 73, Advertising Executive
William P. Reilly, who was vice chairman of Young &amp; Rubicam when it became the largest advertising agency in the United States, died on Monday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 73 years old.
He died of cancer, his daughter said.


Official Plans to Retire At Ogilvy &amp; Mather
Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, New York, announced yesterday that Alexander Brody, 58 years old, president and chief executive of international operations, will retire on Dec. 31.
His duties will be assumed by Graham Phillips, 52, chairman and chief executive.
As a result, an agency spokeswoman said, Mr.
Phillips will devote less time to the agency's national operations.
The appointment in May of Rochelle Lazarus as president of Ogilvy &amp; Mather-New York helped make that possible, the spokeswoman added.


Traffic Alert
Amsterdam Avenue Street Fair: Amsterdam Avenue will be closed tomorrow between 77th and 86th Streets from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.
East 50's Association Fair: Third Avenue will be closed Sunday between 46th and 56th Streets from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.


Sounds Around Town
Big Names
Latin Jazz U.S.A., Avery Fisher Hall, (212) 875-5030.
Chico O'Farrill has been arranging for Latin jazz groups since the be-bop era, and he has long since mastered the combination of high-powered rhythm and daring harmony.
At Avery Fisher Hall, he will lead a 20-piece big band with five powerhouse guests: the alto saxophonist Paquito D'Rivera, the pianist Hilton Ruiz, the conga player Mongo Santamaria, the flutist Dave Valentin and the saxophonist Stanley Turrentine.
Tonight at 8; tickets are $25 to $35.
From Haiti
"The Spirit of Liberation," Aaron Davis Hall, 134th Street and Convent Avenue, Manhattan, (212) 650-6900.
On Aug. 22, 1791, a slave and vodoun (voodoo) priest named Boukman fomented the Haitian revolution that created an independent Haiti.
As part of a series called ". . . And Then Columbus," the Caribbean Center has assembled a concert for that bicentennial, with the vodoun drumming and chanting of La Troupe Makandal and the lilting, guitar-driven compas dance music of Les Skah Shah, along with three dance companies: Roots of Brazil, Forces of Nature and Pura Fe.
Although the recent military coup in Haiti, which overthrew its elected Government, may lend more gravity to the occasion, the music's spirit should hold up.
Tomorrow at 7:30 P.M.; tickets are $12 in advance, $15 at the door, $6 for children and the elderly.
Information: (212) 307-7420.


Joseph Merrin, 91, A Manhattan Jeweler
Joseph Merrin, who founded a prominent Fifth Avenue jewelry company, died Oct. 3 at home in Manhattan.
He was 91 years old.
He died of a stroke, his family said.


Laurie Harris, Manager, Wed
Laurie Lee Harris, a senior manager of the accounting firm of KPMG Peat Marwick, and William Doig Brennan, an associate director at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the financial concern, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Stan Moseley officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
The bride, 33 years old, is keeping her name.
A summa cum laude graduate of the University of Southern California at Los Angeles, she is a daughter of Beverly Harris of Redondo Beach, Calif., and the late Anthony Harris.
Her parents owned Anthony's Jewelers in Hermosa Beach, Calif.


Your Money; Time to Review Benefits Is Now
With employers increasingly adopting flexible, or cafeteria-style, benefit plans, many of which require re-enrollment in the fourth quarter, millions of Americans face important choices about their financial security.
Even for people in traditional benefit plans, it is useful to review whether there are gaps in coverage they ought to supplement.
Some flexible plans offer more choices than others.
But the basic idea is that employees are given a menu to select how much health, life and disability insurance they want and an opportunity to put away money on a nontaxable basis for dependent care and unreimbursed medical expenses.


Prof. Anita F. Hill: 'I Felt That I Had to Tell the Truth'
Following is the text of the opening statement by Prof.
Anita F. Hill at the Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on the nomination of Clarence Thomas to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Thurmond, members of the committee:


Review/Fashion; Unadorned Elegance From Armani
For a long time, suits tailored for men were an important fashion category.
Marlene Dietrich wore them in the 1930's, Rosalind Russell popularized them in the 1940's, and a new wave of female executives and lawyers rushed into them in the 1970's.
More feminine styles called dressmaker suits offered an alternative.
They were made with fancy collars and pockets, softened with gathers and cut with sometimes exaggerated curves.


Kerkorian Buys Chrysler Shares
Kirk Kerkorian, the California investor, confirmed his purchase of six million Chrysler Corporation common shares.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Kerkorian and the Tracinda Corporation, his investment company, said they bought the shares on Oct. 9 at $10.125 each.
Mr.
Kerkorian paid for the shares in cash in Chrysler's new underwritten public offering, which was priced Oct. 1 at $10.125 a share.
The investor now holds 28 million common shares, or a 9.8 percent stake, about the same as what he had before Chrysler's recent offering of 35 million common shares.


Member of Temple Where 9 Died Faces Old Charge
A prominent member of Wat Promkunaram, the temple near here where nine Buddhists were slain two months ago, has been arrested in an old drug case, dealing another setback to temple members trying to recover from the killings.
The suspect, Lamthong Sudthisa-Ard, was arrested Tuesday by Federal officers on California drug charges dating from 1978, a spokesman for the Drug Enforcement Administration, John Albano, said today.


Political Memo; Cuomo Utters a 'Maybe' But Hastens to Add 'Not'
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo told a group of supporters at a private meeting yesterday that he was thinking about running for President, and then spent the rest of the day insisting that he had not said anything that anyone should be interested in.
Thus Mr.
Cuomo set off another round of the now familiar guessing game, "Will he or won't he?" Mr.
Cuomo, who has steadfastly insisted that he has no plans to run for President and no plans to make plans, was now raising the possibility that he was planning to make some.


Keep Congressional Fax Machines On
To the Editor:
Victor Navasky asks in "Two Cents' Worth for Nothing" (Op-Ed, Sept. 29), on the Congressional privilege of free mailing to constituents: "Why should the frank work only one way? Why not extend it to citizens who want to let their representatives know what's in their hearts and on their minds, as Canada does?" He proposes a law permitting letters sent by all of us to senators or representatives to find their way to Washington without a stamp on the envelope -- a two-way frank.


Public &amp; Private; An American Tragedy
He said that if I ever told anyone of his behavior, that it would ruin his career.
And he was right.
The members of the Senate Judiciary Committee sat in silence yesterday as their chairman led an obviously intelligent and thoughtful female professor of law through the first discussion of genitalia in the history of the Supreme Court confirmation process.
The event was by turns seamy, surreal and stunning, and was carried on all major networks in its entirety.
It was the first time I have ever switched off the TV during a Senate hearing because my children had entered the room.


Knicks Look Just As Snappy As Riley in Exhibition Opener
The Knicks opened their preseason last night with a showing that opened some eyes to their potential.
Pulling away in the second half, the Knicks coasted to a 117-91 victory over the Dallas Mavericks before 12,471 at Madison Square Garden.
Pat Riley's coaching debut could not have been more pleasant.
He was greeted with a warm ovation during introductions, then the Knicks' strong performance made him feel even better.


Americans Riveted By Lesson in Civics
In cities and towns far and wide, Americans took time out from their workaday lives yesterday to tune into an extraordinary civics lesson: the riveting collision before the Senate Judiciary Committee between Judge Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court nominee, and Anita F. Hill, the Oklahoma law professor who said she was sexually harassed by him.
For a nearly a week now, since the charges became public, they have been topic No. 1 in offices and universities, in restaurants and on street corners, with many women celebrating the sudden public discussion of a heretofore private subject and many men wondering about their own conduct, present, past and future.


What's Wrong With Tolls on East River Bridges? Plenty; Only on Weekdays  To the Editor:   I think two points need to be considered to make the proposal by Roger C. Altman and Donald D. Kummerfeld about putting tolls on the East River bridges (Op-Ed, Sept. 28) more palatable to the commuters who use the bridges.


Consumer Sales Post Rise of 0.7%
After holding back in August, consumers spent a bit more freely in September but not enough to change the sluggish economic outlook.
The Commerce Department reported yesterday that retail sales -- which include everything from groceries and gas to autos and appliances -- rose last month by a total of seven-tenths of 1 percent.


Pagliarulo Hits It a Ton As Twins Win It in 10
The American League Championship Series was billed as a battle of the bullpens.
Even though Minnesota Manager Tom Kelly was immensely proud of his relief corps, anchored by stopper Rick Aguilera, he conceded that Toronto's group was deeper.
Tonight, the battle of the bullpens raged into extra innings in Game 3 at the Skydome.
This time, the Blue Jays' relievers failed.
Right-handed rookie Mike Timlin gave up a one-out, pinch-hit home run to Mike Pagliarulo in the 10th inning that allowed the Twins to sneak away with a 3-2 victory and a 2-1 lead in the series.


Bad Times at the A-Bomb Factory
When the Savannah River Plant, the nation's main installation for the manufacture of nuclear bombs, was built in the 1950's near Aiken, S. C., it was like "gold rush days," recalls a local resident in Mark Mori and Susan Robinson's frightening documentary, "Building Bombs."
Almost overnight, the population of the area grew from 13,000 to 55,000.
Aiken became a thriving company town run by the Du Pont Company, which built and operated the plant until the 1980's, when it was taken over by Westinghouse.


Corrections
The Where to Find It column in The Home Section on Thursday about vacuum cleaner repairs omitted an authorized factory service center.
The Electrolux center is at 142 West 23d Street, New York, N.Y. 10011; (212) 737-2045.


Sports of The Times; Torborgs Aren't Selling The House
They built the house.
Well, not with their own hands, but they had it built for them, and that is nearly the same thing, after 26 years.
They even know the anniversary.
"October 20th," said Suzie Torborg. "That's the closing date."


News Summary
International 2-5


Patents; Sensitive Alarms Use Fiber Optics
A small California company has patented two new ways to use fiber optics to make security systems that can spot intruders, sniff smoke or detect dangerous chemicals.
Fiber optics, which relay information in the form of light pulses that shoot down hair-thin glass threads, is already a mainstay in telecommunications.
In recent years, however, a growing number of companies have been developing optical fibers as extremely sensitive sensors that react to changes in pressure and temperature and can be adapted for an almost unlimited number of jobs.


EXECUTIVES
*
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., New York, named Stephen I. Sadove president of its Clairol unit. *
Credit Lyonnais Securities Inc., New York, the U.S. unit of Credit Lyonnais Group, appointed Mark J. Diamond head of its equity division.
Mr.
Diamond had previously been head of business development for Credit Lyonnais Group's capital markets division in London.


Fire Reported in Generator Area At the Chernobyl Nuclear Plant
A fire broke out yesterday in an electrical generator at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in the Soviet Ukraine, where a 1986 explosion caused a nuclear catastrophe, news reports said.
Tanya Demidenko, the wife of a leader of the Ukrainian Green World Party, said by telephone that Kiev television reported that an electrical cable caught fire in a building housing a turbine at about 6 P.M.
Ukrainian time.


New Shop Has Camel; Y.&amp;R. Out
Young &amp; Rubicam New York yesterday lost its Camel cigarette account, with an estimated $30 million in annual advertising spending, to an agency being started by two former employees who had worked on the account.
After reports of the switch began circulating in the advertising community yesterday afternoon, David N. Iacuo, senior vice president for marketing for the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company in Winston-Salem, N.C., issued a statement disclosing the change for the country's sixth-best-selling cigarette brand.


Corrections
The Sun, Moon, Planets column of the Weather Report has listed the time of the next full moon incorrectly since Sept. 30.
It will occur on Oct. 23 at 7:09 A.M.


Golf As Kids' Game: It's All in the Approach
Pros are developing new techniques for teaching golf to children.
But the methods for learning apply to adults as well since they take child's play seriously.
The approaches simplify golf by taking a harder look at the game's fundamentals and de-emphasizing its technicalities.
In an effort to bring children into the sport, professionals are looking for ways to interest youngsters at an early age.
"If you were to survey kids to find out their perceptions of golf, you might find them saying that it is for older, wealthy people, or that it's slow, it's lonely," said Mike Peterson, manager of junior gold for the Professional Golfers Association.
"They've seen it on TV, but no one's challenged them with the experience of being able to hit the ball farther than with anything else."
The P.G.A. has developed peewee programs over the last decade to help bridge the gap from junior into adult play.
Clubs for Kids includes an equipment exchange using donated clubs.
And there are support materials for professionals who want to start teaching programs.
Many Tournaments
Other groups, like the American Junior Golf Association in Roswell, Ga., foster junior competition.
The association oversees 28 tournaments annually for players 13-18 years of age.
The focus is apparently having its effects.
The National Golf Foundation in Sturat, Fla., estimates that there were more than two million junior golfers between the ages of 12 and 17 in the United States in 1990.
The number reflects an increase of nearly 600,000 over 1986 figures.
An additional 630,000 children, 5 to 11 years old, played golf in 1990, the foundation reports.
It is the younger-aged children that are increasingly becoming the focus of professionals.
"Anyone who plays the sport at its highest levels played as kids," said Tom Wishon, president of Bynacraft Golf Products in Newarks, Ohio.
Wishon's company recently began marketing children's clubs in two sizes: for ages 4-6 and 7-9, the sets include a putter and a No. 7 iron, and rubberized balls.
The clubs go hand-in-hand with a new teaching program developed by Donna Hamilton, a golf instructor at the Tam O'Shanter golf course in Canton, Ohio.
The basic tenets of the program, "Play Golf With Toby," are visual.
Hamilton's teaching technique grew out of her 15 years instructing adults.
Her program, fostered by the Ladies Professional Golf Association, makes use of common teaching techniques using sensory systems.
"We've been taught, 'Head down, arms straight, shift your weight, clear your chip, sit on a stool, hand ahead of the ball,' " said Hamilton in a recent interview.
"All of these give mental pictures that have nothing to do with hitting a ball correctly."
Instead, Hamilton's program stresses the importance of doing what comes naturally.
"Golf has been taught to be too complicated for a long time," she said.
"I thought that the way adults could learn is through the eyes of children."
She started drawing faces on the club heads for her adult students.
She sketched a happy face on the club face, and toes on the club toe.
The idea formed the basics of a swing: keep the toes up on the clubface for the backswing; two up on the fore swing.
The concept centered around "Toby," a cartoon figure who was learning to swing a golf club.
Hamilton worked together with Wishon on a book of verse for children showing the Toby character.
The picture of an elephant swinging his trunk from side to side was included to further develop the concept.
The sensory image of the club "swooshing" through an arc was designed to bring hearing into the learning process.
Although the Toby program is geared for children, adults are buying the book as well, said Hamilton.
"To learn something, you have to have something in our brain to attach it to," said Hamilton.
The longer I teach, the more basic my teaching becomes.
Focusing on Club Swing
The Toby program centers on the club swing.
Hamilton advised parents to encourage their children to hit golf balls in a field.
"I don't think little children need a course to play golf," she said.
"For them, it's enough to hit the ball."
Experts agree that the inherent nature of the game can turn children off.
The sport requires concentration and skillful eye-hand coordination, both of which demand a certain level of maturity.
Peterson said that the P.G.A. programs try to make sure junior players have strength to swing a club and the discipline to follow instructions.
Beyond that, teachers look for enthusiasm.
"I've seen 5-year-olds who do very well, and others who shouldn't play until they're 9 or 10," said Peterson.
An innovative teaching program within New York City schools has found ways to make golf not only palatabe, but exciting, to inner-city youths.
One way is to give students golf clubs to use for hitting tennis balls on a baseball field.
When they hit the ball, they run the bases.
"The kids seem tenative when you put a golf club in their hands," said Jean Schneider, program coordinator.
"It's a lot easier to teach them golf if you make the game familiar to them." The course, developed by the New York Metropolitan P.G.A. offers golf lessons at 10 of the city's public schools; two in each of the city's five boroughs.
P.G.A. professionals work with gym insturctors.
Equiopent is donated, as is time on the city's 13 public courses.
Under the subsidized arrangement, it might cost a pre-teen 25 cents to play a round of golf.
Last year, nearly 1,000 teen-agers participated.
"Golf is a lifelong game," said Schneider.
"We're tyrying to sell the game to kids right now."


Excerpts From Senate's Hearings on the Thomas Nomination
Following are excerpts from the Senate Judiciary Committee hearing today on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.
Also testifying was Anita F. Hill.
Questions From Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr.
Democrat of Delaware
Can you describe to us how it was that you came to move over to the E.E.O.C. with Judge Thomas?


Injury Puts Giants' Baker Into Hospital
Stephen Baker, the Giants' 5-foot-8-inch, 160-pound split end, was hospitalized today for further examination of his back.
He remained doubtful for the game Monday night against the Steelers in Pittsburgh.
Baker twisted his back Sunday in the Giants' 20-9 victory over the Phoenix Cardinals.
He has suffered spasms since.


CHRONICLE
He has the same name as his illustrious forebear -- CRISTOBAL COLON, or Christopher Columbus -- and not surprisingly, the same occupation, sort of: lieutenant commander in the Spanish navy.
Today, Senor Colon, who also holds the titles Duke of Veragua and Marquis of Jamaica, is to dedicate a time capsule at the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum containing a copy of his great (20 times) grandfather's log and tomorrow, be the grand marshal of the Hispanic Columbus Day parade.
This week, he also met with PRESIDENT BUSH.
Although the Duke, who lives in Madrid, plans to return to this country to be grand marshal of the Tournament of Roses parade on New Year's Day -- "one of the most important things in my voyages," he said yesterday -- he cannot spend the entire Year of Columbus here.
"I work every day, so I can only stay a few days at a time," he said.
And when not working, he has an appropriate hobby for a man of his lineage.
"I build small wooden model ships," he said.
"I even prepare them in bottles."


Classical Music in Review
'Improvement (Don Leaves Linda)'  Merkin Concert Hall


Thousands of Haitians Protest Coup
Tens of thousands of Haitian demonstrators spilled into lower Manhattan from Brooklyn yesterday in a spirited show of support for their nation's ousted President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Clogged by more than 60,000 demonstrators -- the police estimate -- the streets of the financial district were virtually paralyzed for most of the afternoon.
Marching groups split like amoebas into independent pockets of chanting, flag-waving enthusiasts.


INSIDE
Bush Vetoes Benefits Bill Citing a need for budget discipline, the President rejected legislation that would have given additional unemployment benefits to people out of work more than six months.
Page 6.
One Step Closer
The President formed a Bush-Quayle '92 Primary Committee, a move that allows him to go ahead with already scheduled fund-raising events for his re-election campaign.
Page 6.
Yes, He Is.
No.
Maybe.
Political contributors say Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo told them he was considering running for President.
But later he said he had no plans.
Page 31.
Rights and Child Abuse
Westchester officials have agreed to what could be a national model "bill of rights" for the targets of child-abuse investigations.
Page 31.


Twins' Unlikely Hero Scorned by Yankees
Manager Tom Kelly strolled past Mike Pagliarulo's crowded locker, spied about two dozen reporters and said, "Hey, Mike, did you open your eyes yet?"
Then Kent Hrbek politely asked his teammate to move all his friends with notebooks and cameras to another part of the clubhouse because they were impeding the first baseman from getting a beer out of the refrigerator.


Impending Talks Rack Israeli Nerves
As they accept the likelihood that a Middle East peace conference will take place fairly soon, Israelis have succumbed to growing anxieties about the diplomatic consequences that await them abroad and the physical dangers they risk at home.
While jittery feelings are hardly a stranger to a country long used to living on the edge, many here say that such sentiments have reached an acute level not seen in a long time.
Heading the worry list is Israel's relationship with the United States, which is viewed from here as being welded to a roller coaster's downward slope.


Judge Clarence Thomas: 'My Name Has Been Harmed'
Following is the text of the opening statement by Judge Clarence Thomas at the Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on his nomination to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Thurmond, members of the committee.


Killing in Sicily Sets Off Backlash Against Mob
Since mobsters gunned down a Sicilian industrialist a month ago because he refused to pay protection money to the Mafia, Italy has been seized with an extraordinary wave of revulsion against organized crime gangs, even as the mobs seek to spread their trade in exortion, narcotics and money-laundering far from their traditional fiefdoms in the poverty-laden south.


Nets Cut Two Centers
He may have thrilled them in Queens, but center SEAN MUTO won't be wowing them in New Jersey.
Muto, a former St.
John's starter, was cut by the Nets yesterday along with another center, BRIAN D'AMICO of North Carolina State, as the team made its first roster trims.


Holiday on Monday
Columbus Day is observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK Parade: Begins at 11:30 at 46th Street and Fifth Avenue, going north on Fifth Avenue to 86th Street.
Government offices: Federal, state and municipal are closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed.
Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.
Sanitation: No collections or street cleanings.
Schools: Closed.
Financial markets: Open.
Transportation: Regular schedules.
NEW JERSEY Government offices: Federal and state closed; municipal option to close.
Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Banks: Closed.
Schools: Local option.
Transportation: Regular schedules.
CONNECTICUT Government offices: Federal, State and municipal closed.
Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Banks: Closed.
Schools: Closed.
Transportation: Regular schedules.


Forstmann Little and Whittle End Talks
Forstmann Little &amp; Company and Whittle Communications said yesterday that they had discontinued talks on a deal in which Forstmann would have invested $350 million in Whittle in exchange for a one-third stake.
Whittle, 50 percent owned by Time Warner Inc., is best known for providing advertiser-driven programming to schools.
Its operations also include books that carry advertising.
Forstmann Little is an investment firm that has specialized in leveraged buyouts.


Golf As Kids' Game: It's All in the Approach
Pros are developing new techniques for teaching golf to children.
But the methods for learning apply to adults as well since they take child's play seriously.
The approaches simplify golf by taking a harder look at the game's fundamentals and de-emphasizing its technicalities.
In an effort to bring children into the sport, professionals are looking for ways to interest youngsters at an early age.


I.B.M. Will Delay an Anticipated Product
I.B.M. disclosed yesterday that it would not meet its end-of-the-year goal for shipping a new version of its advanced personal computer operating system.
It has been counting on the system to blunt the growing influence of the Microsoft Corporation's Windows program.
The setback, which the International Business Machines Corporation said had resulted from customers' concerns that arose in a product-testing program, is likely to hurt the company's credibility as it struggles to regain its authority in an increasingly bitter marketing war with its former partner.


Pirates Need Bonds to Play Like Bonds
Barry Bonds has hit the magic number, and if it doesn't change soon, the Pittsburgh Pirates could disappear from postseason play for the second successive season.
That's only one of the Pirates' concerns as the National League Championship Series shifts here for three games beginning Saturday.
If the Pirates aren't careful, they could disappear in the torrent of tomahawks, tom-toms and tribal tunes that cascade over the once-silent Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium.


Patents; Coated Balls Remove Hazards From Fumes
Using what looks like a dishwasher packed with plastic Wiffle Balls, a pollution-control company in Santa Clara, Calif., has patented a scrubbing system that it says can remove virtually all the dangerous compounds in fumes produced by chemical processes.
The system is already being used by semiconductor companies to purify the toxic fumes produced while etching computer chips.
Officials of Vector Technology said they want to market their system to a wide range of other chemical and industrial customers.


BRIEFS
*
Ames Department Stores Inc., Rocky Hill, Conn., said a U.S.
Bankruptcy Court has extended until Nov. 14 the period of exclusivity for the company to file its own reorganization plan under Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy law. *
Chrysler Corp., Highland Park, Mich., said talks with Mitsubishi Motors Corp., Tokyo, about the possible sale of Chrysler's 50 percent stake in their Diamond Star Motors venture were continuing, but no decision had been made yet.


Pagliarulo Hits It a Ton As Twins Win It in 10
The American League Championship Series was billed as a battle of the bullpens.
Even though Minnesota Manager Tom Kelly was immensely proud of his relief corps, anchored by stopper Rick Aguilera, he conceded that Toronto's group was deeper.
Tonight, the battle of the bullpens raged into extra innings in Game 3 at the Skydome.
This time, the Blue Jays' relievers failed.
Right-handed rookie Mike Timlin gave up a one-out, pinch-hit home run to Mike Pagliarulo in the 10th inning that allowed the Twins to sneak away with a 3-2 victory and a 2-1 lead in the series.


Soybean Prices Off Sharply; Wheat Up on Crop Report
Soybean futures prices were battered on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday as the market adjusted to prospects of a huge crop in the fields.
Corn futures, meanwhile, overcame early losses and wheat closed higher on a bullish crop production report from the Agriculture Department.


Suspect in Spree Refused to Fight Loss of His Job
Months before conducting what authorities call a murderous vendetta over his dismissal from his job, a former postal clerk here refused an offer to help him fight to keep it, a local union official said today.
"He said he would take care of things in his own way," said Thomas Duayne, president and shop steward of the Ridgewood local of the American Postal Workers Union.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sept. 30, with an article about competing abortion rallies in Manhattan, misstated the action of an abortion rights demonstrator.
She was holding her sign in the face of an anti-abortion demonstrator, not trying to rip his sign.


Dollar Has Broad Decline On Low U.S. Inflation Data
The dollar settled broadly lower on world currency markets yesterday after a better-than-expected report on United States inflation raised the possibility that interest rates might decline.
Gold prices advanced after falling overseas.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery settled at $359.90 an ounce, up $1.10 from Thursday.
The Republic National Bank quoted a late bid for gold of $359.50, up $1.20.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy


Consumer Sales Post Rise of 0.7%
After holding back in August, consumers spent a bit more freely in September but not enough to change the sluggish economic outlook.
The Commerce Department reported yesterday that retail sales -- which include everything from groceries and gas to autos and appliances -- rose last month by a total of seven-tenths of 1 percent.


Guidepost; Updating Your Portfolio
Wall Street professionals say personal portfolios ought to be reviewed regularly.
The experts now favor long-term Treasury securities.
Among stocks, interest has shifted to growth stocks like technologies, pollution control, pharmaceuticals and utilities.
Cyclical stocks like autos, steel and heavy industry are viewed cautiously.
Here are how four brokerage firms recommend allocating assets, with their recommendations in the previous quarters of 1991.
Firm
Stocks
Bonds
Cash
DEAN WITTER
3d quarter
Y45%
Y45%
Y10%
2d quarter
Y55
Y40
Y5
1st quarter
Y55
Y35
Y10
GRUNTAL
3d quarter
Y55
Y30
Y15
2d quarter
Y55
Y30
Y15
1st quarter
Y55
Y30
Y15
3d quarter
Y60
Y35
Y5
2d quarter
Y55
Y40
Y5
1st quarter
Y60
Y35
Y5
PAINE WEBBER
3d quarter
Y63
Y35
Y2
2d quarter
Y55
Y40
Y5
1st quarter
Y60
Y35
Y5


Observer; Potomac Breakdown
Washington is having a nervous breakdown.
It has been coming for a long time.
The hysteria about the Thomas nomination is not the cause of it, just the final bursting of the dam when all restraints collapse and howling replaces civil discourse, telling us something is terribly wrong.
What could be crazier than the Senate, after giving Judge Thomas a free pass on the abortion issue, suddenly finding itself shocked -- shocked! -- at the idea he may have made lewd suggestions to Anita Hill?


Knicks Look Just As Snappy As Riley in Exhibition Opener
The Knicks opened their preseason last night with a showing that opened some eyes to their potential.
Pulling away in the second half, the Knicks coasted to a 117-91 victory over the Dallas Mavericks before 12,471 at Madison Square Garden.
Pat Riley's coaching debut could not have been more pleasant.
He was greeted with a warm ovation during introductions, then the Knicks' strong performance made him feel even better.


Review/Television; In Dramatic Hearings on Thomas, No Soap Opera Fan Need Feel Cheated
No soap opera fan can complain that the Senate Judiciary Committee hearings that usurped the network tales of sex and power could not deliver their daily emotional fix.
It was an astounding day for television viewers, right up there with Watergate.
The hearing room at the Russell Senate Office Building served as a setting for a much better than average, real life, made for television drama.
The political battle took the form, favored by television, of a confrontation between a man and a woman whose testimony could not be reconciled and who would be judged as much on how their characters came through on the tube as on anything they said.


Gay Protesters March on California Capitol to Protest Veto


Westchester Pledges New Rules in Child-Abuse Inquiries
Westchester County officials have agreed to broad new rules for the conduct of child-abuse investigations that experts said could serve as a national model "bill of rights" for the targets of child abuse inquiries.
Traditionally, child-abuse regulations have emphasized the urgency of investigating complaints while paying less attention to the rights of parents and the possible victims themselves.


Incineration Must Remain a Waste Option
To the Editor:
Pennsylvania landfills receive enormous volumes of New York and New Jersey garbage, and the citizens of Pennsylvania are not happy about it.
They don't want their state-of-the-art facilities filled with other people's trash.
Pennsylvania officials have taken measures to keep out their neighbors' waste, but they do have a point: New York and New Jersey need to develop more waste-disposal capacity -- now.


Simon Group's Big Honolulu Profit
Even as it unravels, an investment partnership headed by William E. Simon is continuing to chalk up big profits.
Mr.
Simon's group said today that it had sold HonFed Bank, Hawaii's largest savings institution, to the BankAmerica Corporation.
Terms were not disclosed, but people involved in the transaction said it would yield the group roughly five times its 1986 equity investment of $17 million.


Review/Opera; The Met Revives 'Fanciulla del West'
Though the Metropolitan Opera presented the world premiere of "La Fanciulla del West" in 1910, the new production unveiled on Thursday night marked only the 65th performance of this work in the company's history, and the first since 1970.
Puccini thought it "the best of my operas," adapting it from the play by David Belasco (who also provided the composer with Madama Butterfly &amp; Company), but that turned out to be a minority opinion.
The opera's lyricism was deliberately embedded in the midst of continuous development, not providing the framed melodic hits expected from Puccini.
So "La Girl," as he called it, languished.
But as Thursday's performance showed, the work deserves a more favored place in the repertory.
We may have to tolerate the notion of Wild West gold miners singing in Italian (except for a few choice words like "hello," "dooda, dooda day" and "whisky"), and we may have to resign ourselves to hearing American frontiersmen singing Puccini melodies redolent of Debussy and Strauss.
We may even have to accept the notion that a poker game would be played for custody of a man bleeding profusely from a bullet wound.
But the Met still made a strong case for treating this peculiar opera with respect and even admiration.


Miss Williams Marries in Rye
Laura Lamson Williams and Patrick Gerard Ralph Jodice, biologists with the Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission, were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y.
Msgr.
Daniel Peake performed the ceremony with the Rev.
David Uhl, a Presbyterian minister, attending.
Mrs.
Jodice, 28 years old, is the biology director of the Chinsegut Nature Center in Brooksville, Fla.
A graduate of Williams College, she received a master's degree in science education from the University of Maine.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Allison Williams of Rye.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy.


Patents; No-Alcohol Hair Spray May Help Reduce Smog
Cosmosol Ltd. of White Plains, a company that develops aerosol products, has patented an alcohol-free hair spray that the company said should cause less smog than existing sprays.
Most hair sprays use alcohol as a solvent for hair-setting chemicals because the propellants that push the spray out of the can typically do not mix with water.
But alcohol can quickly attach to other chemicals in the atmosphere and form smog.


Bridge
Iceland won the Bermuda Bowl title here this afternoon after playing convincingly throughout the 12 days of play at the NEC World Team Championships.
In a final of 160 deals the Icelanders defeated Poland by 39 imps, outperforming their opponents in both bidding and play.
The winners were Orn Arnthorsson, Gudmundur Arnarson, Jon Baldursson, Gudlaugur Johannsson, Thorlakur Jonsson and Adalsteinn Jorgensen.
Their upset victory has sparked great excitement in their island home.
About 25 percent of Iceland's adults play the game, and there are 3,000 tournament players.


Golf As Kids' Game: It's All in the Approach
Pros are developing new techniques for teaching golf to children.
But the methods for learning apply to adults as well since they take child's play seriously.
The approaches simplify golf by taking a harder look at the game's fundamentals and de-emphasizing its technicalities.
In an effort to bring children into the sport, professionals are looking for ways to interest youngsters at an early age.


Keeping Better Track Of Checkbook Balances
Checkbook calculators were originally designed to be handy tools for totaling purchases paid for by check.
They did nothing more than add, subtract, divide and multiply.
Royal Consumer Business Products, of Royal typewriter fame, now sells checkbook calculators -- checkbook cover and pen included -- that provide much more than a crutch for the mathphobic.


Knicks Look Just As Snappy As Riley in Exhibition Opener
The Knicks opened their preseason last night with a showing that opened some eyes to their potential.
Pulling away in the second half, the Knicks coasted to a 117-91 victory over the Dallas Mavericks before 12,471 at Madison Square Garden.
Pat Riley's coaching debut could not have been more pleasant.
He was greeted with a warm ovation during introductions, then the Knicks' strong performance made him feel even better.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE -- Named Gail Hunter and Catherine Goldner Major Legue Baseball Properties account supervisors, effective Oct. 21 for Hunter and Nov. 1 for Goldner.
American League


Devices Can Block Unwanted Phone Use
Those late-night television commercials for the Ginsu knife have been replaced by a flood of commercials for telephone services offering everything from stock prices to quotes from the Pope, for fees as high as $9 a minute.
The calls are so popular that the "information service" industry is expected to gross $1.2 billion this year and about $2 billion in 1992, according to Link Resources, a marketing research concern.
There have also been bitter complaints, particularly from parents whose children have run up enormous bills.
A teen-ager in Washington ran up a total of $8,863 in bills over two months.


Harry T. Marks, 83, Executive in Cleveland
Harry T. Marks, retired chairman and chief executive officer of the Ferro Corporation of Cleveland, a large manufacturer of industrial materials, died Wednesday at Lakewood Hospital in Lakewood, Ohio.
He was 83 years old.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his family said.


To Specific Charges, Some Strong Denials
Expressing his embarassment at discussing such issues in public, Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, listed some of the specific allegations made by Prof.
Anita F. Hill and asked Judge Clarence Thomas if they were true.
"Did you ever say in words or substance something like, 'There is a pubic hair in my Coke?' " Mr.
Hatch asked a tight-jawed Judge Thomas.
"No, Senator," he replied.


Composers Orchestra
The American Composers Orchestra is to open its 1991-92 season at Carnegie Hall tomorrow at 3 P.M., with Lawrence Leighton Smith conducting world premieres by Ezra Laderman and Daniel Asia and the New York premieres of works by Morton Subotnik and Leslie Bassett.
Emanuel Ax is the soloist for the Laderman Second Piano Concerto.
Tickets are $9 to $35.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


THOMAS ACCUSER TELLS HEARING OF OBSCENE TALK AND ADVANCES; JUDGE COMPLAINS OF 'LYNCHING'
Confronting a disputed nomination to the Supreme Court and a boiling political furor, the Senate Judiciary Committee heard gripping but contradictory testimony today from Judge Clarence Thomas and the woman accusing him of sexual harassment.
The proceedings in a jammed hearing room at the Russell Senate Office Building amounted to a political drama centered on two extraordinarily composed figures, Judge Thomas and his accuser, Anita F. Hill, an Oklahoma law professor.


Pagliarulo Hits It a Ton As Twins Win It in 10
The American League Championship Series was billed as a battle of the bullpens.
Even though Minnesota Manager Tom Kelly was immensely proud of his relief corps, anchored by stopper Rick Aguilera, he conceded that Toronto's group was deeper.
Tonight, the battle of the bullpens raged into extra innings in Game 3 at the Skydome.
This time, the Blue Jays' relievers failed.
Right-handed rookie Mike Timlin gave up a one-out, pinch-hit home run to Mike Pagliarulo in the 10th inning that allowed the Twins to sneak away with a 3-2 victory and a 2-1 lead in the series.


Madrid Journal; War on Drugs Becomes A War on the Gypsies
Exuding the fervor of crusaders and citing the sacred cause of their children's safety, several dozen men and women have declared war on drugs by blocking construction of homes for 88 gypsy families on a muddy plot of land in a southern Madrid suburb.
"Mind you, we're not racists," a woman in her 40's proclaimed, "but we already have four gypsy camps in our neighborhood, and they are responsible for the drug problem. We want this to become a park. The gypsies can go elsewhere."


Classical Music in Review
Mozartean Players  Weill Recital Hallt


Bayonne Bridge Closed Following Accident
A loading boom on a container ship struck and damaged the Bayonne Bridge this morning, forcing officials to close the bridge for repairs, which could take a week.
The bridge, the only one linking Staten Island with Hudson County, N.J., carries thousands of commuters daily.


Pio Cabanillas Gallas, Politician, 67
Pio Cabanillas Gallas, a conservative member of the European Parliament and a Cabinet minister during Spain's transition from dictatorship to democracy, died on Thursday of a heart attack.
He was 67 years old.
Mr.
Cabanillas, a lawyer, helped write the press law of 1966, abolishing censorship.
He also served as Minister of Information and Tourism and was a member of the Council of the Realm, Franco's highest advisory body.


Political Memo; Cuomo Utters a 'Maybe' But Hastens to Add 'Not'
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo told a group of supporters at a private meeting yesterday that he was thinking about running for President, and then spent the rest of the day insisting that he had not said anything that anyone should be interested in.
Thus Mr.
Cuomo set off another round of the now familiar guessing game, "Will he or won't he?" Mr.
Cuomo, who has steadfastly insisted that he has no plans to run for President and no plans to make plans, was now raising the possibility that he was planning to make some.


Piano by the Dichters
Misha and Cipa Dichter are to open the Distinguished Artists Series with a recital of solo and duo-piano music, tonight at 8 P.M. at the 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue in Manhattan.
The program will be Schubert's "Grand Duo" Sonata in C, Rachmaninoff's Symphonic Dances for Two Pianos (Op. 45), and solo-piano works by Schubert and Bartok.
Tickets are $25.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Consumer Sales Post Rise of 0.7%
After holding back in August, consumers spent a bit more freely in September but not enough to change the sluggish economic outlook.
The Commerce Department reported yesterday that retail sales -- which include everything from groceries and gas to autos and appliances -- rose last month by a total of seven-tenths of 1 percent.


Bond Prices Surge on Inflation Data
An exceptionally favorable report on inflation prompted a sharp rally in the credit markets yesterday, pushing interest rates down as prices of Treasury notes and bonds rose.
The rise in prices wiped out much of the steep declines registered earlier in the week, but long-term bond yields were still higher at the close of trading yesterday than they were a week ago.


Corrections
A brief article yesterday about Morton Smith, an authority on ancient religion, included an an erroneous date supplied by Columbia University for his memorial service.
It was held Thursday; it is not next Thursday.


Jay Franklin Walz, Times Reporter, 83; Was Posted Abroad
Jay Franklin Walz, a former foreign correspondent for The New York Times, died on Thursday at Goodwin House, a nursing home in Alexandria, Va.
He was 83 years old and lived in Alexandria.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Walz's journalism career of more than four decades included work at The Washington Post and three foreign posts with The Times.


Piniella Mentioned For Yank Opening
The search for the new manager of the Yankees has been drastically narrowed this week from 15 candidates to a handful, and the top choice is Lou Piniella, a major league official close to the situation said today.
The official said General Manager Gene Michael had told associates that he liked Hal Lanier, a former Astros manager, and Doug Rader, a former Angels and Rangers manager, but that he would prefer Piniella if the Cincinnati manager could escape the final year of his contract with the Reds.


Bank Bill Becomes Snagged On Egos and House Politics
The banking overhaul legislation in Congress has bogged down in a tussle of powerful egos among House Democrats.
"It's the biggest mess I've ever seen," said one member of the House Banking Committee.
And the result is that personalities and politicking may overtake any substantive airing of the issues behind a legislative package that could reshape the banking system.


CHRONICLE
Love and marriage seem to be everywhere.
EDWARD V. REGAN, the New York State Controller, is to be married this evening to SUSAN GOLDBERG, a lawyer in Buffalo.
The wedding will take place at Randwood, a mansion belonging to the Niagara Institute that is used for public events, in Niagara-on-the Lake, Ontario, Canada.
Both are divorced.


2d Trial for Winfield
California Angels outfielder DAVE WINFIELD will be allowed another trial to convince jurors that he did not have a common-law marriage to a former flight attendant.
The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, in a 2-1 ruling Thursday, threw out a 1989 decision by a Houston court because of a technical error.
"It will be tried again and the status quo will stay the same until there's some ruling in that case," SANDRA RENFRO's lawyer, EARLE LILLY, said yesterday.
Renfro, who lives in Austin, Tex., told jurors the outfielder agreed to the common-law marriage in 1982.
She filed for divorce in 1985.


Editorial Notebook; A Fine Romance
Above all I wanted to see her feet: the feet that bled after what the critic Arlene Croce called "a spine-chilling series of pirouettes" took 40 takes.
That was in "Swingtime," the year was 1936, and the man who partnered her up and down two stage levels linked by staircases was, of course, Fred Astaire.
But the table at which Ginger Rogers was autographing copies of "Ginger, My Story" in a midtown bookstore this week was draped in purple felt, so I'll never know if she still wears high heels.
Ginger was draped in purple, too -- chiffon or something equally airy; the famous blue eyes were obscured by big smoked glasses; and a black velvet band held back hair that was as blonde as her hairdresser could make it.
Ginger Rogers go gray at 80?
Never.
This is no little old lady.
This is a star.


Corrections
An entry in the Company Briefs listing in some editions of Business Day on Tuesday referred incorrectly to the parent company of Verson, a division that received an order from the Ford Motor Company for presses.
It is the Allied Products Corporation.


Her Story, and His
Clarence Thomas shared his pain with the public yesterday, a pain so deep that he seemed on the verge of giving up his Supreme Court nomination rather than endure more humiliating accusations.
In opening his defense against sexual harassment charges, he moved a nation of spellbound onlookers.
Anita Hill, his accuser, was equally moving and, to her evident distaste, far more specific.
In hours at the witness table, she described in painstaking detail why she believes her former boss had abused his power by subjecting her to insistent, repellent suggestive sexual talk.


In An Ugly Atmosphere, the Accusations Fly
With a powerful invocation of racial imagery that he had not used in his public remarks before this day of testing, Clarence Thomas tried to put the Senate on trial tonight, accusing Congress of tactics that went "far beyond McCarthyism."
As his wife, Virginia, sat behind him with a trembling chin, wiping away tears, Judge Thomas delivered a forceful rebuttal to Anita F. Hill's accusations of sexual harassment with a stony face and a voice bristling with anger.


Strict U.N. Arms Curbs Being Imposed on Iraq
The Security Council today imposed stringent new restrictions on Iraq intended to prevent it from ever again building or acquiring weapons of mass destruction.
The plan, approved unanimously by the Security Council, forbids Iraq to possess nuclear, biological or chemical weapons and requires it to report on scientific and industrial activities with military applications for years to come.


Injured Crew Member Taken From Biosphere
One of eight people participating in the Biosphere experiment lost the tip of her finger in an accident on Wednesday and was temporarily taken out of the sealed environment today so that she could undergo surgery.
The 29-year-old woman, Jane Poynter of Surrey, England, farm manager for the prototype space colony at this desert site, was injured while operating a rice hulling machine, said a spokeswoman for the project, Kathy Dyhr.
The accident took off the tip, partway down the nail, of the middle finger on Ms.
Poynter's left hand.


Sports of The Times; Torborgs Aren't Selling The House
They built the house.
Well, not with their own hands, but they had it built for them, and that is nearly the same thing, after 26 years.
They even know the anniversary.
"October 20th," said Suzie Torborg. "That's the closing date."


U.S. Army Building 6-Mile Fence to Halt Mexican Smugglers
Army reservists are building a 10-foot-high steel-panel fence near a border checkpoint at Otay Mesa, Calif., in the hope that it will shut down close off a popular route for smugglers who are bringing drugs and illegal aliens into the United States from Mexico.
The fence, which started going up Thursday, will eventually stretch six miles east from the checkpoint and will run parallel to a road on the Mexican side that leads to an airport in Tijuana.


Nine Players Suspended
Is a coach his players' keeper off the field?
Alabama A.&amp;M.'s interim president, ALAN KEYS, seems to think so.
Yesterday, he forced Coach GEORGE PUGH to resign because of an incident last week in which nine of Pugh's players were said to have beaten another student at a homecoming party.
Keys also suspended the nine players from school and said he would consider expelling them.


On Thomas: More Questions, Not Fewer
The choices presented to the United States Senate by today's lurid, gut-wrenching proceedings on Capitol Hill could hardly have been much starker.
By the time Anita F. Hill had finished her testimony, filled with vivid and often excruciating sexual detail that few had anticipated, but delivered with a prim earnestness that seemed to bespeak reserve and reluctance to discuss such subjects, the Senators who must vote on Tuesday were left with only two options: Either she was telling the truth or she is a sociopath; either these horrifying events took place or she, for some reason, invented them.


Classical Music in Review
Music and Remembrance Carnegie Hall


Classical Music in Review
Hopkinson Smith  Guitarist Metropolitan Museum of Art


TV Coverage of Thomas Hearings
The Senate Judiciary Committee's confirmation hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court will begin at 10 A.M. today.
The Public Broadcasting Service will show the hearings with no interruptions for commercials.
The Courtroom Television Network will also have complete live coverage, with commercials only during breaks in testimony.


2 Belmont Races May Decide Juvenile Championships
Twenty-seven of the most precocious 2-year-old horses in America will gather at Belmont Park today to compete in two classic one-mile races that may decide who will succeed Meadow Star and Fly So Free as the juvenile champions of racing.
The fillies will step onto the stage for the 44th running of the Frizette Stakes, with a purse of $250,000 and a field of 12 headed by Anh Duong, the overnight favorite at 3-1.
She is trained by Leroy Jolley, who saddled Meadow Star in the race last year.
Her chief rivals appear to be the Canadian filly Buckys Solution, Preach and Vivano.


Excerpts From Affidavit About Hill
Following are excerpts from an affidavit submitted by John N. Doggett 3d, dated Oct. 10, 1991, and made public today by the Senate Judiciary Committee.
My name is John N. Doggett 3d and I work and live in Austin, Tex.
I graduated from Yale Law School in 1972 and was a classmate of Clarence Thomas during his first year at Yale.
I also know Anita Hill from the early 1980's when we were both working and living in Washington, D.C.


Borland Deal Is Completed
Borland International Inc. said today that it had completed its acquisition of the Ashton-Tate Corporation.
The deal is valued at about $439 million.
With the acquisition, Borland and the Justice Department have agreed that Borland will not assert copyright claims in menu commands and the command language used in Ashton-Tate's dBASE family of products.
The Federal agency took an interest in the merger because the combination of dBASE and Borland's Paradox program would amount to about 70 percent of the personal computer data base software market.


About New York
Satan is perched on a stool in front of a phone company office, rumbling and roaring like a tornado gone crazy.
His fingers race across the gleaming surface of a most serious electric guitar.
His pencil-thin legs churn like pistons as he bangs a pair of high-hat cymbals, each crowned with a jangling tambourine.
Over the horns, sirens and jittery jive of 125th Street, his gravelly voice wails the blues.
He sings about having "a whole lot of nothing," about the Hotel Happiness and crazy kisses and mojo, about this being a mean old world.
"Every word I say is true," he assures with a demonic wink and a savage strum.


Frustrated Penn State Seeks Some Answers Against Miami
It is not unusual for a football team, even one as consistently successful as Penn State, to search for answers well into a season.
But six games into a perplexing year for the Nittany Lions, an uncharacteristic atmosphere of inconsistency has raised questions that should be answered Saturday afternoon in the heat and hostility of the Orange Bowl.
Penn State's meeting with the University of Miami, after surprisingly difficult victories over Boston College and Temple, could reinforce the sense of strength the Lions showed at the start of their 5-1 season, or demonstrate that there are just too many imperfections for this group to compete at the highest level.


Chip Maker Posts a Profit
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. today reported improved third- quarter results.
The company said that strong sales of its AM386 microprocessor, a clone of the Intel Corporation's 386 computer chip, helped produce a profit despite significant declines in sales of the company's commodity memory and logic chips.
For the quarter ended Sept. 29, Advanced Micro had earnings of $14.5 million, or 16 cents a share, compared with a loss of $20.4 million in the comparable period a year ago.
Sales rose 13 percent, to $289.4 million, from $254.2 million in the third quarter of 1990.


Lithuania Acts on Nazi and Soviet Injustices; Of Good and Evil
To the Editor:
I was born in Kaunas, Lithuania.
My ancestors lived there since the Middle Ages, and I until the end of World War II.
The news that the Lithuanian Chief Prosecutor has sought to pardon war criminals horrifies me.
Although the Government now says these pardons were accidental, it seems clear Lithuania is not taking steps to face up to its history.


Critic of Judge's Accuser States He Decided on His Own to Speak
John N. Doggett 3d said in an interview today that he was acting on his own initiative when he filed an affidavit with the Senate Judiciary Committee challenging Anita F. Hill's integrity.
Mr.
Doggett, a 43-year-old graduate of Yale Law School and Harvard Business School who has his own management consulting firm here, said no senators or committee staff members had sought him out.


Dow Increases by 7.16 in Light Trading
Stock prices rose modestly yesterday, but trading was light as many investors held back, concerned with third-quarter corporate results and hoping for some sign by the Fed that it will lower interest rates further.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 2,983.68, up 7.16 points for the day and 21.92 for the week.
Volume on the Big Board was 148.9 million shares, down from 164.2 million on Thursday.
Gainers outpaced declining issues by a ratio of 3 to 2.


Bush Forms Committee for Re-election Campaign
An open secret became even more open today as President Bush filed papers with the Federal Election Commission for his 1992 re-election campaign.
In a letter to the commission, Mr.
Bush announced that he was forming the Bush-Quayle '92 Primary Committee to "allow those people who have encouraged me to seek a second term as President a chance to express their support in a manner that fully complies with the Federal election laws." The move allows Mr.
Bush to go ahead with already scheduled fund-raising events for his re-election campaign.


Lithuania Acts on Nazi and Soviet Injustices
To the Editor:
"Undoing Injustice in Lithuania" (editorial, Sept. 14) seems to misunderstand the process of rehabilitation under way in Lithuania.
Government statements make it abundantly clear that Lithuania is rehabilitating victims of both the Nazi and the Soviet regimes.
The process is not, as you seem to believe, limited to the exoneration of citizens convicted for crimes of collaboration under the Nazi occupation.
Rather it extends also to citizens convicted of "crimes" (attitudes, social or professional status) that may have nothing to do with any kind of collaboration, alleged or real, culpable or not.


Soviet Republics Agree to Create An Economic Union
Russia and a majority of the other republics announced their commitment today to soon forming a new economic community devoted to free-market resuscitation of the fallen Soviet nation.
President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian federation, the centerpiece republic in the complex plan, led the way in pressing nine other republics for a formal signing of the economic compact as early as next Tuesday.


Defense in Smith Rape Case Rebuffed in Bid for Records
A judge ruled today that lawyers for William K. Smith could not see the employment records of a woman who has accused Mr.
Smith of raping her at the Kennedy family's Palm Beach estate last spring.
In the latest of a series of setbacks to the defense's efforts to delve into the woman's past, the judge, James Stewart of Palm Beach County Circuit Court, said his review of her job records "do not lead to the discovery of any admissible evidence."


Pigeon Shoot Provides a School for Brutality
To the Editor:
I just spent two weeks, Sept. 2 through Sept. 16, at Schuylkill County Prison in Pottsville, Pa.
My crime was refusal to pay a fine, on ethical grounds, after running onto the shooting field and disrupting the annual Labor Day live pigeon shoot in Hegins, Pa.
Lobbying, peaceful protesting and education efforts over the years failed to stop this slaughter; we activists had no choice but to place ourselves physically between the bullets and the birds.


March of the Mayors
Suddenly last summer, while no one was looking -- not even the press -- the mayors of America got mad.
Meeting at Hyannis, Mass., in August, leaders of the U.S.
Conference of Mayors -- representing 1,000 cities -- voted to mount what they hope will be history's greatest march on Washington.
It will be part protest against a Government the mayors think has betrayed them, and part celebration of the immeasurable contributions the cities make to our society.


Ann Figge and James W. Nawn Jr. Are Married
Ann Joyce Figge and James William Nawn Jr., graduates of the College of the Holy Cross, were married yesterday at Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in Washington.
Msgr.
John Martin officiated.
Mrs.
Nawn, 25 years old, is studying for a master's degree in social work at Boston College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John K. Figge of Washington.
Her father is the vice chairman and chief executive of the Davenport (Iowa) Bank and Trust Company.


Investigation In London
The London Futures and Options Exchange said today that an investigation had found that the exchange had given brokers almost $375,000 in payments and fee rebates to encourage trading in new products.
Some of the practices may be illegal or at least improper, the exchange officials and regulators said.
The schemes appear to have been intended to make it look as if new products were more successful than they really were.
The London exchange is relatively small, but it has been struggling to expand.


Balancing Act in Quest for Quiet Skies
In the battle for quieter skies, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey finds itself caught between the airlines that pay the bills at its three airports and the politicians who represent the airports' angry neighbors.
In starting to draft "aggressive" local rules that would reduce such noise faster than new Federal rules, the Port Authority is throwing in its lot with its neighbors, at least for now.


Traffic Alert
Amsterdam Avenue Street Fair: Amsterdam Avenue will be closed today between 77th and 86th Streets from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.
East 50's Association Fair: Third Avenue will be closed tomorrow between 46th and 56th Streets from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.


Suzan D. Johnson, Pastor, Marries Ronald Cook, Program Coordinator
The Rev.
Dr.
Suzan Denise Johnson, the senior pastor of the Mariners' Temple, a Baptist Church, was married at the Riverside Church in New York yesterday to Ronald Cook, the program coordinator of the Convent Avenue Baptist Church, both in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
James A. Forbes Jr., the senior minister of the Riverside Church, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 34 years old, graduated from Emerson College and the Union Theological Seminary.
She also received a master's degree from Columbia University Teachers College and a doctor of ministry from the United Theological Seminary.
A visiting professor at Harvard Divinity School, she is also secretary of Johnson Security Bureau, a security company founded in the Bronx by her father, the late Wilbert T. Johnson.
She is the daughter also of Dorothy C. Johnson of New York, the president of Johnson Security.
Mr.
Cook, 45, is the son of Herman Cook of New York and the late Vivian Cook.
His father retired as a community organizer and political adviser.
The bridegroom's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Torborg Grabs Reins and Gives Them a Shake
The delivery at the microphone was polished, tough, self-assured, entertaining.
The question for the man behind it, of course, was whether Jeff Torborg can manage as good a game as he talks.


New Judge Requested in Murder Case
Throughout the love-triangle murder trial of Carolyn Warmus, courtroom spectators whispered among themselves that the judge had it in for the prosecution.
Now, as a new trial nears, the Westchester County District Attorney has put the substance of those whispers into a legal challenge.
Charging that the judge favored the defendant, the District Attorney, Carl A. Vergari, has made the formal and unusual request that Judge John Carey remove himself from round two of the case.


Haitians in New York Rally for Ousted Leader


Former KLA Manager To Return as President
The KLA Instruments Corporation said yesterday that Kenneth L. Schroeder, who was on the company's management team from 1979 to 1987, would return as president and chief operating officer, effective Nov. 4.
KLA, based in San Jose, Calif., produces image automation systems used in manufacturing semiconductors.
Mr.
Schroeder, who is 47, resigned effective Oct. 18 from Genus Inc. of Mountain View, Calif., a maker of semiconductor manufacturing equipment, where he was president and chief operating officer.
Genus said that his position would not be filled immediately, but that his responsibilities would be assumed by William W. R. Elder, the chairman and chief executive.


Mortgage Rate Down to 8.82%
Fixed-rate mortgages averaged 8.82 percent this week, down from 8.87 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
It was the lowest rate since May 6, 1977, when rates averaged 8.78 percent.


Tripucka Signs Pact To Play in France
Just because the National Basketball Association doesn't seem to want KELLY TRIPUCKA anymore doesn't mean the 10-year N.B.A. veteran isn't wanted.
Tripucka, a former Detroit Piston who played the last two seasons with the Charlotte Hornets before becoming an unrestricted and apparently unwanted free agent, has signed to play with Limoges in France.
Contract details were not disclosed, but a team offical told the French sports daily L'Equipe that the deal represented "a financial effort without precedent." (AP)


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Rostagno Beats Becker in Three Sets  Derrick Rostagno upset second-seeded Boris Becker, 7-6 (7-4), 4-6, 6-3, yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Seiko Super tournament in Tokyo.
"I was good, but I just had an opponent who played extremely well," said Becker, playing in his first tournament since suffering a thigh injury and losing in the third round of the United States Open.
Rostagno, seeded seventh, got the key break in the eighth game of the third set, when Becker double-faulted at break point.
For the second straight week, Andre Agassi was beaten by Goran Ivanisevic, 6-3, 6-4.
Ivanisevic, who served 15 aces, next faces top-ranked Stefan Edberg, a 6-2, 6-2 winner over Michael Chang.
Rostagno will play Ivan Lendl, who defeated David Wheaton, 7-6 (7-5), 7-5. (AP) Graf Wins in a Hurry: Needing only 35 minutes, top-seeded Steffi Graf routed Marketa Kochta, 6-2, 6-1, to reach the semifinals of the European Indoors in Zurich.
Fifth-seeded Helena Sukova upset her former doubles partner, third-seeded Jana Novotna, 3-6, 6-2, 6-4, in another quarterfinal. (AP) Stich Loses: Anders Jarryd defeated top-seeded Michael Stich, 6-4, 7-6 (7-5), in the quarterfinals of the Association of Tennis Professionals tournament in Berlin.
Stich, the Wimbledon champion, was plagued by a weak serve and a faulty backhand. (AP) RUGBY  United States Eliminated from World Cup  The United States was eliminated from the World Cup of rugby yesterday with a 37-9 loss to England, the host team, in Twickenham.
The loss was the Americans' third in three matches.
Fullback Simon Hodgkinson led the English by setting up two tries for Rory Underwood and booting four conversions and three penalties. (AP)


Polish Pirates' Booty: Bootleg Tapes
Knocking back vodkas at the kitchen bar of his sprawling suburban villa, Wojciech Brzezicki unabashedly recalled 12 years of cranking out pirate cassette tapes in his basement.
The tapes, emblazoned with his initials and a royal crown, are the "Rolls-Royces" of Poland's entertainment industry, he boasted extravagantly, with better sound quality than Western originals.
His warehouse is stacked with row after row of familiar titles and colorfully repackaged selections, including tapes by artists like Whitney Houston and Prince and lesser-known fare like "Accordion Classics."
Mr.
Brzezicki, 38 years old, and his colleagues in the video and cassette business are at the center of an increasingly heated dispute between Washington and Warsaw over protection of intellectual property.
In the two years since Communism fell, Poland has become a pirate's haven, and industry experts say it is now a leading worldwide producer of counterfeit tapes.


Classical Music in Review
Thomas Yehudah Tirino  Pianist Alice Tully Hall


Tories Are Trying to Purge the Lingering Ghosts
By the time Prime Minister John Major gave them his pre-election pep talk at the end of their convention here today, the British Conservative Party faithful had talked themselves into a winning mood.
What they really needed was an exorcist to rid the party of the demons that had nearly split it in two last fall, when Mr.
Major succeeded Margaret Thatcher as leader.
Even the 48-year-old Prime Minister seemed to be whistling in the dark today, speaking in quiet and subdued tones.


Blacks and Jews Take It to the Hoop
"Slam that!" yelled Shmuely Andrusier, prodding a teammate to charge toward the basket and shoot.
Decked out in a torn white T-shirt, battle fatigues and a yarmulke, the 21-year-old veteran of a Brooklyn yeshiva basketball team wiped the sweat from his forehead, and, as his teammate missed the basket, growled: "You had that."
After an evening of relentlessly evading attempts to block his hook shots, Derek Williams -- a tall, 17-year-old black -- pointed to another Hasid who he said was the best white player he had seen.


Classical Music in Review
Itzhak Perlman Daniel Barenboim  Avery Fisher Hall


Paul Yu, 75, Leading Cardiologist, And Physician to Chiang Kai-shek
Dr.
Paul N. Yu, former president of the American Heart Association and physician to the late Gen.
Chiang Kai-shek, died on Tuesday in Taipei, Taiwan.
He was 75 years old.
He died after a long illness that was not specified, said a spokesman at the University of Rochester.


Beliefs
When large numbers of Soviet Jewish emigres to Israel began arriving by train in Poland a few years ago, security precautions dictated that buses whisk them from the railroad station to temporary housing.
There they awaited flights to Tel Aviv.
But repeatedly the tires of the buses were punctured, and the Jewish travelers had to be piled quickly into taxicabs.
Some people assumed that this was another instance of Polish anti-Semitism.
Then the perpetrators were discovered: enterprising cab-drivers.


New Pact for Maxwell
Houston Rockets guard VERNON MAXWELL has signed a four-year contract extension with the team, STEVE PATTERSON, the Houston general manager, said yesterday.
Terms were not disclosed.
Maxwell, a 6-foot-4-inch guard from Florida, is entering his fourth N.B.A. season, his third with the Rockets.
He set the league single-season record for 3-pointers last season with 172.


From Father to Son, Howfields Know Leahy
It was 1974 when the paths of Pat Leahy and Ian Howfield first crossed.
Leahy was 25 years old and had just replaced Ian's dad, Bobby Howfield, as the place-kicker for the Jets.
Ian, who was 8 years old at the time, is now 25 and is the place-kicker for the Houston Oilers, who will play the Jets at Giants Stadium on Sunday.


The Way to a Nuclear-Free Korea
South and North Korea joined the United Nations together last month.
But they failed to use the occasion to defuse the armed truce that keeps them apart.
That will require building mutual confidence.
President Bush has provided a way to do just that -- using, of all things, nuclear arms.
Pyongyang and Seoul would do well to exploit the opening he has given them.
As part of his sweeping arms initiative, Mr.
Bush announced that he would eliminate America's worldwide inventory of ground-launched short-range nuclear arms, including the artillery shells now in Korea.
He made no mention of bombs on U.S. aircraft in Korea, but left open the possibility of their eventual withdrawal.


Miyazawa Gets Party Approval to Lead Japan
Kiichi Miyazawa, a stalwart of Japan's governing party and one of the architects of the country's postwar economic ascent, was virtually assured election as the next Japanese prime minister tonight, ending a bruising weeklong scramble for the leadership.
Mr.
Miyazawa, an urbane 72-year-old politician who has held virtually every key political post in Japan except prime minister, was endorsed this evening by the largest and wealthiest faction in the Liberal Democratic Party, controlled by former Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita.


NATO to Cut Its Nuclear Bombs by Half
Ministers of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization are expected next week to announce reductions of as much as half of the 1,400 nuclear bombs intended for use aboard allied aircraft, Pentagon officials said today.
The cuts in NATO's nuclear arsenal would be in addition to President Bush's announcement last month to eliminate or remove 2,400 short-range nuclear weapons on land and at sea in Europe and Asia.


California to Test Children for Lead Poisoning
California has agreed to test at least 500,000 poor children for lead poisoning, after three years of failing to do so in its Medicaid clinics, it was state officials announced today.
Immediately after the agreement was reached, settling a lawsuit, Gov.
Pete Wilson announced three bills that would carry out the court settlement and go beyond it to test other children and workers who may be exposed to high levels of lead at work.


Hello, Torborg: The Fans Do the Wave
Not long after the winds of change had officially blown in from Chicago yesterday, and Jeff Torborg had taken over as manager of the Mets, many baseball fans in the local area had taken their stance.
"It's a very good selection," said Stephen Hill, a 26-year-old insurance broker from Westchester County who was at Charley O's next to Madison Square Garden.


Target Official Names Chairman of Marshalls
Warren D. Feldberg, the president of the Target discount store chain, yesterday was named chairman and chief executive of Marshalls, a 402-store operation that sells brand-name clothing at discount prices.
Mr.
Feldberg is leaving Target less than nine months after he became president, jumping from a larger operation where he was the No. 2 official to a smaller chain where he will be the top executive.
"It is not often that an opportunity such as Marshalls comes along," he said in a telephone interview from his home in Edina, Minn., a suburb of Minneapolis.
"Marshalls is an opportunity for me to run the entire business."


Sports of The Times; Torborgs Aren't Selling The House
They built the house.
Well, not with their own hands, but they had it built for them, and that is nearly the same thing, after 26 years.
They even know the anniversary.
"October 20th," said Suzie Torborg. "That's the closing date."


Capitals Rout Rangers And Lift Record to 4-0
They just don't get it at the Capital Centre, where some stubborn Washington hockey players continue to insist that the Rangers are no shoo-ins for the Stanley Cup.
Obstinate again until the final siren, the Capitals drubbed the Rangers tonight, 5-1, in the same arena where they ended the Rangers' dream last spring in a humbling playoff series.
Six months and Mark Messier later, things had not changed noticeably for the flat-footed, and quite often flattened, visitors.


Paths to Better Medical Care: Speaking Up and Questioning
Berta Ledecky, a Washington advertising executive, visited a neurologist recently because she had migraines.
She gave him a lot of information about her health and symptoms, but neglected to tell him about her allergies and eating habits.
As a result, the doctor prescribed the wrong medicine and her condition did not improve.
"You've got to be as good a detective about your own body as possible prior to going to the doctor," she said.
"That way he can start his investigation fully informed."


CHRONICLE
The Rev.
SUZAN D. JOHNSON is senior pastor of the Mariners' Temple Baptist Church in Manhattan, but when she was married last night to RONALD COOK, there was not enough room there to hold the 800 to 1,000 guests expected.
Instead, the ceremony and reception took place at Riverside Church.
The guest list included three members of Congress, CHARLES B. RANGEL, EDOLPHUS TOWNS and FLOYD H. FLAKE, in addition to Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS, Borough President RUTH W. MESSINGER of Manhattan and, as a bridesmaid, YOLANDA KING, daughter of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Because Ms.
Johnson is also a chaplain for the New York City Police Department, Commissioner LEE P. BROWN was also there, and a police honor guard escorted the couple.


U.N. Assembly Calls for the Restoration of Haiti's Ousted President
Strongly condemning the military coup in Haiti, the General Assembly called today for the immediate restoration of the democratically elected Government of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, but made no move to request that peacekeeping forces be sent to the area.
After delegates from around the world denounced the military takeover in Haiti and expressed support for Father Aristide, who was ousted Sept. 30, the Assembly unanimously approved without a vote a resolution demanding his immediate return to office, full application of the Constitution and full observance of human rights in Haiti.


Quotation of the Day
"One of them is not telling the truth." -- Senator Howell Heflin, Democrat of Alabama.  [ 1:6. ]


Political Memo; Cuomo Utters a 'Maybe' But Hastens to Add 'Not'
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo told a group of supporters at a private meeting yesterday that he was thinking about running for President, and then spent the rest of the day insisting that he had not said anything that anyone should be interested in.
Thus Mr.
Cuomo set off another round of the now familiar guessing game, "Will he or won't he?" Mr.
Cuomo, who has steadfastly insisted that he has no plans to run for President and no plans to make plans, was now raising the possibility that he was planning to make some.


Midway Stock Halt
Trading in Midway Airlines common shares and series D cumulative convertible exchangeable preferred shares was suspended by the New York Stock Exchange, effective immediately, the exchange said yesterday.
The exchange said it was applying to the S.E.C. to delist both issues.
The shares were suspended, the Big Board said, because of Midway's announcement that a Federal bankruptcy court had approved the acquisition of Midway's assets by Northwest Airlines for $170 million.


Global Phone Systems Act to Avoid Failures
The world's telephone companies are increasingly concerned that as national networks become more interconnected, a breakdown in one place could affect service in another place.
To try to head off such wide disruptions, a group of the largest telephone companies agreed at a meeting here today on a procedure to issue alerts to keep problems with new, sophisticated equipment that can break down in a split second from spreading beyond national boundaries.


Peter Galassi Is Modern's Photo Director
Peter Galassi has been appointed director of the Museum of Modern Art's department of photography, Richard E. Oldenburg, the Modern's director, announced yesterday.
Mr.
Galassi, 40 years old, had been associate director of photography at the museum since 1981.
He becomes only the fourth person to head the department, one of the most prestigious posts in the field of photography.
The department was founded by Beaumont Newhall in 1940.
Its next director was Edward Steichen, the photographer, who served from 1947 until 1962, when he was succeeded by John Szarkowski.
Mr.
Szarkowski, who retired on July 1, was named director emeritus of the department yesterday, and will maintain a consulting role with the museum.


Help Mothers Feed Their Babies
In a country as rich in infant formulas and vitamin supplements as the U.S., breast milk doesn't necessarily mean the difference between good and poor nutrition.
But it's a proven help to babies' immune systems; and there's unconfirmed evidence that death and illness rates may be lower among breast-fed babies.
It's thus unfortunate that the percentage of American women who breast-feed babies is steadily dropping.
The drop is steepest among women whose babies need every plus they can get.
Only 35 percent of women with a family income of less than $7,000 breast-feed their children -- half the percentage of women with family incomes over $25,000.


Bids for Executive Life End With 8 Proposals Submitted
The bidding for the Executive Life Insurance Company reached its final stage today with a sweetened offer from a French consortium and formal proposals from seven other groups interested in acquiring the troubled insurer.
The bidding reflected intense interest by some investors in the huge junk bond portfolio held by Executive Life, which was seized by California regulators in April.
And it suggested that Executive Life's hundreds of thousands of policyholders nationwide would be less exposed to losses from the company's failure than they had feared.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.00
5.06
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.96
5.02
7.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.01
5.06
7.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.16
7.28
8.65
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.88
7.95
8.93
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.02
9.06
9.98
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.88
6.89
7.83
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellweather bonds, notes and bills


New Witnesses Set for a New Day
Following are some of the witnesses to testify Saturday on a schedule yet to be announced:
J.
C.


Bush Vetoes Extended Jobless Benefits
President Bush today vetoed a $6.5 billion bill that would have provided as many as 20 additional weeks of unemployment benefits for 3 million people who have been out of work more than half a year.
The President said the measure would damage the economic recovery by abandoning budget discipline.
Mr.
Bush's 23d veto was accompanied by a message intended to blunt the political issue the Democrats have made out of his opposition to this bill and a similar measure that he killed in August.
He said his Administration was "deeply concerned about the needs of the unemployed and their families." Mr.
Bush added that if a "responsible" bill were passed that did not violate last year's budget agreement, he would sign it immediately.


Baker Confident on Palestinian Peace Delegation
After two days of discussions between Palestinian representatives and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, American officials said today that they were "reasonably assured" that the Palestinians would begin formal discussions with Jordan on forming a joint delegation to represent them at the peace conference.
Palestinian movement in that direction, which has not been forthcoming up to now, is viewed by the Bush Administration as the key ingredient in finalizing the peace conference, which it still hopes to convene by Oct. 31.


Korean Grocer Convicted in Shooting
A Korean grocer today was convicted of voluntary manslaughter for the fatal shooting of a black teen-age girl that has strained relations between the black and Korean communities here.
The 49-year-old grocer, Soon Ja Du, could be sentenced to up to 11 years in prison for the March 16 killing, which occurred after Mrs.
Du accused the girl, Latasha Harlins, 15, of trying to steal a $1.79 bottle of orange juice.


Redd Foxx, Cantankerous Master Of Bawdy Humor, Is Dead at 68
Redd Foxx, a ground-breaking comedian best known for his portrayal of a curmudgeonly junk dealer in the 1970's televison series "Sanford and Son," died late last night in Los Angeles after suffering a heart attack on the set of his new television series.
He was 68 years old.
Mr.
Foxx collapsed during a rehearsal for the CBS series "The Royal Family," in which he and Della Reese co-starred.
The series had its premiere on Sept. 18.


Angry Dinkins Defends Travel To South Africa
In an impassioned and often angry speech yesterday, Mayor David N. Dinkins painstakingly detailed his reasons for going to South Africa, saying he hoped to forge an economic partnership with leaders he believes will lead the country after apartheid falls.
"I'm going in November," the Mayor declared at a meeting of the City Club, a civic group.
"I'm going in a rowboat if I have to. I'm going to South Africa. No doubt about it."


America Listens In On a Private Subject
In cities and towns across the country, Americans took time out from their workaday lives to tune into the riveting collision between Judge Clarence Thomas and Anita F. Hill.
The hearing capped a week in which Professor Hill's charges became the leading topic in offices and on university campuses, in restaurants and on street corners, with many women applauding public discussion of a frequently private subject and many men wondering about their own conduct.
Article, page 8.


What's Wrong With Tolls on East River Bridges? Plenty
To the Editor:
Tolls on New York City's East River bridges, a bad idea when first proposed decades ago, hasn't improved with age ("What's Fair Is a Fare," Op-Ed, Sept. 28).


Common Threads Between the 2 Accusing Thomas of Sexual Improprieties
Angela Wright, a former employee of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, who is expected to level new accusations of sexual improprieties at Judge Clarence Thomas, has at least three things in common with Professor Anita F. Hill, who testified today at the Senate hearings on the judge's Supreme Court nomination.
Like Professor Hill, Ms.
Wright grew up black in the South during the civil rights revolution and then branched far afield in a career that mixed drive, ambition and a strain of conservatism.


Review/Dance; A Tomato In Love, And Other Italian Fare
The current explosion of experimental dance in France came to international attention in the 1980's.
A few choreographers set the pace in the 1970's and among the earliest was Gigi Caciuleanu, who now leads one of the Government-supported companies in the provinces.
That company, based in Rennes and saddled with the accurate if unwieldy name of the Choreographic Theater of Rennes-the National Center of Brittany, made its New York debut on Thursday night at Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street.
A second program, "Mozartissimo," will be presented tonight and tomorrow.
Mr.
Caciuleanu's two-hour impressionistic survey of Italy and its mores, "Piazza Italia, Pomodoro Kosmos," opened the engagement.


Organizing for Visas: Irish, Lottery and Luck
In the shadow world of the more than 30,000 Irish living illegally in New York City, this weekend has become a symbol of their hopes and dreams.
It is the culmination of a maddening but strangely coordinated frenzy of millions of mailings, their one chance to leap overnight from a barely visible realm into an established world, part of the largest legal migration of the Irish since 1965.


German Orchestra Cancels
Because of a lack of sponsorhip, the Dresdner Kreuzchor and Philharmonie, which was to have performed two concerts at Carnegie Hall tomorrow and Monday as part of a North American tour, will not appear.
The orchestra was to have performed Mendelssohn's oratorio "Elijah" tomorrow at 8 P.M. and Bach's B-minor Mass on Monday at 8 P.M.


Julie Tiao Weds Timothy Dann
Julie Ming-Hwei Tiao, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George C. Tiao of Chicago, was married yesterday to Timothy Franklin Dann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert T. Dann of Harrison, Me.
The Rev.
Allan B. Warren 3d performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Advent in Boston.
Mrs.
Dann, 29 years old, graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She is the director of hardware development at BBN Communications in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father is the W. Allen Wallis Professor of Statistics at the University of Chicago.
Her mother, Barbara Tiao, is a piano instructor at the Sherwood Conservatory in Chicago.


BEST SELLERS: October 13, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
1
8
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
3
2
5
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate a balloon accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force.
4
7
2
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on the Pan American Clipper's last trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
5
13
81
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
6
3
6
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $22.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his older brother.
7
6
3
THE DECEIVER, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $22.50.) To escape forced early retirement, Sam McCready recalls his years in the British secret service.
8
4
31
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
9
5
6
FLOWERS IN THE RAIN, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $20.) A collection of short stories, many of them set in Scotland.
10
10
3
THE DUCHESS, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $21.) An American woman, in Scotland to marry a duke, finds a mysterious stranger more attractive.
11
8
5
RUSSKA, by Edward Rutherfurd. (Crown, $25.) Eighteen centuries in the lives of four families of different cultures residing in a Russian village.
12
9
16
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
13
11
2
THE DRAGON REBORN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor, $22.95.) The fate of a man doomed to save and then destroy the world; part of the "Wheel of Time" fantasy series.
14
1
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Macmillan, $21.95.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara, Rhett Butler and the Georgia plantation Tara.
15
12
12
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
2
3
7
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies. (LP)
3
2
4
LA TOYA, by La Toya Jackson with Patricia Romanowski. (Dutton, $19.95.) Growing up in a leading show business family, as experienced by Michael Jackson's sister.
4
7
47
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures through the centuries.
5
6
22
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
6
5
17
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the workings of the Federal Government.
7
8
3
J.
EDGAR HOOVER, by Curt Gentry. (Norton, $29.95.) The career of the longtime Director of the F.B.I.
8
4
5
HARD COURTS, by John Feinstein. (Villard, $22.50.) A journalist's behind-the-scenes look at a year of professional tennis.
9 *
10
15
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
10 *
12
3
EXPOSING MYSELF, by Geraldo Rivera with Daniel Paisner. (Bantam, $21.50.) The autobiography of the television personality.
11
9
17
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America, past, present and future.
12
13
6
ANNE SEXTON, by Diane Wood Middlebrook. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) The life of a gifted poet who was hampered by mental illness.
13
11
12
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
14
14
2
THREE BLIND MICE, by Ken Auletta. (Random House, $25.) How ABC, CBS and NBC lost their dominance of the television world during the 1980's.
15
15
15
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
9
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
2
48
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
3
89
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
4
31
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
5
3
52
HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $18.95.) How to find the child you once were that lives within you.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE JOURNALS OF JOHN CHEEVER, by John Cheever. (Knopf, $25.) The journals of this peculiarly, poignantly American writer, who wanted to be a good husband and father but didn't know how, concern themselves, as his fiction does, with four principal subjects: nature, God, home and sex.
THE CAMPAIGN, by Carlos Fuentes. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.95.) A vast social, intellectual and political panorama appears in this highly entertaining novel, which focuses on the decade of Latin America's independence struggle, from 1810 to 1820.
SAVAGE INEQUALITIES: Children in America's Schools, by Jonathan Kozol. (Crown, $20.) The author of "Death at an Early Age" argues vigorously that our public schools, as public facilities, should offer the same quality of education everywhere.
IN THE REALM OF A DYING EMPEROR, by Norma Field. (Pantheon, $22.) Absorbing reporting by a scholar, half Japanese by parentage, on three incidents in which Japanese society treated nonconformity as simply perverse.
DIRTY TRICKS, by Michael Dibdin. (Summit, $18.) Mr.
Dibdin's fifth novel, a highly sophisticated entertainment set in present-day Britain, mines the themes of sex, murder and social climbing with much more and better humor than is customary.
CRACKING INDIA, by Bapsi Sidhwa. (Milkweed Editions, $18.95.) Ms.
Sidhwa, a Pakistani who writes in English, offers heartbreak and slapstick in this novel about an 8-year-old girl caught up in the horrors of the partition of India in 1947.
THE GERMAN COMEDY: Scenes of Life After the Wall, by Peter Schneider. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Caustic notes and reflections by a German liberal on the first year of unification.


Ol' Man River Meets His Mate
Opera has been taking some sharp left turns in recent years.
Works as diverse as Philip Glass's "Einstein on the Beach," Anthony Davis's "X," Julius Hemphill's "Long Tongues: A Saxophone Opera" and John Adams's "Death of Klinghoffer" have searched out new (some would say off-the-wall) structures and themes for a genre that had long seemed frozen in its repertory.
Yet American composers have been developing alternative approaches to opera at least since Scott Joplin's ragtime-based efforts "A Guest of Honor" (1903) and "Treemonisha" (1911).
That historical context underlies operas like "X," "Long Tongues" and now "The Mother of Three Sons," a dance opera that was performed in Europe last year but is only now having its American premiere, at the New York City Opera on Saturday evening.


Political Memo; Wary New Hampshire Watches Campaign Unfold
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas was eating a salad in the cafeteria at Dartmouth College one afternoon this week when a reporter for the student newspaper asked why he had chosen now to return to his alma mater.
Mr.
Tsongas, who has been campaigning for President almost entirely by himself since April, paused, shrugged and gave a rare smile.


Faux Fashion: All That Glitters Here Is Glass
A copy of Mamie Eisenhower's ersatz-pearl necklace -- the one she wore to her husband's second inaugural ball in 1957 -- is in the grand tradition of fabulous fakes that have been a hallmark of fashion throughout most of the 20th century.
The First Lady's triple strand of graduated glass pearls, shown with matching bracelet and earrings, is among the 75 baubles presented in the exhibition "Glass Jewelry: 25 Centuries of Style," at Steuben, Fifth Avenue at 56th Street, through Oct. 26.
Mrs.
Eisenhower had her pearls custom made for both the 1953 and 1957 inaugural balls.
The manufacturer, Trifari, Krussman &amp; Fishel of Providence, R.I., produced three sets each time -- one for Mrs.
Eisenhower, one for the Smithsonian Institution and one for its archives, which lent its 1957 set to Steuben for this show.


Authors Point Hikers To Trails Close to Home
CONNECTICUT hiking is special, say the authors of a paperback guide to hiking in the state, because so many trails are easily accessible.
"Very few places in Connecticut don't have hiking within 10 or 15 miles," said Gerry Hardy.
He and his wife, Sue Hardy, have collaborated on three editions of "Fifty Hikes in Connecticut" (Backcountry Publications-Countryman Press, Woodstock, Vt.).
They noted that a friend who hiked at Bear Mountain in Salisbury one recent afternoon easily returned in time for dinner at their house in Manchester.
Mr.
Hardy estimated that Connecticut has 700 to 800 miles of trails, including 500 miles maintained by the Connecticut Forest and Park Association plus the Appalachian Trial, those in state and local parks and the preserves of conservation organizations.
Wending over mountains, along the shore, across meadows, through woods, around ponds and into hollows, these paths make up what is said to be the second-largest trail system in New England. (New Hampshire's is first).


Fashion; Who Makes Paris Sizzle?
ONE OF THE MOST POWERFUL MEN IN FRENCH FASHION is usually seated several rows back at the Chanel shows, purposefully blending into the crowd.
He detests being photographed, and rarely is.
Fortyish, quietly well dressed, bespectacled and balding, he looks like an average businessman traveling on the Concorde.
But as the chairman of Chanel, Alain Wertheimer is the man who controls the purse strings of perhaps the most successful French fashion house today.
It is Wertheimer who allows the lavish expenditures that keep the designer Karl Lagerfeld satisfied and surrounded by the best of everything -- from fabrics to staff to sybaritic perks.
Wertheimer is one of an elite few, tough but astute Parisian businessmen who back the best of French fashion.
Like Pierre Berge, chairman of Yves Saint Laurent, and Bernard Arnault, chairman of the company that owns the couture houses of Christian Dior, Christian Lacroix and Hubert de Givenchy, Wertheimer understands that true talent must be nourished in a secure but opulent cocoon.
France is, after all, a country that takes style seriously.
The shifts, twists, fortunes and fables of fashion are considered as important as those of politics, sports and finance -- and just as worthy of inclusion on the nightly news.
As the spring 1992 ready-to-wear shows begin this week, everyone in France, from taxi drivers to farmers, will want to know where the hemline is going.


Turkish Troops Attack Kurds' Bases in Iraq
Turkey today sent thousands of troops, combat planes and helicopters to crush Kurdish rebels in northern Iraq, a military official said.
He said 3,000 Turkish commandos, 200 civilian guards and special security teams had entered Iraq near the towns of Cukurca and Uludere.
The action followed eight bombing sorties against Kurdish bases in Turkey on Friday.


Athens
Athens is not for the faint-hearted, nor for those unable to momentarily suspend logic, common sense, a predilection for order.
Rather it is for the visitor who delights in paradox and the odd juxtaposition: the customs officer who advises ripping out a troublesome passport page; the popular song blasting to amplified guitars with lyrics by a Nobel Prize-winning poet; relentless rows of cement apartments cheek by jowl with elegant ruins of another age.
It is a city that assaults the senses but assuages the soul, where even while suffering some indignity like jam-packed, overheated public transportation, one has only to glimpse the Acropolis to feel renewed.
One of the assaults on the senses comes in the form of air pollution; the city bans private cars in the "inner ring" downtown on days when smog reaches emergency levels.
On extreme days, residents have been advised to stay indoors as much as possible.


The Many Pros and Cons of the 55-M.P.H. Speed Limit
In a Forum page article on Sept. 29, Donald L. Pevsner proposed raising the 55 mile-an-hour national speed limit on Interstate highways.
He argued that the limit, set during the oil crisis of the early 1970's, is retained because it is a source of income for states, insurance companies and makers of radar-detection equipment.
He suggested raising the Interstate speed limit to 70 m.p.h. except in congested urban areas and in unsafe terrain.
Some of the letters received in response follow.
55 Saves Lives


Ms. Greenberg to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Greenberg of New York have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Deanne Fern Greenberg and Charles Peter Winnick, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Winnick of Hartsdale, N.Y.
Ms.
Greenberg, 25 years old, was until recently an account representative at Bliss, Barefoot &amp; Associates, a marketing communications firm in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
The prospective bridegroom, 29, is a vice president of Gilford Securities in New York.
He graduated from Boston University.


The Struggling Writer: Gissing Had It Right
If you're one of the millions of Americans trying to launch or advance a literary career -- with the mix of elation, envy, self-loathing, paranoia and arrogance that seems to be the writer's normal frame of mind -- you should read a few pages of George Gissing's diary.
It is a record of 15 years, 1887-1902, in the life of a Victorian novelist; begun when Gissing was 30 years old, and ending a year before his death in 1903, and its 500 pages of entries go by with a devastating sameness.
Their accumulated effect seems to say: This is what it amounts to.
"Thursd. Nov. 20. Dull, rainy, warm. Morning did nothing. Went to Museum to get particulars of pneumonia, for Reardon's death. Wrote from 2:30 to 9, doing 4 pp. -- A steamroller at work all day down in the street; maddening.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
An Economics of the Imagination
As we move into an age valuing information above the acquisition of material possessions, the critic and poet Frederick Turner suggests that traditional societies offer the most useful economic model of how to behave.
This is from "Tempest, Flute, &amp; Oz: Essays on the Future" (Persea Books).


JACQUES OF ALL TRADES
FRAMED ON THE podium by his former boss, President Francois Mitterrand of France, and Prime Minister John Major of Britain, Jacques Attali recites his acceptance speech impatiently, each cluster of words following too swiftly upon the echo of its predecessor.
On this dreary spring day in London, the newly elected president of the equally new European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (or BERD, in the French acronym) gives, delivery aside, a typically high-flying performance.
With the flags of 39 nations as a backdrop, he tells his listeners that the bank, born in Attali's fertile brain a mere two years ago to guide the transition of the Soviet Union and the rest of Eastern Europe to capitalism and democracy, will be "the first institution of the post-cold-war period . . . the first institution of a united Europe . . . the first institution of the new world order."
The heads of state and finance ministers from the BERD's member countries strain in vain to keep up with the soaring rhetoric.
Attali, whose owlish face turns handsome when animated, spews out references to Spinoza, Tolstoy, Hobbes, Voltaire, Goethe, Kafka and Sakharov.
He ends with a prayer that the bank will one day help "700 million Europeans unite in a single ideal of peace, tolerance and light."


Tashkent Trouper


'Mystery Dance'
To the Editor:
Although it is almost always nobler to overlook a bad review, we will run the risk of sounding defensive in order to make a few simple points in response to Bettyann Kevles's review (Aug. 25) of our book "Mystery Dance." Very briefly, we would like to defend the work (the "wild speculation") of the scientists and scholars that "Mystery Dance" synthesizes.


When Imagination Furnishes
For artisans and craftsmen throughout the ages, successful improvisation has been sometimes a matter of necessity, sometimes of genius, and often a little bit of both.
When our colonial forebears first set foot on American shores, far from the established guilds and precious woods of Europe, they were both freed and forced to work with new materials and new motifs.
The early results were sturdy oak, pine and walnut pieces that were frequently smaller in scale, more vertical in line than their European peers.
But far from being improvisations in a minor key, these creations are no less prized as antiques for their proportion and grace.
In more recent times, the desire to develop furnishings that better cushioned the body led modernists to literally change the shape of design.
It could be said that Marcel Breuer improvised a chair from metal bicycle tubing and that Alvar Aalto adapted his furniture from skis, which had previously been the only manufactured form to utilize molded birch.
What began as improvisation became evolutionary improvement.


Hampton Eagerly Takes the Lead
The most exciting moment in the lives of Lee and Eva Hampton came on the day that the eldest of their five children, Debbie, entered Texas Southern University in their hometown, Houston.
"Everyone was excited," Rodney Hampton recalled today, "because she was the first from either my mom's or dad's family to go to college."


The Evolving Concept Of Sexual Harassment
As the drama between an Oklahoma law professor and the Supreme Court nominee she accused of sexual harassment played out on Capitol Hill and television screens around the country, Americans saw a conflict that grew out of the convergence of two social forces: the explosion of women in the work force and an evolving understanding of what constitutes sexual harassment.
It is a convergence that has left many men wary and puzzled, as once-tolerated forms of behavior became not only offensive but serious legal offenses.
Nowhere is the change more striking than in the Federal Government, the nation's largest single employer of female workers, the vast majority of whom hold jobs in which their superiors are men.
Allegations of sexual harassment by Anita F. Hill, the Oklahoma law professor, against Judge Clarence Thomas, President Bush's choice for the Supreme Court seat vacated by Thurgood Marshall, have only highlighted for many women what they see as a systemic problem.


Tech Notes; Pager in the Wilderness
People on business trips and vacationers on the road can receive messages anywhere in the United States and Canada, thanks to satellite paging systems.
One new system, Skyword, allows a traveler to receive text of up to 80 letters or numbers, said to be enough space to convey essential information even if the recipient cannot make a telephone call to get a message.
The service is offered by the Skytel Corporation, a subsidiary of the Mobile Telecommunication Technologies Corporation.


An Exile of Sorts Finds a Welcome
Amid an exceptionally busy theater season -- Alan Ayckbourn, Alan Bennett, David Hare and Harold Pinter are among those receiving premieres -- one name stands out: Arthur Miller.
Why is the man often referred to as America's finest living dramatist unveiling a new play later this month in the West End when half the theaters on Broadway are dark -- and when the play, "The Ride Down Mount Morgan," is not only by an American but about Americans? (Tom Conti plays a New York businessman who suffers a serious accident, and that's all we're being told for the moment.)


Handle With Care
LIKE INFANTS, ANTIQUES SHOWS quickly develop personalities of their own.
It doesn't take more than a season before word spreads that a show has a particular look and a particular strength.
In Paris, for example, the Biennale Internationale des Antiquaries is known for its sheer spectacle of over-the-top presentations and for its superlative offerings of fine French furniture.
Grosvenor House, that other great bastion of showmanship, on the other hand, has long held a reputation for its staid but elegant English antiques.
In this country, the International Antique Dealers Show, while only in its third year, is known for its European polish and its strength in decorative objects like the porcelains shown here.
Many attribute the extraordinary porcelains, which will be on view when the six-day antique show opens Oct. 19 at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan, to the eye and taste of the London-based organizers, Anna and Brian Haughton.
Themselves ceramicists, the Haugh tons are also widely recognized for the specialized decorative-arts exhibitions they pull together, namely the International Ceramics Fair and the International Silver and Jewelry Fair, both held annually in London.


Farm Profits Fall as Dairy Farmers Talk of Strike
At a time when some dairy farmers in New York are talking about striking because of low milk prices, state agriculture officials said this week that farm profits have been falling since reaching a record level last year.
In 1990, the net income of all the state's farmers, dairy as well as fruit and vegetable growers, was $938 million, up 6 percent from 1989, largely because of high prices paid to dairy farmers in the first 10 months of 1990, according to the Agricultural Statistics Service, an arm of the state Department of Agriculture and Markets.


Shrubs That Add to Autumn's Glory
THE Northeast is famous for its fall foliage.
Anything from brilliant red to orange to soft yellow to bronze can be seen in the trees now.
But what about shrubs?
Gardeners in the Northeast are lucky; if theydon't have room to add a tree of brilliant color, they might have space for a shrub, maybe even two.
Selection should be made of a cultivar that is the most colorful now.
It is important to see the shrub before purchase; sometimes the foliage color is not what is expected.
The leaf color of a particular shrub is not going to get any better with the years after planting.
If the nursery does not have a particular shrub available, perhaps it can be ordered.
Planting can go on to the end of the month, as long as the ground is open and can be dug easily.
Root development will continue until early December in the top few inches of the soil.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
STREET DRAMA
Vera, Edna, Lillian, Ursula and Mae, the five characters in Paula Vogel's new play, are discovered sitting on a bench at 72d Street and Broadway in Manhattan discussing life.
What makes them a bit unusual is that they are all prostitutes ranging in age from 72 to 83.


Gulf Security Talks Stall Over Plan for Saudi Army
WASHINGTON, Oct. 12 --
Seven months after the end of the war in the Persian Gulf, the United States negotiations with Saudi Arabia over a new security alliance for the vital oil-producing area are deadlocked by a dispute over the future size and strength of the Saudi armed forces, United States and allied officials say.
For the first time, the Saudis want to supplement their sophisticated air defense system with an offensive army capable of large-scale, mobile warfare like that demonstrated by allied forces against Iraq earlier this year, those officials say.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
THE HARLEM RENAISSANCE
Between the time World War I ended and the Great Depression dried up private patronage of the arts, Harlem was a hotbed of music, painting and literature by black Americans.
The Harlem Renaissance, as that brief timespan was called, is remembered this month at Manhattanville College.


Small ships for special trips
SOME of the more interesting cruises are offered aboard small vessels.
For example, the Sea Cloud carries only 70 passengers, but in what style!
The elegant setting is the four-mast bark built in the early 1930's by E. F. Hutton and Marjorie Merriweather Post.
Represented by Cruise Company, she sails regularly on seven-night Caribbean cruises from Antigua, with prices somewhat corresponding to the setting: $2,600 to $5,800.
Adventurous travelers can sail through the Galapagos Islands from Baltra, Ecuador, aboard the 90-passenger Santa Cruz and the 40-passenger Isabella II, both represented by Adventure Associates.
A seven-night trip on the Isabella II costs $1,750 a person including excursions on 10 islands.


Dancing Through the Panama Canal
THERE are no women on this ship.
We are, in the parlance of Royal Cruise Line, on whose 14-day cruise through the Panama Canal I have just embarked, "ladies." Later, on further acquaintance, I will find myself among "girls" -- "the girls" to their husbands.
And then there are the few raucous ladies who sit by the swimming pool and make rude comments about each other's anatomy.
They gleefully call themselves "old broads."
Whatever we are, we are somewhat in the majority on this late summer voyage that will take us from Los Angeles to Nassau, calling in Mexico at Puerto Vallarta, Zihuatanejo and Acapulco; in Costa Rica at Caldera, and, on the other side of the Canal, at Ocho Rios, Jamaica.
There are, I have been told, apt to be more ladies than gentlemen on many cruises, especially those directed toward an older and more affluent market, as, by reason of length and cost, this one is.


Opera Master Classes
The soprano Evelyn Lear and the baritone Thomas Stewart will give a master class in voice today at 3 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall (129 West 67th Street), working with singers who have won grants from the Richard Tucker Music Foundation.
The mezzo-soprano Marilyn Horne will teach on Jan. 5 at 3 P.M., and the soprano Leonie Rysanek on April 5 at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets -- singles at $25, or a subscription to the three events for $60 -- are available at the box office, (212) 362-8719, or through the Tucker Foundation, (212) 496-5154.


Calmly Creative In San Francisco
For a fashion designer, San Francisco has more than just temperate weather, views of the bay emerging from the fog and Alice Waters's homegrown baby lettuces.
The city offers freedom from the trends that bubble out of Seventh Avenue.
A month ago, proof was the absence of plaids in the collections of six of the city's top young designers.
"We were removed from this pressure of plaids," said Michael Casey, one of the six.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Norwich 204,000
963 Route 106  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, den, family room, deck; taxes $3,400.
Farmingdale 185,000
17 Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old ranch; dining room, den, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
Glen Cove 185,000
19 Ravine Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 34-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, inground pool, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.
Miller Place 135,000  46 Grandview Boulevard  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 34-year-old ranch; basement, 1-car garage; deeded beach rights; taxes $2,400.
Mill Neck 485,000  Darthy Lane  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old ranch; den, fireplace, 2-car garage, 3.6 acres; taxes $7,500.
Mineola 215,000
99 Krug Place  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, den, deck, brick and aluminum siding; taxes $3,600.
OTHER AREAS Rye, N.Y. 328,500
44 Oakwood Avenue
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 66-year-old colonial; enclosed front porch, stone fireplace, breakfast room, den; taxes $4,984.
Darien, Conn. 1,050,000
8 Stonewall Lane  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 140-year-old colonial; 2 terraces, fireplace in master suite, 2.1 acres; taxes $7,291.
Brookside, N.J. 450,000
4 Michael Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; professionally decorated, oak paneling, formal dining room; taxes $7,406.


Three Students Suspended For Betting-Ring Operation
Three students at Middletown High School have been suspended for three days for operating a football betting ring after the illegal gambling was exposed by the student newspaper.
The operation generated several hundred dollars in bets each week on professional football games, said the school principal, Robert E. Kozaczka.


Review/Dance; Graham's 'Celebration,' From 1934
Nothing is really new.
There is something of the exhilarating spareness and simplicity of 1970's minimalist dance in Martha Graham's "Celebration," a 1934 work performed by her company on Thursday at City Center.
Not long after its creation, Graham began to move on to more theatrical, narrative dance.
But she proved in "Celebration," a dance for 12 women, how strongly an emotion can be conveyed through pure movement and formal design.
"Celebration" owes something to Louis Horst, the musician and dance scholar who was Graham's longtime mentor and who taught the fledgling practitioners of American modern dance that this new art form must have rules and a discipline of its own.
His insistent, rigorously simple score for drum and trumpet gives "Celebration" a good deal of its starchy backbone.
And Graham moves her dancers almost unceasingly throughequally rigorous patterns.


New York Is Cast as Villain and Victim
In the second act of "Babylon Gardens," things would appear temporarily to be looking up for Opal, a homeless black woman and Jesus freak who's been surviving as best she can in the streets and alleys on the Lower East Side of New York.
Bill, a perpetually stoned anesthetist, has taken her to a flophouse, paid for two nights' lodging, rented her a TV set and even given her $12 in mad money.
Opal is not appeased, though.
Fixing her benefactor with a fierce stare, she thunders -- as Daniel did to the King of Babylon -- "Your kingdom is finished. You have been weighed in the balance and found wanting."


Philanthropist
When Barnard College began its campaign to raise $100 million, Phyllis Ben, the school's head security guard, became its benefactor.
Ms.
Ben, whose salary is a little over $12 an hour, donated $1,000.
Ms.
Ben has worked at the college for 27 years, beginning as a part-time housekeeper.
She once captured a man who was later found to be carrying a knife; in 1968 she weathered the student riots, uncomfortable as a lifelong unionist to cross anybody's protest line.
Eligible this year to retire at the age of 62, she plans to stay at the college until she loses speed in responding to calls.
Barnard's fund drive has already raised $37 million, with some writing checks for $1 million.
Few donations, however, had the impact of the one from Ms.
Ben.
"We were all overwhelmed by it," said Helene L. Kaplan, chairwoman of both Barnard's board and the fund-raising drive.
"It was all I could afford," Ms.
Ben said.
"I wish it was millions."


Answering The Mail
Q.
A contractor recently ripped up my asphalt driveway
and
put down new asphalt that has a "rocky-looking" finish.
I asked the contractor if I should apply a sealer, but he said it was not necessary.
Do you think a sealer would protect the new asphalt and also help to cover its "rocky" appearance?
A.
I do not know what you mean by a "rocky" appearance.
New asphalt should be smooth and uniformly black, with no stones, rocks or other fillers showing.
A sealer is usually not necessary on new asphalt in the first year, but it is a good idea after about two or three years.
That should be repeated at regular intervals, the intervals depending on the amount of exposure and wear.
The sealer helps prevent drying out from the sun, as well as water penetration and freezing damage.
It also keeps the driveway looking better.
But I do not see how a sealer could smooth over or correct a "rocky" appearance, except to make the driveway all uniform in color.


Diana Lucas Marries
Diana Tamsin Lucas, an actress and artistic director, and William Samuel Leavengood, a playwright, both in New York, were married yesterday in Keuka Park, N.Y.
The Rev.
Patricia Hanen performed the Episcopal ceremony in the Norton Chapel on the campus of Keuka College.
Mrs.
Leavengood, 27 years old, graduated from Keuka; Mr.
Leavengood, 31, from Rollins College.
The bride is the daughter of Richard Lucas of Frewsburg, N.Y., and Sandra N. Lucas of Syracuse.
The groom is the son of C. Richard Leavengood of Redington Beach, Fla., and Pauline Leavengood of St.
Petersburg, Fla.


Jodi Nussbaum Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Nussbaum of Roslyn Harbor, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jodi Merril Nussbaum, to Michael Solomon, the son of Beverly Cerron, of Bayside, Queens, and Stephen Solomon of Merrick, L.I.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Nussbaum, 23 years old, is a production editor with Faulkner &amp; Gray, a publishing company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father, a lawyer, is the senior executive vice president of HHL Financial Services, a health-care financial-management company in Great Neck, L.I.
Her mother, Bette Nussbaum, owns Bette B. Antique Jewelry in Roslyn Harbor.


Wall Street; Placing Bets Via Puts and Calls
For those who want to place bets on the course of stock prices, long-term options have proved to be a surprising hit in the year since they were introduced.
Now traded on four exchanges, the options last up to three years.
For a premium, an investor can stake out a position that will profit if a given stock, or stock market index, rises above a set level in that period.
Normal options all expire within a year.
A dichotomy has developed over which options are most popular.
Among options on individual stocks, calls -- options whose owners are betting on rising prices -- have consistently been more popular than puts.
But traders in options on stock indexes have generally been more likely to use puts -- options whose owners profit if prices fall.


Mexico
To the Editor: Readers who plan to vacation in Mexico can make a real difference for millions of people.
Tipping waiters and chambermaids is the custom in Mexico and can turn an otherwise poverty wage ($3 a day) into an adequate one.
American travelers should share this information with tourists they meet because many of them, Europeans in particular, seem to be unaware of it.
Besides this, and contrary to the popular myth, price haggling with street vendors is an outmoded practice.
The few cents a foreigner saves on a trinket may cost a child milk or eggs that week.
Inflation in Mexico is drastic.
Tourist books would do well to stop encouraging penny-pinching that takes bread out of children's mouths.
ROBERTA GOULD Brooklyn The writer is secretary of the International Committee for the Well-Being of the People of Mexico.


Ryder Cup Revisited
To the Sports Editor:
Some comments on the memorable 1991 Ryder Cup match:


Taking Stock


Group of Seven Edges Toward Soviet Debt Relief
After an evening of meetings here with Soviet economic officials, the financial leaders of the world's seven largest industrial nations appeared ready to consider an important step toward some sort of emergency program to prevent a Soviet debt crisis, officials said early today.
Grigory A. Yavlinsky, the Soviet Union's key economic planner, said there had been good progress toward providing what could amount to substantial financial assistance to his country.


CAMPUS LIFE: William &amp; Mary; Rules Tightened In Effort to Limit Student Drinking
The College of William &amp; Mary has tightened its regulations about alcohol consumption to stem what the college's administration, local hospital officials and national fraternity chapters have increasingly depicted as student drinking that is out of control.
Kegs and other large containers of alcohol are now banned from fraternity houses and other residence halls, except during large-scale events like homecomings.
Fraternities and other campus organizations must provide separate drinking areas, called beer gardens, at all events where alcohol is served.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about a rally in Hartford to protest Connecticut's new income tax misstated the party affiliation of Representative Miles S. Rap oport of West Hartford in some editions.
He is a Democrat.


Jewish Focus On India Tour
"India Through Jewish Eyes" is the title of a 13-day tour that will be led by Rabbi Marvin Tokayer, an authority on the Jewish experience in the Far East.
The tour leaves New York Dec. 21, and the itinerary includes New Delhi, Agra, Bombay, where the group will visit the poet laureate of India, and Cochin, where travelers will attend services at the city's ancient synagogue.
The fully escorted tour costs $3,996 a person, in double occupancy, and includes hotels, most meals and round-trip air fare from New York.
The trip is being organized by Lotus Tours, 2 Mott Street, New York, N.Y. 10013; (212) 267-5414.


EASING ASSET RULE FOR AID RECIPIENTS
Mary Johnson speaks with all the confidence and acumen of a shrewd business professional when she talks about her plans to open an electronic billing service to process claim forms for doctors.
"My computer will communicate with the insurance company's computers by way of a modem, instead of going through the mail," she said.
"This will make the payment process much speedier."


Social Events
Dinner at the U.N.
Oct. 15 The annual benefit for the Hospitality Committee for United Nations Delegations will start with cocktails and dinner at 5:30 P.M. and continue to 7:15 in the Delegates' Dining Room at the United Nations.
Guests will be bused to the Broadway Theater for the 8 P.M. performance of "Miss Saigon." Tickets, $275, from (212) 963-7182.
Lawyers for Human Rights
Oct. 15 -- The Lawyers Committee for Human Rights will honor John C. Whitehead, former Deputy Secretary of State, for his work with refugees.
Sadako Ogata, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, will speak at the black-tie dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 722-6226.
For Israel's Handicapped
Oct. 15 -- American Friends of ILAN, or Israel's Foundation for Handicapped Children, is planning a cocktail reception at the Michael Ende Gallery, 135 West 58th Street, from 5:30 to 8 P.M.
Mimimum donation $50; from (718) 575-5189.
Tap Dance Orchestra
Oct. 16 -- The five-year-old American Tap Dance Orchestra will benefit from its opening at the Joyce Theater.
A 6 P.M. buffet supper at Rogers &amp; Barbero, 149 Eighth Avenue near 18th Street, a block from the theater, will precede the 8 P.M. performance.
Tickets, $50 for the performance alone, $250 to include the buffet, from (212) 370-7180.
Training Simian Helpers
Oct. 16 -- Helping Hands, an affiliate of the Boston University School of Medicine, raises and trains monkeys to help quadriplegics.
Its first fund-raiser starts with an exhibition of exotic wildlife at the Metropolitan Club, 1 East 60th Street, at 7 P.M.
Dinner, dancing, an auction and games of chance will follow.
Black tie.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 249-6540.
Caribbean Evening
Oct. 16 -- The Ubu Repertory Theater, founded in 1982 to foster exchanges of the works of playwrights of the French-speaking world, will benefit from the 8 P.M. performance of "The Tempest" at the theater at 15 West 28th Street.
Cocktails and a Caribbean buffet will follow.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 679-7540.
Antique Show at the Pier
Oct. 16 -- The opening night of the Fall Antiques Show at the Pier, Pier 92 at 52d Street and the Hudson River, will benefit the Museum of American Folk Art.
Quilts, pottery, antiques and furniture will be among the items on display by 110 dealers from 22 states at the reception from 6 to 9 P.M.
Free shuttle buses will run every half hour from the museum at Columbus Avenue at 66th Street.
Tickets, $150 or $100 for those under 30, from (212) 595-9533.
Fifth Avenue Art Preview
Oct. 16 -- Children with AIDS and the scholarship fund of the New York Academy of Art will benefit from a black-tie reception and preview of the Fifth Avenue Art and Antiques Show at 2 East 79th Street from 6 to 9 P.M.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 505-5300.
An Evening Cruise
Oct. 17 -- Forward Face, a support group for people with facial abnormalities, will be the beneficiary of a fund-raising cruise aboard the Spirit of New York.
She will sail at 6:30 P.M. from her berth near South and Wall Streets.
Dinner and a Broadway revue will be followed by an auction of autographed sports memorabilia.
The group is affiliated with the New York University Medical Center.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 263-5205.
Aid for Tibetan Refugees
Oct. 17 -- The Dalai Lama will speak at a reception sponsored by the American Jewish World Service, at the Board Room Club, 280 Park Avenue (48th Street) from 5 to 7 P.M.
The international development and relief organization helps Tibetan refugees in India and Nepal.
Tickets, $18, from (212) 683-1161.
Antiques at the Armory
Oct. 18 -- A reception and preview of the International Antique Dealers Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street, will benefit the Society of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
Tickets for 5 to 9 P.M., $500; for 6 to 9 P.M., $200.
Telephone (212) 355-6110.
Highland Fling
Oct. 18 -- The American-Scottish Foundation, which promotes Scottish cultural activities, is planning a Highland Fling starting at 7 P.M. at the Genealogical and Biographical Library, 124 East 58th Street.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 682-1070.
Evening at the Races
Oct. 19 -- The Westchester division of the Jewish Guild for the Blind is planning a dinner at 7:30 P.M. at the Empire Terrace at Yonkers Raceway.
Diners will have a view of the races from their tables.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 365-3700 or (914) 963-4661, extension 597.
Gallery Treasure Hunt
Oct. 19 -- The Museum of Modern Art is planning a treasure hunt from 1 to 6 P.M. at six Manhattan galleries, ending with a cocktail party from 6:15 to 8 at the museum.
The event will raise money to buy prints, and signed prints will be the prizes.
Tickets, $125 or $500, which will include a signed poster by Jasper Johns, from (212) 708-9562.
For the Katonah Museum
Oct. 19 -- The dance ensemble Terra Brasil will entertain at a black-tie dinner-dance for the Katonah (N.Y.) Museum of Art at the museum, Route 22 at Jay Street in Katonah.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $250, from (914) 232-9555.
Hadassah Party
Oct. 20 -- Spanish-style appetizers, Viennese desserts and guitar music are planned for a 6:30 to 9:30 P.M. party for the Hadassah Medical Group at the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 439-6484, or $60 at the door.
Reservations required.
'Forbidden Broadway'
Oct. 21 -- Kathleen Turner, the actress, and Dr.
L.
Jay Oliva, the president-elect of New York University, will be honored by the University Settlement Society of New York for their work in settlement programs on the Lower East Side.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. at the New York Hilton will be followed by dinner and a performance of "Forbidden Broadway." Tickets, $250, from (212) 674-9120, extension 158.
Casita Maria Fiesta
Oct. 22 -- Casita Maria, founded in 1934 to provide social services for New York City's Hispanic residents, will honor the author Carlos Fuentes, Wolfgang Flotti, a financier, and Fernando Sanchez, a designer, at a black-tie dinner-dance at the Plaza.
Cocktails at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 593-9026.


THE NEW CROP
Picture a barge planted with flowering orchards, another with giant redwood trees, yet another with sand dunes and beach grass and wild roses, all floating along a city's shoreline and tying up to the edge of a blighted neighborhood.
Or think of the same gardens rolling down an inner-city street on the flatbed trailers of a fleet of 18-wheelers.
This is Steven Abrahams's "Landscape Mobilis," a theoretical concept for bringing gardens to those who have no backyard.
The San Francisco-based landscape architect has also designed a garden for a planned home for low-income AIDS patients south of the city.


Rebecca Neale, Missionary, Marries David Williamson 3d, Speech Writer
Rebecca Neale, a United Church of Christ missionary, was married yesterday to David Williamson 3d, a speech writer for the Nature Conservancy in Arlington, Va.
The Rev.
William P. Chilton performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Church Hill, Md.
Mrs.
Williamson, 30 years old, graduated from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Margo B. Neale of New York and the Rev.
Robert E. Neale of Leeds, Mass.
Her father, a United Church of Christ minister, is the author of "The Art of Dying." Her mother is an assistant principal in the Greenwich, Conn., public schools.


Isles Win Without Style Points
Despite the close score and the many goals, this one was rarely pretty and seldom exciting, except at the very end.
Nevertheless, the Islanders managed a 5-4 victory over the Philadelphia Flyers tonight in their home opener at the Nassau Coliseum.
Ray Ferraro scored twice for the Islanders and Andrei Lomakin scored twice for the Flyers, who have not won a game this season.
Each also had one assist.
Joe Reekie had three assists for New York, and Steve Duchesne had three for Philadelphia.


Tri to Watch, Preach Pass Tests at Belmont
On a day devoted to testing the careers of precocious 2-year-old horses, no championships were won or lost and no heads were crowned yesterday at Belmont Park.
But one or two notable performances were given that cast shadows down the racing road.
In the first of two major tests, the well-connected Preach outran 11 other fillies by more than two lengths to win the $250,000 Frizette Stakes.
But in the second half of the doubleheader half an hour later, a 12-1 shot named Tri to Watch outran 14 other colts by seven and a half lengths and scored a smashing upset in the $500,000 Champagne Stakes.


Clothes Help Make The Woman
At the moment, no one knows better how Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy Onassis dresses than Mrs.
Onassis herself and Shelley Komarov, the costume designer for "A Woman Named Jackie," an NBC mini-series to be broadcast tonight through Tuesday at 9.
Ms.
Komarov has chosen 150 outfits for Roma Downey, who plays Mrs.
Onassis. (The mini-series also features Stephen Collins as John F. Kennedy and Joss Ackland as Aristotle Onassis.) The designer had half a million dollars to spend on the clothes; the dry-cleaning budget alone was $25,000.
"It's very challenging to design clothes for a person who is still alive and has a very special style, and when everybody has an opinion on that style," said Ms.
Komarov, who immigrated to the United States from St.
Petersburg in 1978.
Since then she has worked on costumes for 26 television and feature films, including "The Kennedys of Massachusetts," a 1990 mini-series.
"It's so much easier to design clothes for average people," she said with a sigh.
Only once in the mini-series does Mrs.
Onassis wear "ordinary" clothes: as an infant in her mother's arms, wrapped in what Ms.
Komarov calls "just a blanket."


Dollar Off Again Against the Yen
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
129.55
129.70
129.10
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6880
1.6675
1.5245
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1287
1.1313
1.1471
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7230
1.7375
1.9670
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$359.50
$359.00
$398.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Palestinians Look for Way To Improve a Losing Hand
THE meeting in Washington last week between Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and four Palestinians has underscored both the weakness of the Palestinians' position as they head into the peace conference proposed by the United States and some of the weaknesses of the conference idea itself.
For the Palestinians, being invited to the peace conference by Mr.
Baker is like being invited to a game of musical chairs in which you know in advance that when the music stops you -- and only you -- will be the one left without a chair.
That the Palestinians are nevertheless prepared to consider coming is a measure of their own desperate straits, brought on in part by a series of self-inflicted wounds including support for Iraq in the gulf war.
What the four West Bank and Gaza Palestinian leaders -- Hanan Ashrawi, Faisal Husseini, Sari Nusseibeh and Zakaria al-Agha -- tried to win from Mr.
Baker in Washington were the least bad terms.


Executive Gets Top Sentence in Famine Fraud
A shipping-company executive who admitted sending hundreds of tons of cheap milk powder meant for animals to African famine victims was sentenced Thursday evening to five years in prison and fined nearly $2 million, the maximum possible under the law.
"This is the largest single combination of fine and restitution in our history," said Gene Richardson, assistant inspector general for investigations at the United States Agency for International Development.
"We hope it sends a loud and clear message to anyone who may even contemplate doing such a thing."


Coaches Standing on the Firing Line
The reign of terror that has struck major league managers since the regular season ended a week ago has reached such proportions that one coach compared it to a startling political development in recent world history.
"It's like when the Berlin wall came down," he said.
"Everything was falling."
The crumbling of the managers -- at the rate of one per day last week, four were fired and one changed teams -- has overshadowed another post-season development.
Nine teams that did not fire or change their managers last week dismissed coaches.


Mozart Bicentennial Still Inspires Programs
THE Mozart bicentennial is heading into the home stretch, with musical organizations countywide scurrying to complete their observances before the end of the year.
One example is the Totally Mozart series at the Union Church of Pocantico Hills, where today at 4 and 6 P.M. members of the Philharmonia Virtuosi play the Oboe Quartet and Clarinet Quintet in the incomparable surroundings of the Chagall and Matisse stained-glass windows.
Call 631-8702 or 631-8200 for information.


Ms. Linde Wed To L. H. Marten
Lucinda Linde, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Linde of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., was married yesterday to Lewis Hilary Marten, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
James Frederick Marten of Cohasset, Mass.
The Rev.
Richard R. McKeon Jr. officiated at Zion Episcopal Church in Dobbs Ferry.
The bride, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated and received a master's degree in materials science and engineering from M.I.T. and has an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is a general manager of contaminated soils at Molten Metal Technology in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father is the president of Lagus Capital, the New York holding company for the Linde Company of Wiesbaden, Germany.


Mary Lee Is Married to John J. Burnett
Mary Lee of Clinton, Conn., was married there yesterday to John Joseph Burnett of East Hartford, Conn.
The Rev.
George P. Burnett, a brother of the bridegroom, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church.
Mrs.
Burnett, 45 years old, is an independent saleswoman in the Connecticut area for gift and stationery manufacturers.
She graduated from Elizabeth Seton College in Yonkers.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick J. Lee of Riverdale.
Her father was the ticket manager at Yankee Stadium.
Mr.
Burnett, 62, is the research manager of The Hartford Courant.
He graduated from St.
Michael's College.
He was a widower.
He is the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Burnett of West Hartford, Conn.
His father was the fuel oil marketing manager for the Mobil Oil Company in Hartford.


Baylor Makes Bid to Yanks
Don Baylor spoke with General Manager Gene Michael of the Yankees today and asked to be considered as the next Yankee manager.
Michael has said that he is wary of hiring someone who has no major league managing experience, but Baylor is making his case to be considered for the Yankee job.
"I told him if he changes his mind, he knows where to find me," said Baylor, Milwaukee's hitting coach.
"He said he would give it some thought and let me know."


THIS SCHOOL IS OUT
A POPEYE HAT ON HIS head, a gold stud in his mahogany nostril, Eddie T. sashays through the classroom door, arms akimbo and hips thrust forward.
"Children, I have arrived," he drawls, then waggles his hands skyward.
Teacher Fred Goldhaber is unimpressed: though school has been in session for 15 minutes, only four students are at their desks.
"I thought we weren't going to have any more of these guest appearances," he clucks.
"But I see we're operating on Gay People Time."
Paul M. stomps into the room on chartreuse Rollerblades.
Big and round, with bleached blond hair beneath a helicopter beanie, Paul wears bright plaid pants, a daisy T-shirt and, cinching his droopy black cardigan, a button reading:
Nobody knows I'm gay.


Democrats Find A Campaign Voice, And It's Singing A Different Tune
OUT on the Democratic hustings, where a grim silence reigned for so many months, a Democratic message is emerging.
It is coming from a group of five candidates who, by and large, are looking for the synthesis that eluded their party in the 1980's.
They seek a message to carry the country past Reaganism, back to a more active Federal Government, and back to a Democratic Party that is trusted by the middle class to use that Government to help them.


Venison, a Meat for the 90's
VENISON is traditionally eaten in the fall and winter.
But now, along with farm-raised game like quail and pheasant, it is showing up with increasing frequency on restaurant menus year round.
Chefs are preparing venison in a wide variety of ways, from traditional stews and roasts to venison tartare seasoned with truffle sauce and green venison chili topped with an avocado salsa.
Farm-raised venison does not have the rich gamey taste of animals from the wild.
It is a much milder meat, more like well-aged beef or lamb, fine-grained and velvety in texture with a faint grassy taste.
But in addition to its flavor, the greatest appeal for venison these days is its low fat.


The Many Pros and Cons of the 55-M.P.H. Speed Limit
In a Forum page article on Sept. 29, Donald L. Pevsner proposed raising the 55 mile-an-hour national speed limit on Interstate highways.
He argued that the limit, set during the oil crisis of the early 1970's, is retained because it is a source of income for states, insurance companies and makers of radar-detection equipment.
He suggested raising the Interstate speed limit to 70 m.p.h. except in congested urban areas and in unsafe terrain.
Some of the letters received in response follow.
Reasons to Slow Down


Legal Victory
Contracting AIDS from his wife after she had been given contaminated blood in a Navy hospital, Martin Gaffney, a 42-year-old Marine chief warrant officer, sued.
Last week the Government decided not to appeal his $3.8 million medical malpractice award.
Mr.
Gaffney's family's troubles started in 1981 when Navy medical staff failed to detect that his wife, Mutsuko, was in labor and sent her home.
The baby was stillborn, and Mrs.
Gaffney required a Caesarean section, during which she had the transfusion that infected her with the AIDS virus.
Mrs.
Gaffney died in 1987.
Mr.
Gaffney, who learned in 1987 that he was also infected, has been in court for five years.
The Government decided not to appeal the award because of Mr.
Gaffney's rapidly deteriorating health and because the award was, in the words of one official, not huge.
The money is to be used for a trust fund for Mr.
Gaffney's 8-year-old daughter, Maureene, who appears to be free of the virus.


Stealth Technology: Elusive In More Ways Than One
EVEN as Washington and Moscow pledge to slash their nuclear and conventional arsenals, military leaders still insist on the latest technology for their shrinking forces.
The success of American radar-evading warplanes in the Persian Gulf war has accelerated a new arms race to develop Stealth technology, which makes planes and other weapons more difficult targets.
Japan and Israel are building sleek new ships with smaller radar signatures.
France is developing a cruise missile and Germany a remotely piloted reconnaissance aircraft with Stealth features.
Moscow is working on radar-eluding planes.


Pope Arrives in Brazil to Shore Up the Church
Beginning a 10-day visit in which he will meet with leaders of Brazilian Jewish groups, Pope John Paul II seemed today to rule out any imminent recognition of Israel by the Vatican.
The Pope, answering reporters' questions on a nine-hour flight from Rome, urged the Israeli authorities to "make it a little easier" for the Vatican to normalize ties.


With Bettis Out Front, Irish Crush Pittsburgh
Shortly after Notre Dame's game with Pittsburgh this afternoon, Irish fullback Jerome Bettis recalled that as a senior at Mackenzie High School in Detroit, his classmates, noting his height, broad shoulders and facial features, said he was almost a dead ringer for heavyweight fighter Mike Tyson.
Two years later, the 5-foot-11-inch, 247-pound sophomore has extended the comparison to include his punishing style of running.
Last week, he scored four touchdowns against Stanford.
This afternoon, he scored two, including one on a 40-yard burst off left tackle, as Notre Dame crushed Pittsburgh, 42-7 before a sellout crowd here at Notre Dame Stadium.


Margaret Frank Weds William Echt
Margaret Lois Frank, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lloyd Frank of New York, was married last evening in Houston to William Isadore Echt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Echt of Fort Worth.
Rabbi Stuart Federow officiated at the Lovett Inn.
Mrs.
Echt, 31 years old, is a researcher at the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Maine and received a master's degree in health service administration from New Hampshire College and a doctorate in public health management from the University of Texas.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Parker Chapin Flattau and Klimpl.
Her mother, Beatrice Frank, teaches consumer law at New York University.


Elizabeth Hunt Walsh Is Married
Elizabeth Hunt Walsh, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph N. Walsh Jr. of Bedford, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Brian Dean Rutledge, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul D. Rutledge of Malden, Mass.
The Rev.
William J. O'Halloran, a vice president of the College of the Holy Cross, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Church.
Mrs.
Rutledge, 30 years old, is a product manager at American Express in New York.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is the vice president for personnel at New York Telephone.
Her mother, Patricia Walsh, teaches English at Rye High School.


Supermarkets Expand Nutritional Advice
CONCERNED about cholesterol?
Distressed about diabetes?
Need more fiber and less salt, sugar or fat in your diet?
Help is available from an unexpected source, supermarkets.


Returning From Anti-Coup Rally, Man Grabs Gun and Kills Intruder
After a daylong march with 60,000 fellow Haitian-Americans to protest the coup in Haiti, Emmanuel Esperance felt a weary satisfaction as he returned to his home in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn on Friday night.
Family and friends who had marched with him and then gathered at his apartment for his wife's 41st birthday had barely settled on the living room sofa to watch the 10 o'clock news coverage of the demonstration when two young men pushed their way inside, demanding cash and valuables.


When Hateful Words Lead to Hateful Deeds; Harm's Beginnings
To the Editor:
There is nothing quite like a philosophy professor hung by his own doctrine.
Michael Levin writes (Op-Ed, Sept. 26): "If Smith causes Jones to hate you, you have not been harmed. Harm begins when Jones attacks you, and then it is Jones, not Smith, who is responsible for the damage."


Camera
Forty-eight photographers, including professionals and college students majoring in the field, descended on Ste.
Genevieve, Mo., last week for a workshop run by the School of Journalism at the University of Missouri.
A quiet town on the west bank of the Missouri River, Ste.
Genevieve appears to spend more time looking back than forward.
The town looks much as it did in the late 1700's and early 1800's.


A QUESTION OF MERCY
Richard Selzer's article "A Question of Mercy" (Sept. 22) was moving.
His experience helped me understand what we're up against legally and morally when we tamper with the "will to die." Selzer was brave to have simply considered the request.
RHODA LOHIER
New York, N.Y.


Q and A
Sources for Caribbean Villas
Q.
How can I find a rental of a two- or three-bedroom house in the Caribbean with a cook? -- Paul Ritchie, New York, N.Y.
A.
Here are some companies that represent villas in the Caribbean, with some examples of those that include a cook.
Places with cooks are most common on Barbados and Jamaica, though some exist on other islands.
When a cook is not included, one is usually available for an additional fee.
Rates are given for the winter season.


Elaine Velaochaga Weds Senen Ubina
Elaine Velaochaga and Senen Carlo Ubina, partners in UV Studios, a photographic studio in Lawrence, L.I., were married yesterday at St.
Joachim Roman Catholic Church in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The Rev.
John McGeever officiated.
Mrs.
Ubina, 25 years old, graduated from the School of Visual Arts.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Alberto Velaochaga of Lawrence and the late Mr.
Velaochaga.
Mr.
Ubina, 25, studied at the Parsons School of Design and the School of Visual Arts.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Senen Ubina of New York.


State Assessment A 'Horrendous' Process
At a time of weak real-estate markets and disturbing increases in foreclosure rates, the New York State Equalization and Assessment Board is again seeking to perform its destructive "hatchet job" on the homeowners of Long Island by once more calling for reassessment of residential properties.
In some unsuspecting areas where municipalities have acquiesced, it has been a painful and horrendous process.
The state government has already done a great deal of harm here by forcing Long Island to bear the greatest brunt of the reduction in state aid to education of any area in the state, thereby causing increased taxes and major disruptions in education.


Ms. Zipes Weds Alan Eskenazi
Debra Lee Zipes, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Douglas P. Zipes of Carmel, Ind., was married in Indianapolis last night to Alan Eric Eskenazi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sy Eskenazi of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Jonathan Stein officiated at the Broadmoor Country Club.
Mrs.
Eskenazi, 27 years old, is a psychologist at the Grand Street Settlement in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a master's degree in psychology from New York University.
Her father is a professor of cardiology at the Indiana University School of Medicine.


Protest in Warsaw


Tightening the Standards for Cruise Ship Safety
"WE'RE in a race with a catastrophe," is the way Alan Pollock of the National Transportation Safety Board characterizes efforts in several forums to improve cruise vessel safety.
What he means, he explained, is that a cruise ship disaster would create overwhelming pressure for new safety regulations, but he would rather take preventive action.
"Improved cruise ship safety is on the most-wanted list at the board," he said.


Sunday Menu; Quickly Prepared Polenta and Grilled Vegetables
Polenta is as versatile as rice and with the instant variety it is even more quickly prepared than most other starches.
Grilling the vegetables brings out their sweetness and to cook them quickly, cover them while they grill.


Making a Difference; Bringing Suit Against Her Own Firm
Thirty years after becoming the first female partner at Chicago's Baker &amp; McKenzie, Ingrid L. Beall has reached another milestone at the world's biggest law firm: last week, she became the first female partner to sue the firm.
The 65-year-old expert in tax and international corporate law says Baker &amp; McKenzie has over several years systematically pushed her out of the partnership because of her gender and age and made the practice of law virtually impossible.
According to a complaint filed in a Chicago court, Ms.
Beall's income has fallen some 64 percent in the last three years because she was denied assignments and shunted aside, in violation of the firm's partnership agreement.


Judge's Backers Take Up His Defense, Posing Motive and Method for Accuser
On Friday, supporters of Judge Clarence Thomas on the Senate Judiciary Committee tried to demonstrate a motive for Prof.
Anita F. Hill accusing the Supreme Court nominee of sexual harassment.
They presented an affidavit from a man who said Professor Hill had mistakenly believed he had a sexual interest in her and was prone to fantasy.
Then today, Senator Orrin G. Hatch, the Utah Republican who is one of Judge Thomas's chief defenders, suggested her method.
He invited listeners to consider the idea that she had worked with "slick lawyers" from liberal interest groups to concoct her story as part of their effort to oppose his nomination to the Supreme Court.


Beyond Manhattan, Some Islands Of Growth
"THERE is no argument necessary but this: Long Island City will be the greatest apartment and factory proposition around New York in five years," crowed New York City's leading real estate newsletter in 1906.
As far as Long Island City's future was concerned, it was right -- up to a point.


Ms. Hoffman Has Wedding
Debora Ruth Hoffman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Hoffman of Daytona Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Dr.
Eric Adam Pierce, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Pierce of New York.
Rosaria Salerno, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Lyman Estate in Waltham, Mass.
The bride, 32 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Colgate University and is the director of the Women, Infants and Children nutrition supplement program at St.
Elizabeth's Hospital in Boston.
Her father, who is retired, was a professor of electrical engineering at Union College in Schenectady, N.Y.


Twins Push Jays to the Edge
When the Toronto Blue Jays left Minnesota and its raucous followers in the Metrodome earlier this week, more than one player expressed hope that they would not have to play under that uncomfortable big top again.
Well, if Toronto does not find a way to stop the determined Minnesota Twins in Game 5 of the American League playoff on Sunday, that wish will have come true, only in a nightmarish fashion that the Blue Jays never imagined.


Business Diary/October 6-11
COMPANIES A New Market for the Baby Bells


Marshall and 4 Others Get Freedoms Medals
Thurgood Marshall, who retired on Oct. 1 as a Supreme Court justice, and five other prominent Americans received Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Medals in a ceremony here today in the church where President Roosevelt worshiped.
The medals have been awarded each year since 1951 by the Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute to those it has selected as proponents of the four freedoms described by President Roosevelt in a speech 50 years ago, on Jan. 6, 1941 -- freedom of speech, freedom of worship, freedom from want and freedom from fear.


Assets of a Three-Way Switch
IN OLDER and remodeled houses, ceiling lights above staircases or in rooms with two doors are sometimes controlled by just one wall switch.
That means having to negotiate a dark stairway or walk through a dark room to turn on the light.
The problem can be solved by adding a second switch at the head or foot of the stairs or at the entrance to the second doorway, and by making each switch a three-way switch.


CORRECTION
Because of an editing error, a letter to the editor on Sept. 22, about the value of workplace critiques by an evaluator of the same race as the intern or trainee, omitted the race of Bill Sharp, who took part in such critiques in 1967 while a creative supervisor at Leo Burnett advertising.
Mr.
Sharp is black.


Now Familiar With Killer Bees, Texas Braces for Their Spread
It has been a year since Africanized honeybees crossed the border into South Texas.
Now the bees, called "killer bees," are expected to reach Houston by spring, and the authorities are trying to prepare for them.
"People say we have to learn to accept these, like fire ants and rattlesnakes," said the Houston Fire Chief, Robert Clayton.
"But rattlesnakes don't fly."


About Cars; Porsches &amp; Plants, Plywood &amp; Peugeot
It's time again for a sampling from readers who are smiling or frowning or just love their cars.
For my part, this has been a summer and fall for bird-watching, for gardening, for expanding the lungs.
And, as pointed out here recently, I no longer rate a car on the basis of its ashtray.
Now I want to know how much pine-bark mulch it can carry.
Thus:


Meeting a Lama, A King, a Queen, An Ex-Mayor
The Dalai Lama was honored Thursday at a reception for 100 guests at the Cathedral House on the grounds of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
An interfaith service for 5,000 was held in the cathedral.
The reception was given by Tibet House, a nonprofit organizationt that is dedicated to the preservation of Tibetan culture.
Later Thursday, the New York City Opera marked the opening night of "The Most Happy Fella" with a supper-dance for 300 on the State Theater promenade at Lincoln Center.
Proceeds will aid the opera company.


Credit Line
To the Editor:
In his excellent appraisal of the Metropolitan's exhibition "Seurat, 1859-1891," Michael Kimmelman omitted mention of the exhibition's underwriter, Fondation Elf, a nonprofit philanthropic organization sponsored by a leading French oil corporation, Elf Aquitaine.
Visitors to the Metropolitan would not have the opportunity to see this exhibition were it not for that sponsorship -- a point worth noting in view of the increasingly difficult environment for the provision of substantial support for the arts in the United States.
PHILIPPE DE MONTEBELLO  New York
The writer is the director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Assets of a Three-Way Switch
IN OLDER and remodeled houses, ceiling lights above staircases or in rooms with two doors are sometimes controlled by just one wall switch.
That means having to negotiate a dark stairway or walk through a dark room to turn on the light.
The problem can be solved by adding a second switch at the head or foot of the stairs or at the entrance to the second doorway, and by making each switch a three-way switch.


When Love Doesn't Conquer: Crack and Murder
The only relative who never gave up on Tracey Bowe was her grandmother.
In return, Tracey stole her grandmother's good silver, a radio, cameras, clothes, a silver chain, a diamond ring and a set of dishes.
She and her boyfriend lived rent-free with the grandmother in her Brooklyn apartment, where they smoked crack.
Last month, the police say, Tracey and her boyfriend took her 66-year-old grandmother's life, smothering her with a pillow as she slept, then slitting her wrists to make it look like a suicide.
The killing occurred after Mary Bowe threatened to press charges against her granddaughter for stealing a $2,400 retirement check.


When Nuances Meant Life or Death
WILD SWANS
Three Daughters of China.
By Jung Chang.
Illustrated. 524 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


What Will Outcome Reveal in Jets-Oilers Matchup?
A third of the pro football season is gone and the Jets and the Houston Oilers are two National Football League teams still searching for their true identities.
After a game this afternoon between the two teams at Giants Stadium, each may have a better indication of just who they really are.


Squatters and Friends March, But Tompkins Sq. Is Weary
Outside Tompkins Square Park, where squatters and their supporters have chanted, raged and fought with the police, they showed up yesterday with floats, banners and a tin drum band -- a gathering that seemed less like a protest than a pep rally.
Organizers billed the event as a Squatters Day parade, meant to be "a celebration of the positive contributions of squatting to our community." The march that followed through the frayed streets of the Lower East Side was also meant to win community support for what the squatters say is a looming fight to remain in the city-owned buildings, which they have taken over to use as shelters, homes and, in some cases, political headquarters.


Foolish Conjecture
To the Editor:
Anthony Burgess resuscitates a legend that was laid to rest some time ago  [ "A Conductor With a Talent for Resurrection," Sept. 8 ] .
In connection with Beethoven's Ninth Symphony Mr.
Burgess writes: "The valved horn was coming in. Beethoven knew of a man . . . who had one of these newfangled marvels and he wrote his fourth horn part for him."


Subscription Concerts Lead the Week
ORCHESTRAL concerts dominate the music scene this week, with subscription openings in Hartford, Stamford and Bridgeport, plus a touring visit from the National Symphony.
That splendid orchestra, under its music director Mstislav Rostropovich, begins the "Great Performers at Woolsey Hall" series in New Haven with a concert at 8 P.M. on Tuesday devoted to the Shostakovich Eighth Symphony and Schumann's A minor Cello Concerto.
The soloist, Wendy Warner, is a Rostropovich protegee and winner of a 1991 Avery Fisher Career Grant.
For information, phone 776-1444.


Redd Foxx, Cantankerous Master of Bawdy Humor, Is Dead at 68
Redd Foxx, a ground-breaking comedian best known for his portrayal of a curmudgeonly junk dealer in the 1970's televison series "Sanford and Son," died late Friday night in Los Angeles after suffering a heart attack on the set of his new television series.
He was 68 years old.
Mr.
Foxx collapsed during a rehearsal for the CBS series "The Royal Family," in which he and Della Reese starred.
The series had its premiere on Sept. 18.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  BUFFALO BILLS -- Placed Bruce Smith, defensive end, and Michael Alexander, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
Waived Odell Haggins, nose tackle.
Activated Reggie Rogers, defensive end, from injured reserve.
Activated Chris Hale, cornerback from the physically unable to perform list.


Shore Tourism Rebounds, Slightly
ALTHOUGH tourists began returning in good numbers to the Jersey Shore last summer for the first time in four years, state and local tourism officials and merchants say a poor economy and inadequate marketing efforts by the state prompted many beach towns to wonder if the visitors had left their wallets at home.
Rentals of cottages and rooms at bed-and-breakfast inns, for example, were up 40 to 100 percent over last year's rate.
And beach-tag revenues in most of Monmouth, Ocean, Atlantic and Cape May Counties increased about 30 percent, according to the State Division of Travel and Tourism.


Catherine Hicks Has Wedding
Catherine Elizabeth Hicks, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence E. Hicks of Old Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday in Riverside, Conn., to Gytis Barzdukas, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gytis J. Barzdukas of Cleveland.
The Rev.
Philip E. Perkins officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Barzdukas, 26 years old, is an international market analyst with American Airlines in Dallas.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College and received a master's in public policy from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a vice president and the general counsel of the Thomas J. Lipton Company in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.


Questions on Questions In 'The Engagement'
TOM, Pat and Jeffrey agree that "marriage ruins friendships." So when their buddy, Tony, who has a "great business, money and all the women he wants," tells them he's going to get engaged to Susan, they set out to put a stop to that at once.
Even though Susan rejects Tony's roses and his ring, Jeffrey, a lawyer and a self-described "expert in relationships," knows just how to change their minds.
He'll tell all: Sexual and financial transgressions.
Names.
Places.
Dates.
Details.
Jeffrey, you see, keeps files on his friends.
And on their girlfriends.
On himself, too.
He carries them around in his attache case.
Just in case.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
YAuto sales, millions on annual basis
Y7.2
Y6.6
Business invetories, percent change
Y-0.3
Y-0.1
Thursday
YConsumer price index, percent change
Y0.2
Y0.3
Mechandise trade, in billions
Y$-5.9
Y$-5.5
Industrial production, percent change
Y0.3
Y0.4
Capacity utilization, in percent
Y80
Y80
YReal earnings, August percent change
Y-1.7
Y0.3
Monday: International Monetary Fund meeting in Bangkok Tuesday: Japanese Foreign Minister visits Soviet Union *
Nobel Prize for economics awarded  Wednesday: Announcment of two- and five-year Treasury note sales  Friday: Elections in British Columbia, Canada  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Quotation of the Day
"I'd rather die than withdraw." -- Judge Clarence Thomas.  [ 1:6. ]


The Finer Points of Diving
To the Editor:
into
a pool.
Swim is what you do once you get in there.
JOHN S. JERZAK  Philadelphia, Sept. 22


Despite Civil War, Kabul and Afghan Rebels Hold Their Fire in Some Areas
A scarred strip of asphalt runs beneath the gun barrels of Government tanks arrayed on peaks above this place in the gorge through which the rebels fighting the Government must pass if they ever hope to capture the capital, Kabul, just 40 miles to the northeast.
Atop one ridge, Gen.
Fateh Mohammed, an officer in the Interior Ministry's armed forces, looked south past huddled villages, down the macadam ribbon vanishing into a distant dust storm.


Sunday Outing; Daylong Tours to See Fall Foliage, and More
A little earlier than usual, because of a warm spring and summer, the fall foliage season is at hand almost everywhere north of metropolitan New York.
On every road, the Virginia creepers and the sumacs have turned bright red and purple, the swamp maples bright red and an occasional sugar maple stands out in orange, bronze or brilliant crimson against a background of still-green conifers.


Miss Guthrie Has Wedding
Suzanne Briggs Guthrie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William V. Guthrie of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday in Mount Kisco, N.Y., to David Perry Harmon 3d, a son of Mr.
Harmon Jr. of Annandale, Va., and Melissa Pedersen of Glenview, Ill.
The Rev.
Jack Silvey Miller performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church of Mount Kisco.
Mrs.
Harmon, 25 years old, graduated from Denison University, as did her husband.
She is a saleswoman with Richard Bauer &amp; Company, a paper brokerage in New York.
Her father is the senior vice president for sales and marketing at the Brown Printing Company in New York.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Sept. 29 misstated the various prices of the Swiss Pass, which allows unlimited travel on trains, boats and buses in Switzerland.
The report also listed a pass that is no longer sold.
The prices, in effect through 1992, are: for 8 days, $159 in second class, $239 in first; 15 days, $189 and $289; one month, $269 and $389.
The Swiss Flexi Pass, valid for any 3 days within a 15-day period, costs $129 in second class, $199 in first.
The four-day Swiss Pass has been discontinued.


INSIDE
Braves and Twins Wins In the National Leauge Playoffs, the Braves won 10-3, in Atlanta to take a 2-1 lead over the Pittsburgh Pirates.
In the American League, the Minnesota Twins opened a 3-1 lead by beating the Blue Jays, 9-3, in Toronto.
Some copies of SportsSunday were printed before the games ended.


Ellen O'Toole Has a Wedding
Ellen Julia O'Toole, the daughter of Vitaline O'Toole of New York and Thomas O'Toole of Washington, was married yesterday to Daniel Deschamps Hubbard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Hubbard of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
George Tracy, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated, with the Rev.
Karl Phillippi, a Congregational pastor, attending, at the First Congregational Church in Madison, Conn.
Mrs.
Hubbard, 29 years old, graduated from Duke University.
Until recently, she was the art curator and publications manager for the Oliver Carr Company, a real-estate development concern in Washington.
Her father is a senior consultant with Powell-Tate, a Washington public affairs agency.


Data Bank/October 13, 1991
Consumer Credit
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
--2.1
--1.0
--2.8
Sales at Retail Outlets
Sept.
Aug.
July
Monthly percent change
0.7
--0.6
0.5
Producer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.1
0.2
--0.2
6-month Treasury Bills
Oct. 11
Oct. 4
Sept. 27
Yield in percent
4.99
5.07
5.14
Electric Power
Oct. 4
Sept. 27
Sept. 20
Millions of kilowatt hours
54,080
53,857
60,098
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons
1,719
1,692
1,725
Weekly Jobless Claims
Sept. 27
Sept. 20
Sept. 13
In thousands
435
430
440
Coal Production
Thousands of net tons
Y20,388
Y20,194
Y 21,193


Beware of G.M.'s In Bow Ties
To the Sports Editor:
Why is it that general managers who build winning franchises with brilliant trades and maneuvering stay complacent, then let them founder and wilt, as did Frank Cashen and Bill Torrey?
Could it be that they are tying their knots too tight?
LEWIS J. LORIA Roslyn, L.I.


POSTINGS: 175 Rooms Near La Guardia; A New Hotel for Flushing
After years of growth as a center of business, social activities and residences for New York City's Chinese American community, the Flushing section of Queens is about to become home to the city's newest hotel, an unusual venture aimed at attracting tourists and business people far from the center of Manhattan.
The hotel, the Sheraton La Guardia Center, is scheduled to open in November.
The 14-floor structure will have 175 rooms, including eight deluxe suites, and has been developed at a cost of $40 million by Heo Peh Lee, president of Shie Jie Enterprises, a Flushing construction company.
The architect is Daniel Pang Associates of Manhattan.


Tied Up in Knots, Cryptographers Test Their Limits
EDGAR ALLAN POE thought there was no such thing as an unbreakable code.
"It may be roundly asserted that human ingenuity cannot concoct a cipher which human ingenuity cannot resolve," he wrote.
In this spirit, cryptographers have spent nearly 15 years picking at a code that the National Security Agency, the nation's code-making and code-breaking agency, helped design for business and government to use in banking and in transmitting sensitive, but unclassified, data over computer lines.
Yet, to the surprise of many mathematicians and computer scientists, the code, known as the Data Encryption Standard, or D.E.S., has stubbornly resisted their efforts to penetrate it.
Only recently has anyone found a dent in the code and that dent by no means breaks it.
In fact, the new system is only a slight improvement over the laborious method of trying every possible key to the code until the correct one is chanced upon.


A Cold Warrior Breathes a Little Easier
IN the four decades of life-and-death struggle between East and West, there was never a more valiant cold warrior than Paul H. Nitze.
Just weeks before the Korean war began in 1950, he wrote one of the seminal policy planning papers of the new era, known as NSC-68, urging that the United States build up its military forces to the point where it could face down Soviet expansionism anywhere in the world.
He advised John F. Kennedy during the Berlin crisis.
He was a member of the original covey of hawks and doves who pondered the Cuban missile crisis in the White House.
He was a bishop in the arms-control priesthood, a principal negotiator of the Strategic Arms Limitation and Intermediate Nuclear Forces treaties.


Afghan Rebels Report Missile Attack on City
Afghan rebels rocketed the heavily fortified city of Jalalabad in Afghanistan today, killing 17 and injuring 67 others, state-run Radio Kabul said.
Afghanistan's Soviet-backed Government retaliated by heavily bombing guerrilla positions around the eastern city.
Diplomatic sources in Kabul said several medium-range Scud missiles were launched from the city.


Private Schools Turn to Reconstruction
AFTER two years of living like academic nomads, the students and teachers of Nightingale-Bamford, a private girls' school on Manhattan's Upper East Side, are home again.
When the 1991-92 school year began last month, they returned to their 62-year-old, Georgian-styled schoolhouse at 20 East 92d Street after a $22 million expansion and renovation of the building.
While the work was going on they held classes and ate lunch in 17 neighboring schools, churches, synagogues and community centers.


Maryelizabeth Duffy Wed to William McManus
Maryelizabeth Duffy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Duffy of Sunnyside, Queens, was married yesterday to William Fraser McManus, a son of Mrs.
Thomas J. McManus of Brooklyn and the late Mr.
McManus.
The Rev.
Thomas J. Nielson officiated at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Mrs.
Duffy-McManus graduated from Marymount College in Tarrytown, N.Y.
She is a paralegal at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
The bridegroom graduated from Niagara University.
He is the vice president and director of operations for Moore Capital Management in New York.


THOMAS BACKERS ATTACK HILL; JUDGE, VOWING HE WON'T QUIT, SAYS HE IS VICTIM OF RACE STIGMA
Republicans on the Senate Judiciary Committee launched a fierce assault today on the truthfulness of the Oklahoma law professor whose accusations of sexual harassment have threatened the Supreme Court nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas.
In the second day of hearings whose drama and anger have riveted national attention, the committee continued to evaluate the sharply contrasting accounts offered by Judge Thomas and Anita F. Hill.
And once again the televised hearings, marked by Judge Thomas's expressions of disgust, produced powerful testimony about sexual and racial issues.


He Knows They Are Coming for Him
BROTHERLY LOVE
By Pete Dexter. 274 pp. New York: Random House. $22.


Mara H. Kalish To Wed in 1992
Mr. and Mrs.
Ladd Fraternale of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., have announced the engagement of her daughter Mara Hillary Kalish to Simon Ivor Walker, a son of Patricia Farrell of Vienna, Va., and Donald James Walker of London.
A wedding next summer is planned.
Ms.
Kalish, 27 years old, is a candidate for a master's degree in theater management at the University of Maryland.
Her stepfather is a graphic designer in Hastings-on-Hudson.
Her mother, Marion Fraternale, is a corporate vice president at R. H. Macy &amp; Company.


European Trains
To the Editor: After you printed a letter about European trains, together with the reply, I called Rail Europe's 914 number trying to determine a train connection from Innsbruck to Chiusa (Klausen).
The person who answered said that she had no listing for Chiusa, only Bressanone and Bolzano.
It turned out that she did not have an Italian railroad time table, only a timetable published by Cook's, which lists only larger stations.
The single Rail Europe information number might be money-saving for the European railroads.
But it was certainly less aggravating and more accurate when each country's railroad had its own office in the United States.
Perhaps they prefer the tourists to rent cars instead of taking the train.
GEORGE SACHS New York, N.Y.


STARMAN
How appropriate for you to run William Grimes's article about astrology, "Starman," on Sept. 15, with the moon in Sagittarius, Venus moving in a direct motion around the sun, Mercury and Jupiter all in the sign of Virgo (a favorable time for research, unusual studies).
His fairness to astrology and insight into Patric Walker's style were refreshing.
Though Patric and I are competitors (I too have a 900 number and am a syndicated astrology columnist), his wit, class and positive outlook have and will continue to bring our craft into the mainstream.
JOYCE JILLSON
Sherman Oaks, Calif.


World Markets; Picking the Country, Not the Stock
In international investments, the country an investor chooses can often be far more important than the stock he or she actually buys.
The reason is that a nation's economic and political climate can have such a strong impact on the performance of the country's stock market that individual stocks, whatever their merits, are swept along.


Eastern Europe's Reactors Don't Seem So Distant Now
PROTESTERS coined the motto "A nuclear accident anywhere is a nuclear accident everywhere," but lately it has been adopted by government regulators, looking nervously at the primitive reactors in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
Meeting outside Paris last month, top regulators from the seven largest industrialized nations began laying plans for international safety standards.
And in Brussels on Thursday, the European Community appropriated $60 million for assistance to the Soviet Union and discussed an aid program begun earlier this year for Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia.
Significantly, the aid is for improving the regulation of reactors.


Bomb Threat at Hearing Site
bomb threat forced a brief evacuation today of the Russell Senate Office Building where the Clarence Thomas hearings were being held.
The Capitol Police received the threat while the hearings were recessed for lunch.
The session resumed as scheduled after the break.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the wedding of Ann Siegel and Michael Fisch er misidentified the person who officiated.
It was Judge Phylis Skloot Bamberger of the New York State Court of Claims; Milton Mollen, the New York City Deputy Mayor for Public Safety, who was to officiate, became ill.


Ellen H. Kavee Plans Wedding
Barbara H. Kavee of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter, Dr.
Ellen Hillary Kavee, to Dr.
Stephen Michael Nadler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Nadler of Syosset, L.I.
A November wedding is planned.
Dr.
Kavee, 31 years old, is an attending anesthesiologist at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University and she and her fiance received their M.D. degrees from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
Her father, the late Dr.
David J. Kavee, was a surgeon at Montefiore Medical Center, where her grandfather the late Dr.
Julius Kavee was a pulmonologist.


Corrections
An article on page 2 of the New Jersey Weekly today about an ordinance that requires bars in Walling ton to close at 2 A.M., rather than 3, misstates Stump Merrill's status with the New York Yankees.
He was dismissed as manager on Monday.


Substitute Rooms
To the Editor: I recently returned from Globus-Gateway's Grand Tour of Germany.
Globus-Gateway had indicated in their catalog that they use only two hotels in Berlin -- the Hamburg or the Queens.
On my tour, however, they put us up at the Hotel Muegglesee Perle, a resort hotel located 15 miles outside of East Berlin.
Since the hotel was not convenient to public transportation, a trip by taxi to West Berlin could take up to 1 1/2 hours (depending upon traffic) and cost around 100 marks, or about $61 each way (if a taxi could be found in West Berlin willing to take you to this remote location on the return trip).
Probably because of the out-of-the-way location of the Hotel Muegglesee Perle, Globus-Gateway did not make available an optional excursion that they had advertised -- Berlin at Night.
This would have included an evening at a world famous cabaret in West Berlin.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 29 about Albertville, France, referred incorrectly to the T.G.V. rail schedule between Paris and Lyons.
High-speed trains leave Paris for Lyons at least once an hour, not once every two hours; the trip takes about two hours, not four hours.
Connecting service from Lyons to Albertville takes an additional two hours.


County Lease On Offices Splits Officials
COUNTY EXECUTIVE Andrew P. O'Rourke has ordered several hundred county employees to begin moving into a three-year-old office building in Hawthorne despite opposition from a bipartisan legislative coalition that has vowed not to finance the move.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  When a 68 Isn't Special Chip Beck followed up his record matching 59 on Friday with a 68 yesterday - and lost ground in the exceptionally low scoring Las Vegas Invitational.
Beck completed 72 holes of the five-day, 90-hole event at 264, a distant 24 below par.
That equals the most strokes under par for any previous 72 holes on the PGA Tour this year, but it was only good enough for a tie for fifth in this remarkable shootout.
Four golfers - Craig Stadler, D.A.
Weibring, Bruce Leitzke and Andrew Magee - were tied for the lead at 25-under 263 with one round to go.
Stadler had eagles on the first and 18th holes and finished with a 66.
Andrew Magee had a 62 with a birdie-birdie finish. (AP) South Africa Tops U.S.
John Bland defeated Curtis Strange and David Frost beat Steve Pate yesterday to give South Africa a 2-1 victory over the top-seeded United States in the quarterfinals of the Dunhill Cup at St.
Andrews in Scotland.
Bland edged Strange, 68-69, and Frost beat Pate, 70-71.
The Americans' only point came on Fred Couples's 67-74 victory over Gary Player.
The South Africans, playing in their first international team event in 11 years, returned to the Old Course in the afternoon and beat Scotland, 3-0, to reach the finals.
The other semifinal between Wales and Sweden was suspended by darkness with two of the matches tied after 18 holes. (AP) Baird and Trevino in Lead: Butch Baird made a pair of eagles en route to a six-under-par 66 and a share of the lead with Lee Trevino after two rounds of the Raley's Senior Gold Rush in Rancho Murieta, Calif.
Baird and Trevino, who had a 70, were tied at seven-under 137 entering today's final round.
George Archer and Bob Charles were tied at 138. (AP) TENNIS  Rostagno Tops Lendl  Derrick Rostagno continued to produce surprises at the Seiko Super tournament in Tokyo, reaching the finals by beating third-seeded Ivan Lendl, 7-6 (7-4), 6-2, yesterday.
A day earlier, Rostagno upset second-seeded Boris Becker.
The seventh-seeded Rostagno will face Stefan Edberg, the world's top-ranked player, in the final today.
The Swede rallied to beat No. 6 Goran Ivanisevic, 4-6, 7-6 (7-2), 7-5.
Edberg had trouble with the serve of Ivanisevic, who had 21 aces. (AP) Graf Defeats Sukova: Top-seeded Steffi Graf overcame a nagging wrist injury and turned in a 6-4, 6-3 victory over Helena Sukova in the semifinals of the European Indoors tournament in Zurich.
In the final today, Graf faces Nathalie Tauziat, who defeated Manuela Maleeva-Frangniere, 7-6 (7-3) 7-6 (7-5). (AP) FIELD HOCKEY Germany Defeats U.S.
Franziska Hentschel scored all of Germany's goals in a 4-0 victory over the United States in the opening round of women's Olympic qualifying yesterday in Auckland, New Zealand.
Two groups of six will compete for the next two weeks to determine the draw for the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
Other winners in first round games were, New Zealand, Canada, Britain and South Korean. (AP) DOG SHOW Welsh Terrier Wins A Welsh Terrier, Ch.
Briggsdale Rowdy Rusty, owned by Pete Zablocki of Paramus, N.J., led a field of 1,510 dogs at the Palisades Kennel Club Show at Liberty State Park in Jersey City yesterday.
It was the fourth top award for the 3-year-old dog, who was handled by Christopher Nance.


Sources of Information
Abercrombie &amp; Kent, 1520 Kensington Road, Oak Brook, Ill. 60521; (708) 954-2944; (800) 323-7308 outside Illinois.
Admiral Cruises, 1050 Caribbean Way, Miami, Fla. 33132; (305) 539-6000.


A Knoblauch Makes It To the Big-Time Fields
There is a lot of little boy in Chuck Knoblauch, the man who plays second base for the Twins.
His chubby cheeks are red after games, his short hair desperately needs a comb and his uniform is searching for the nearest spin cycle.
But why should it matter?
Those are signs of Knoblauch being Knoblauch.
He plays the game with the verve of a kid trying out a new baseball glove.
A hustling kid.
An intense kid.
A dynamic kid who forces observers to marvel at his simple style.
He is in the majors, but the rookie plays like it is Little League.


Real Politics in a Celluloid City
A big-city mayor is secretly filmed in a hotel room snorting cocaine with a woman who is not his wife.
Another mayor, grasping at the last spoils before his political machine collapses, is guilty of complicity in the death by arson of two squatters whose makeshift home stood in the way of a lucrative land deal.
Given the seemingly boundless greed and venality that periodically mar American politics, art faces stiff competition trying to imitate, much less outdo, life.
The cocaine incident really happened.
The corrupt land deal is the crux of "City of Hope," the John Sayles film that opened Friday.


Wanted: Homes for Homeless Shelters
WHEN Mayor David N. Dinkins issued his plan for sprinkling up to 24 new shelters for single homeless people throughout New York City last week, he did more than unleash a fierce fight on how to handle a daunting social problem.
He uncorked a debate on the meaning of the word "fair."
Under the broad legalese of the new charter adopted by voters in 1989, the city must "further the fair distribution among communities of the burdens and benefits associated with city facilities," from libraries and parks to jails and incinerators.


Answering The Mail
Q.
A contractor recently ripped up my asphalt driveway
and
put down new asphalt that has a "rocky-looking" finish.
I asked the contractor if I should apply a sealer, but he said it was not necessary.
Do you think a sealer would protect the new asphalt and also help to cover its "rocky" appearance?
A.
I do not know what you mean by a "rocky" appearance.
New asphalt should be smooth and uniformly black, with no stones, rocks or other fillers showing.
A sealer is usually not necessary on new asphalt in the first year, but it is a good idea after about two or three years.
That should be repeated at regular intervals, the intervals depending on the amount of exposure and wear.
The sealer helps prevent drying out from the sun, as well as water penetration and freezing damage.
It also keeps the driveway looking better.
But I do not see how a sealer could smooth over or correct a "rocky" appearance, except to make the driveway all uniform in color.


Angolan Rebel Pleads for Help in Setting Election
After agreeing in the spring to end 16 years of civil war, the Angolan Government and the main rebel movement have brought their rivalries to this country, with both sides soliciting support from the United States Government, the American business community and the United Nations.
Jonas Savimbi, the United States-backed guerrilla leader of the civil war against the Soviet- and Cuban-backed Angolan Government, accused the Government in Luanda of seeking to delay a national election and has asked for American and U.N. support to insure a "free and fair" vote in September 1992.


All About/Car Engines; A New Consumer Passion for What's Under the Hood
As the new model year begins, auto makers are touting their engines as never before to consumers, who are increasingly savvy about power plants.
Car buyers are concerned not only about horsepower and cylinder displacement, but also about fuel economy, emissions, technology and performance.
They know their engines.
"It's really amazing how many people do their homework," said Frank Ward, president of MOR-PACE, a consumer research firm in Farmington Hills, Mich.


On the Street; Mixing Up the Moods
A vibrant kaleidoscope of patterns is being seen on Fifth Avenue.
The mixes are startling, often disorderly.
They suggest a revolution against uniformity, a desire to escape basic solid colors.
Fanciful patterns and clashing colors are amusing; a way to express a mood.
In the tropics, where clothes were once unnecessary, ancient peoples painted their bodies and tattooed them, and in some places still do.


Streetscapes: St. Luke's Hospital; With Its Dome Gone, Can a Cornice Help?
WHAT can be done with part of a historic building?
That is the preservation question posed by St.
Luke's Hospital on West 113th Street between Morningside Drive and Amsterdam Avenue.
The hospital is carefully and conscientiously replicating the cornice on the remains of its original 1896 building -- which has been irretrievably compromised by additions.


CAMPUS LIFE: Cornell; Greek System Polices Itself Over Drinking
Times are changing for the Greek system at Cornell University.
For one, the Greeks are policing themselves.
Already this year a student committee has charged 10 fraternities with violating Cornell's alcohol policy.
Yet in a rare moment of agreement, students and administrators both say the rules are not being broken more frequently.


After the Curtain Falls
A BALLET may appear like poetry in motion, but all that delicate movement comes at a price.
Like many athletes, ballet dancers often use up their bodies by age 40.
Some of them are questioning why they should have to wait around another quarter century -- until they are 65 -- to get their pensions.
Last week a group of ballet dancers from the American Ballet Theatre, the New York City Ballet, the Joffrey Ballet and the Dance Theatre of Harlem filed a suit against their union in Federal District Court in Manhattan charging it with discrimination and seeking $20 million as well as changes in how the plan is run.


Talking: Chimneys; It Takes More Than Sweeping
THE continued popularity of fireplaces and wood-burning stoves means homeowners should be far more diligent about regular chimney cleaning and maintenance.
And -- despite the lingering Mary Poppins image of the sweep as a sooty-faced gentleman in top hat and tails -- the work is critical.
According to the Consumer Product Safety Commission, a Federal agency, some 70,000 residential fires each year are associated with defective or clogged chimneys.
Those fires originate only in part from a lack of regular cleaning.
Deterioration is equally responsible, notes James Madorma, a home inspector in New York City, in his new book, "The Complete Guide to Understanding and Caring for Your Home" ($19.95 from Betterway Publications, Crozet, Va.).


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE INNOCENT, by Ian McEwan. (Bantam, $6.99.) In a novel set in cold war Berlin, a bland young British clerk becomes involved in a plan to dig a tunnel from the American sector to the Russian.
Last year our reviewer, George Stade, said Ian McEwan "proves himself to be an acute psychologist of the ordinary mind" who "demonstrates how violence and horror can erupt from what that mind does not know about itself."
IN ALL HIS GLORY.
The Life of William S. Paley: The Legendary Tycoon and His Brilliant Circle, by Sally Bedell Smith. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $15.) As Sally Bedell Smith shows in this biography, the legend of William S. Paley, the man who built CBS, was a fiction as overblown as one of those television mini-series the networks are forever inflicting on the public.
"Her superb and thorough reporting uncovered all the unpleasantness along with the greatness," Christopher Buckley said here last year.
" 'In All His Glory' is an impressive narrative history, not only of the man who pioneered the most important broadcasting network of its day but also of that technology's extraordinary impact on the United States."


Woman Gives Birth for Daughter
The first American woman to serve as a surrogate mother for her daughter gave birth this morning to her grandchildren -- a boy and a girl.
The woman, 42-year-old Arlette Schweitzer, served as a surrogate mother for her daughter, Christa Uchytil of Rapid City.
Mrs.
Uchytil, 22, was born without a uterus, which made it impossible for her to have children.


Skinheads of Portland
To the Editor:
Wayne King's review of "Blood in the Face" by James Ridgeway (In Short, Sept. 1) mentions an incident in which skinheads beat to death an Ethiopian man.
The review says this happened in Seattle, whereas it actually occurred in Portland, Ore., where, I would like to add, justice was upheld in the trial and convictions that followed this tragic death.
JENNIFER HURTADO  New Haven


Soloist in C minor


Beyond the Master's Voice
Architects are not like dancers, and even less like footballplayers: Their careers develop slowly and peak late.
To be a young architect is almost never to be a star, celebrated and possessed of an individual style.
It's much more often to be a work in progress, an artist in the process of becoming.
And that process almost always involves forming an attachment to an older architect, a mentor, whose style becomes a model for the younger designer.
The strongest disciples burst out on their own in one way or another, as they always have -- as Frank Lloyd Wright broke away from his mentor, Louis Sullivan, as Robert Venturi set off in a new direction away from his greatest influence, Louis I. Kahn.
But Wright referred to Sullivan as his master for the rest of his life, even as he defined an architectural style that was not Sullivan's at all, but every bit his own.


Mutual Funds; Alternates as the C.D.'s Go Sour
More than $150 billion invested in certificates of deposit are coming due this month, and many holders of these certificates are looking for new homes for their money.
The reason: yields on C.D.'s and other short-term investments like money market funds have dropped.
As of Oct. 1, one-year C.D.'s were yielding just 5.66 percent on average, according to Robert K. Heady, publisher of Bank Rate Monitor in North Palm Beach, Fla.


Fairfield University Offers Contemporary Florentine Works
AT the Walsh Gallery, on the Fairfield University campus, are paintings and sculptures by Tuscans -- live ones, not the effigies reclining on sixth century B.C. sarcophaguses.
Most come from Florence, which was founded long before Rome overcame Etruria but did not reach its zenith until the Renaissance.
This is a part of the world where the term historic really means something.
The show is titled "The Florentine Workshop Today," but few if any of the 16 artists -- all in their 40's and 50's -- have reputations that extend beyond Europe, and none could be called avant-garde.
Theirs is not Arte Povera; then again, they don't strive officiously to repeat the past.
The one artist to have appeared solo in the United States is Riccardo Nannini, a sculptor who lived in this country from 1976 to 1980 but seems unaffected by the experience.
Mr.
Nannini's "Spaceship," a carving some three feet long in gray stone, one of the best works in the show, resembles an oil tanker, except that it has platforms fore and aft.
The platforms have trap doors that lift out to reveal cubbyholes, one containing an egg seemingly of white marble, the other a miniature table and chair in the same material.
Amidships is a grid containing small objects -- spears, pylons, thin slabs, a pyramid and so on.
This is transportation fit for de Chirico.


ECONOMIC WORRIES RISE IN YUGOSLAVIA
Inflation has been galloping on the heels of the war horses in the last 15 weeks of fighting in Yugoslavia, and now the introduction of a new currency by the separatist republic of Slovenia threatens a fresh surge.
On Wednesday, Slovenia gave its two million citizens until Friday evening to exchange all of their holdings in dinars, the federal Yugoslav currency, for the newly printed tolars.


Churchill and the Codes
To the Editor:
As Zara Steiner, who reviewed "Betrayal at Pearl Harbor" (Sept. 8), has neither spoken with Capt.
Eric Nave nor read his 500-page manuscript, I am surprised she queries his recall of events during his 42 distinguished years' service with the intelligence services of Britain and Australia.


Data Update
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Aug. 91
Jul. 91
Aug. 90
Nation
$ 101,800
$ 103,000
$ 97,200
Northeast
144,400
143,500
145,300
Midwest
78,900
79,200
75,100
South
91,100
93,600
87,200
West
144,700
148,800
140,200
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.06
9.15
10.35
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.83
6.86
8.37
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.94
9.02
10.15
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.65
6.73
8.05
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.94
9.04
10.20
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.67
6.78
8.26
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.15
9.27
10.53
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.37
7.39
8.56
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
5.40
5.50
7.58
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.10
9.10
9.70
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Ms. Gardner Wed
Deborah Laura Gardner, a daughter of Miriam Jacobs of Brooklyn and Donald Gardner of Red Bank, N.J., was married yesterday to Bruce Douglas Walker, a son of Hugh and Maureen Walker of Danvers, Mass.
The Rev.
Bernard Poppe officiated at St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity Episcopal Church in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Walker, 35 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Trenton State College.
She was until recently the director of public relations at the Y.W.C.A. of Brooklyn.
The bridegroom, 27, graduated from Salem State College.
He is a pension analyst with Angell, Disend &amp; Quesnel, an actuarial consulting firm in Waltham, Mass.


Citadel Takes Army by Storm in Upset
Like a number of Division I-A schools, Army has managed to pad its record in recent years with victories over Division I-AA teams.
Indeed, after a 22-20 loss to Colgate midway through the 1987 season, the Cadets won 14 consecutive games against generally undermanned and undersized Division I-AA schools, averaging three victories a season against such opponents.
But that streak ended today when the Citadel took a 20-0 first-half lead and then held off an Army comeback to upset the Cadets, 20-14, before a homecoming crowd of 40,459 at Michie Stadium.
It was Army's third defeat against two triumphs, both of which had come over Division 1-AA opponents, Colgate and Harvard.


Gail E. Dorros Plans to Marry
December wedding plans for Gail Ellen Dorros and Arthur Dorfman have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Dorros of Morristown, N.J.
Mr.
Dorfman is the son of Ira Dorfman of Revere, Mass., and the late Virginia Dorfman.
Miss Dorros, 30 years old, graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from Northwestern University and a master's degree in organizational psychology from Columbia University.
She is an account manager for Personal Performance Consultants in New York.
Her father is an executive vice president of technical services for Bell Communications Research in Livingston, N.J.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 13, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
2
7
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four tales of late-night terror.
3
12
THE MUMMY, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Ramses the Great and Cleopatra return to life.
4
2
QUESTION QUEST, by Piers Anthony. (Avon, $4.99.) A woman is sent to hell to rescue a missing sorcerer; part of the "Xanth" fantasy series.
5
8
THE WOMEN IN HIS LIFE, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The rise of a tycoon and his relationships with five women.
6
1
SEASON OF THE SUN, by Catherine Coulter. (Onyx, $5.99.) A historical romance about a Yorkshire belle and a Norwegian landowner.
7
3
BUFFALO GIRLS, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $5.99.) Calamity Jane and her friends seek to recapture the excitement of the old Wild West by joining Buffalo Bill's show in London.
8
3
Q-IN-LAW, by Peter David. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" novel.
9
1
THE SHADOW AND THE STAR, by Laura Kinsale. (Avon, $4.99.) The romance of a wealthy man and a nearly destitute woman in 19th-century London and Hawaii.
10
5
HARVEST, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $5.99.) Turmoil in a Jewish family during the turbulent 1960's.
11
38
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) Chinese-American women and their mothers.
12
6
BATTLEGROUND, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.95.) The Marines' struggle for Guadalcanal.
13
3
SWEET FORTUNE, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) A freewheeling young woman has problems: should she marry the man chosen for her by her dictatorial father?
14
1
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Avon, $5.99.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.
15 *
19
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
16 *
8
TIME BOMB, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $5.99.) A child psychologist tracks down the perpetrators of crimes spawned by hatemongers.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
16
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents and from them learns the ways of mountain men and the Indians.
2
21
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
3
22
WHEN RABBIT HOWLS, by the Troops for Truddi Chase. (Jove, $4.95.) A woman voices the 92 personalities that live within her.
4
13
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
5
3
GET TO THE HEART, by Barbara Mandrell with George Vecsey. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of the country-music singer.
6
99
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
7
414
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
8 *
14
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
9 *
1
THE MILWAUKEE MURDERS, by Don Davis. (St. Martin's, $4.99.) The story of Jeffrey L. Dahmer, the 31-year-old man who has admitted killing 17 people since 1978.
10
1
PRECIOUS VICTIMS, by Don W. Weber and Charles Bosworth Jr. (Signet, $5.99.) The case of an Illinois woman who cold-bloodedly killed two of her infant children.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
2
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
63
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
43
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
22
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
5
9
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


New Yorkers, etc.
There is unanimity about few things these days, but mention the indiscriminate use of first names and listen to the reaction.
The intensity of response varies from mere dislike and resentment to sheer rage and fury, but it adds up to something very close to complete agreement, agreement that the practice is presumptuous and inexcusable.
The sad part about this caveat is that these strong negative reactions about strangers and chance acquaintances using first names are nothing new.
The complaints have gone on for years, but for every person who has taken heed and reformed there are, it seems, 10 new offenders springing up.


Death Invades a Tranquil Village, And Ridgewood Deals With Horror
RIDGEWOOD, N.J., Oct. 12 --
The people who live in this placid, well-to-do suburb, many of them professionals who ride the weekday trains and buses to jobs in New York, make much of the fact that nothing extraordinary ever seems to happen in their town.
They relish the orderliness and monotony of daily behavior.
"We're happy that nothing ever happens here," Peter Scheschuk, a tax lawyer, said today.
"It's terrific that nothing happens."


One Artist Looks at Another in 'La Belle Noiseuse'
Ensconced in his Chateau in a village near Montpelier, the aging painter Frenhofer has lost his artistic drive and surrendered to the good life of southern France.
Ten years earlier he had abandoned what he hoped would be his chef-d'oeuvre, and he has since come to terms with being famous but inactive.
A collector and an admiring young painter urge him to try again.
What convinces him, though, is Marianne, the young man's beautiful girlfriend.
And after five days of contemplating her nude form, Frenhofer finally captures what he has been seeking for so long.
In choosing an artist wrestling with a mental block as the theme of his new film, "La Belle Noiseuse," which is translated in the subtitles as "The Beautiful Nut," the director Jacques Rivette has clearly not dipped into autobiography.
A small, fragile-looking 63-year-old, he concedes that creation can be painful.
But his problem is different: Frenhofer has given up and lived off past glory; Mr.
Rivette never stops working, and fame has eluded him.
Movie buffs may recognize him along with Francois Truffaut, Eric Rohmer, Jean-Luc Godard and Claude Chabrol as a founding member of the French New Wave; but, with the exception of "La Religieuse" in 1965, his movies have never reached a wide audience.


Updating a Heritage
IT WASN'T EASY FOR SACHA Lichine, but in the end he came to know his father well.
Though he was just 28 when Alexis Lichine died in 1989, Sacha swiftly began stamping his own image on the famed Chateau Prieure-Lichine, in Bordeaux -- trying not so much to keep the Lichine legend alive, but to move it into the 90's.
Gone is almost the entire wine-making and vineyard crew who worked for his father.
The top man now is 28 years old, just two years younger than Sacha, and as adept with a computer as he is pruning vines.
Gone is the rustic little retail shop where Alexis used to autograph copies of his books and bully visitors into buying wine.
In its place, Sacha has built an enormous structure resembling a flying saucer.
Appropriately, its roof is a helipad -- for the truly upscale tourists.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
KENNEDY 27, LEHMAN 19 -- Tae Kim of Kennedy ran two touchdowns in from short yardage and Eddie Gains capped the scoring as Kennedy (3-1) defeated Lehman (2-3) in its first divisional game.
Kennedy only led at the half by 14-13, but the Knights did not allow a first down until the game was out of reach.
Kennedy with four minutes left, went into its prevent defense and allowed Lehman to drive down the field for a late touchdown.
Robert Talley (2 touchdowns, 4 catches for 102 yards) was the standout for Lehman.
ST.
FRANCIS PREP 28, MT.
SAINT MICHAEL 20 -- Kevin Tabron dashed for two touchdowns in the first half and Ed Richard broke free in the third quarter for a 85-yard run to help pace St.
Francis Prep (4-1) past Mount St.
Michael (3-1).
Before yesterday, Mount St.
Michael had only allowed 106.3 yards of total offense a game.
But yesterday, St.
Francis Prep rushed for 275 yards and 402 yards of total offense.
Chris Mayo of Mt.
Saint Michael, rushed for two touchdowns in his first start as a fullback.
COPIAGUE 36, BAYSHORE 0 -- Three Copiague players ran for more than 100 yards while its defense allowed only 82 yards of total offense as the Eagles (4-0) rolled over Bayshore (2-2).
Quarterback Rob McCoy (2 touchdowns, 126 yards on 10 carries), running backs Earl Hassell (1 touchdown, 121 yards on 9 carries) and Anthony DiIeso (1 touchdown, 110 yards on 10 carries) led the way offensively.
The Eagles held Bayshore to 82 yards of total offense as linebacker James Auritte (1 fumble recovery and 14 tackles) led the attack.
BERGEN CATHOLIC 27, MONTCLAIR 0 -- Running back Eric Lane (3 touchdowns, 122 yards on 19 carries) and quarterback Zeke Rodgers (1 touchdown, 5 of 11 for 120 yards) helped Bergen Catholic (3-0) pound Montclair (1-2).
Bergen Catholic defensive back Scott Robinson held all-state receiver Jason Curry to one reception.
Linebacker Scott Esposito intercepted two passes for Bergen Catholic.
The Crusaders allowed only three first downs and 36-yards of total offense.
The Mounties gave up 347 yards of total offense.
Outstanding Offensive Performances
CHARLES DAVIS scored five touchdowns and ran for 297 yards on 19 carries as Horace Mann rolled over St.
Luke's, 34-0. . . .JAMALL POLLOCK dashed for all four of Poly Prep's touchdowns as it defeated Xavier, 20-6. . . .
WAYNE MOFFIT scored his eighth and ninth touchdowns of the season to help Brooklyn Tech crush Jefferson, 40-0.
Moffit's scores came on a 67-yard run and a 73-yard pass reception from Jonathan Starks. . . .
MIKE STRAZZERI scored four times as East Islip breezed past North Babylon, 38-8. . . .
GARFIELD ANDERSON scored two touchdowns and ran for 186 yards on 15 carries as Stuyvesant handled John Jay, 20-6. . . .
JAVONNE DARLING ran for five touchdowns and 220 yards on 24 carries as Susan Wagner cruised past Midwood, 44-20. . . .
LARRY WATSON of Hempstead ran 48-yards for the winning score early in the third quarter as Hempstead defeated archrival Massapequea, 13-7. . . .
CURT BLAGROVE scored one touchdown on an intercepted and rushed for one other, as Farmingdale swamped Freeport, 37-6.
Outstanding Defensive Performances
RICKEY MARIANI had four of Stepinac's nine sacks in its 20-7 victory over Iona. . . .
DERRICK TAULING pulled down two interceptions and recorded five tackles as Sewanhaka defeated South Shore, 28-12. . . .
JASON HOWARD of Harvey recorded 15 tackles and 2 sacks in a shut out over Fieldston, 14-0.
The Longest Yard
BRIAN HAY ran the opening kickoff back 96-yards to pace Garden City past Herricks, 35-0.


Sports of The Times; Goodbye, Skipper, Goodbye
Either baseball owners and general managers are the greatest optimists since Pollyanna, or they are the greatest dopes since Goofy.
They have had a long and gory history of firing their managers in order, of course, to hire new ones who, in almost every case, are fired, later if not sooner.
Not only does the brass think that the next guy in a dugout has to be better than the guy they've got, but then they also obviously can never figure out who the best next guy is.
And he's told to pack his pajamas and hit the road, too.


Correction
A picture caption in The Book Review last Sunday with a review of "Damon Runyon" misstated the date.
The picture was made in 1936.


A Course in Capitalism For Soviet Enterprisers
Chris Somers and Viktor Donyants have a lot to talk about as they ride back and forth to work each day: jobs and families, history and politics.
Mr.
Donyants, 42 years old, is in the United States to learn new skills so he can expand his telecommunications company in Moscow.
Mr.
Somers, 30, is his American host; he sells phone systems for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.


ARABS SEEK DELAY ON ZIONISM RULING
Arab nations are seeking to delay an American drive at this year's United Nations General Assembly session to repeal the 1975 resolution equating Zionism with racism until they see how well the proposed Middle East peace conference is going.
The Arabs argue that repeal should be put off at least until Israel has shown that it is willing to negotiate in good faith on the future of the occupied territories at a conference the Administration hopes to convene at the end of this month.


Hats That Don't Screech for Attention
Hats are props.
They are to the ordinary person what face paint, fake noses and wigs were to Laurence Olivier.
"Hats are transformational," said James Ferguson, a hat designer here.
"They can bring out hidden sides of people, so that either they shrink or they bloom."


The Lure Of the Raucous
To the Editor:
As a New Yorker who has been in exile on a two-year sabbatical in Baton Rouge, hard at work on a novel, I wish to thank you for Tony Hiss's article "The Bomb Chuckers of Trump Hamlet"  [ Sept. 8 ] .


Q and A
Reimbursement of Fees  Question: Despite getting a mortgage commitment I was rejected as a buyer by a co-op in Bayside, Queens.
The co-op board never notified me of the rejection.
They told the seller but did not provide reasons for the rejection.
The situation is even more peculiar because I have a clean credit rating and have owned shares in the co-op where I now live since 1987.
Are there any legal recourses for the recovery of the money I spent on the pre-purchase, like mortgage fees, attorney fees and fees for consideration of the application by the board? . . .
Andrea Harris, Briarwood, Queens Answer: No.
David L. Smith, a lawyer specializing in real estate matters, says the board is under no obligation to reimburse you.
These kinds of costs and fees, Mr.
Smith said, are risks inherent in the purchasing process.
"One of the problems," said Mr.
Smith, "from the consumer's point of view, is that a co-op board can reject an applicant for any reason except for an unlawful one like racial or religious prejudice. And proving rejection based on that is very hard to do."
Mr.
Smith suggested, however, that you write to the board or managing agent requesting that, as a courtesy, they provide you with an explanation for the rejection so you may avoid problems with applications in the future.
Absentee Superintendent Question: I live in a 175-unit co-op.
Recently the board hired a new superintendent.
He does not live in the building, as previous superintendents have, but about 60 blocks away.
It is my understanding that there is some sort of requirement in the multiple dwelling code or some other housing laws that requires that superintendents live in the buildings where they work.
Is this true?  . .
Ada Kauder, Manhattan Answer: Not exactly.
According to Roz Post, a spokesperson for the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development, there is a requirement that buildings of a certain size have on-site superintendents or ones who live within a block of the building under their supervision.
Sec. 27-2053 of the city's Housing Maintenance Code obligates an owner of a building with nine or more units to either be a resident owner who serves as superintendent or to provide janitorial service 24 hours a day.
The law also says that the person who performs janitorial services must live in the building or "within a distance of one block or 200 feet from the dwelling, whichever is greater." New Rule for Tenants Question: Two years ago I moved from Massachusetts to New York to take care of my grandmother, who was suffering with cancer.
I became a full-time caretaker, living with her in her rent-controlled apartment until her death last December.
At the time of her death I notified the management and continued to live in the apartment.
I never received any indication that my residency was a problem until March 1991.
My personal check for the rent was rejected with a note saying the management did not accept checks from anyone except the named tenant.
My rent is $545.85 and the superintendent did try to negotiate a new lease for the "market rate" of $1,350 a month.
Eviction proceedings have started and I have put my rent into an escrow account.
Do I have any right to keep the apartment? . . .
Kerry Flynn, Manhattan Answer: Yes.
State law does give succession rights to certain remaining family members of both rent-stabilized and rent-controlled tenants after the death of the tenant of record.
As a granddaughter of the tenant, you would be covered by the protective measure.
According to John Gilbert, a spokesman for the Rent Stabilization Association, the professional association to which most residential building owners belong, the organization has a suit pending challenging the succession laws.
You should notify the State Division of Housing and Community Renewal of the landlord's eviction petition.
The Rent Administration Hotline phone number is 718-739-6400.


Gaviria's Gamble
CLUTCHING STRAW HATS BETWEEN THEIR knees, peasants from Santa Maria La Antigua sit on rough board benches waiting for Don Fidel and his men.
An unexceptional scene, perhaps, to a stranger who happened upon it.
But in this village on the Caribbean coast of Colombia, it marked another event in what most Colombians are hoping is a gathering political and economic revolution in their country.
As recently as a year ago, Fidel Castano, a local rancher, ruled the area the old-fashioned way: through "self-defense" squads, gangs of killers responsible for a string of peasant massacres.
And these same landless peasants of Santa Maria were giving their sons and their blessings to the People's Liberation Army, a Maoist guerrilla group that kidnapped large landowners.


AS YOGI SAYS . . .
Concerning Jack Rosenthal's discussion of antilogous words -- words that mean one thing and also very nearly the opposite -- in the On Language column "As Yogi Says . . ." (Sept. 15), I take a modest pride in having invented the application of the obsolete word, antilogies, and to a considerable extent this whole category.
I would be grateful if you could acknowledge this, and perhaps cite some examples.


Chants of a Lifetime as the Braves Win
When Orlando Merced swatted the first pitch of the game over the center-field fence, Greg Olson, the Atlanta catcher, said to himself, "Oh my gosh, I don't want a long day." In the Pittsburgh dugout, the players whooped it up.
Jim Leyland, the Pirates' manager, liked what he saw less than Olson liked what he saw.
"I didn't like the way we reacted," Leyland said four hours later.
"We reacted a little foolishly. You've got to be pumped up, but the other team hasn't hit yet. I wasn't very happy with that display. In fact, I was very disappointed. We were whooping it up like the game was over, like we were in the ninth inning and it won the game."


Miss Kennedy Weds
Kerstin Aileen Kennedy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Kennedy of Danbury, Conn., was married yesterday to Lieut.
Patrick Michael Boyer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael R. Boyer of Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert J. Morrissey, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Joseph's Church in Danbury.
Mrs.
Boyer, 21, graduated cum laude from Marymount College in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bridegroom, 23, graduated from the United States Military Academy at West Point.
He is a helicopter pilot with the 101st Airborn Division of the Army, stationed at Fort Campbell, Ky.


Assets of a Three-Way Switch
IN OLDER and remodeled houses, ceiling lights above staircases or in rooms with two doors are sometimes controlled by just one wall switch.
That means having to negotiate a dark stairway or walk through a dark room to turn on the light.
The problem can be solved by adding a second switch at the head or foot of the stairs or at the entrance to the second doorway, and by making each switch a three-way switch.


News Summary
International 3-20
A debate over the Saudi military -- particularly whether it should include an offensive army as well as a sophisticated air defense system -- is deadlocking negotiations between the United States and Saudi Arabia on a new security alliance.
Page 1


Stage Group Ends Its Run
The Los Angeles Theater Center, which became known as this city's premier sponsor of multicultural theater, is to shut down on Sunday after six years, the victim of increasing debts and a failed attempt at urban renewal.
The demise of the critically acclaimed nonprofit theater, long anticipated but repeatedly averted by emergency fund-raising and city grants, became official Thursday night, when the board of directors voted 7-3 to end operations Sunday.
It will leave behind $1 million in debts and 80 unemployed people.


Want a New You? Do It Simply or Do It Dramatically
A change in weather and a change in wardrobe is the impetus for women to change their makeup and hair styles.
The make-over process can be as simple as a change in makeup application techniques, taught in a department store; but remember, there is always an emphasis on the purchase of products.
Or it can be as dramatic as a transformation of makeup colors, hair style, hair color, clothing styles and silhouettes and accessories.


Two Generations, Two Revivals of the Blues
Robert Johnson's ghost, wherever it is, can claim credit for two blues revivals: one among musicians in the 1960's and one for the music business in the 1990's, when the CD reissue of his songs became an unexpected hit.
Major labels are signing up blues musicians, independents are stepping up their efforts to promote the blues, and clubs and festivals are thriving.
Often, however, "the blues" has become a catch-all term for blues and Southern soul.
The attention has been good for longtime bluesmen.
Buddy Guy, who will perform Oct. 20 at the Beacon Theater (along with John Lee Hooker, as part of the nine-day Benson and Hedges Blues Festival), has made what may be one of the fiercest albums of his career with "Damn Right, I've Got the Blues" (Silvertone/B.M.G. 1462-JA; cassette and CD).
In his voice, rage and pain, despair and belligerence are never far apart, and his guitar style -- wailing sustained notes and salvos of speedy licks -- carries the songs to the brink of hysteria.
He makes hard-luck stories hit home on the new album with a pushy band that doesn't let him ease up; even horns and female backup singers egg him on instead of soothing him.
The album includes guest stars like the guitarist Jeff Beck, but they fade next to Mr.
Guy's fervor.


Apartheid Battleground Shifts to the Economy
The struggle between the Government and the African National Congress for dominance in the transition to a post-apartheid democracy has shifted to the economy, bringing some of the angriest recriminations heard since President F. W. de Klerk legalized the congress 20 months ago.
"One might call the A.N.C. and its allies spoilers," Mr. de Klerk said in a speech Monday night at a convention in the Western Cape of his governing National Party.
"Through their words and deeds, they are standing in the way of what the vast majority of South Africans really want, of what would be good for South Africa and all its people."


It's Not All Offense For the Oilers Now
The transformation of the Houston Oilers from a trash-talking bunch to a more disciplined team whose talent would surface more readily has been Jack Pardee's mission since he replaced Jerry Glanville as head coach before last season.
In Pardee's first year, the Oilers made strides toward more consistent performance.
But make no mistake, they retain some of the most volatile, demonstrative and egotistical personalities in the National Football League.


Soviets Assure Safety at A-Plant Damaged by Fire
Officials said today that no radioactivity escaped during a fire that occurred on Friday night at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, site of the infamous nuclear eruption five years ago.
About 300 firefighters and 60 fire trucks were rushed to fight the blaze from as far away as Zhitomir, 100 miles away, and Kiev, 60 miles away, and brought it under control by 11:30 P.M., three and a half hours after it began, officials said.


Inquiry at Harlem Hospital Following a Patient's Death
A 73-year-old Harlem Hospital patient who was reported missing from his room a week ago was found dead early yesterday morning, wedged between two pipes in a hospital steam and ventilation shaft, hospital officials and the police said.
A spokesman for Mayor David N. Dinkins said that the hospital would investigate the man's death -- the third incident in recent weeks to cause an inquiry into the way Harlem Hospital treats its patients.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Sept. 28 MANHATTAN Chelsea 255,000
161 West 15th Street  1,170-sq.-ft. open-loft co-op; elevator, eat-in kitchen, 12-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $570, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Delson-Ginsberg Real Estate)  Greenwich Village 310,000
366 West 11th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,075-sq.-ft. condo in a 5-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 2 balconies; common charge $639, taxes $4,483 (Broker: Debra Kameros Co.)  Upper East Side 165,000
196 East 75th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area; maintenance $844, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: David Day Realty)  Upper East Side 1.4 million
1021 Park Avenue (85th St.)  3-bedroom, 6-bath, 3,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, entrance gallery, 3 maid's rooms. butler's pantry, dining room, 3 exposures; maintenance $2,465, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia-Charles H. Greenthal Residential Sales)  Upper West Side 1.375 million
44 West 77th Street  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,900-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, library, 1,400-sq.-ft. terrace, Central Park view; maintenance $3,000, 31% tax-deductible (Broker: William B. May)  BRONX  Pelham Parkway North 185,000
2920 Laconia Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family, semi-attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 19- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Locascio Realty-Highland Realty)  Wakefield 115,000
3817 Merrit Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family, detached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $825 (Broker: Cancro Realty)  BROOKLYN  Midwood 280,000
1014 East 14th Street  2-family detached stucco house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen, beamed ceilings, 1-fireplace in each unit; solarium, 2-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  Park Slope 488,000
630 3d Street  2-family attached brick house; 2 1/2 baths in lower duplex unit; 1 1/2 baths in upper duplex; 3 bedrooms, dining room in each; 21 1/2- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $2,900 (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  Prospect Park South 312,500
190 Marlborough Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, one-family detached wood-frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, finished basement, original oak details, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  QUEENS  College Point 143,000
120-20 Cove Court  (River View)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. condo in a 7-year-old building; dining room, eat-in kitchen, sunken living room; common charge $106, taxes $1,618 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Rego Park 230,000
99-48 62d Road  2-family detached frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom, den in other; finished basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  STATEN ISLAND  Sunset Hill 185,000
145 City Boulevard  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, Florida room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 33- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)  Tottenville 115,000
33 Parker Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family semi-attached frame house; remodeled eat-in kitchen and bath, 25- by 107-ft. lot; taxes $700 (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty)


NEIGHBORS MAKING BUDAPEST UNEASY
With the civil war in Yugoslavia raging on its southern border, Slovak separatism rising on the northern side of the Danube in Czechoslovakia, and increased tensions to the east in Romania, Hungarians have reason to feel insecure.
"We feel increasingly threatened not because of anything that might happen in Hungary," said Gyula Kodolanyi, a foreign affairs adviser to the Hungarian Government "but if there is a conflict in Yugoslavia, tensions are high between Bohemia and Slovakia, and things are on the move again in Romania -- all in all, it is not very easy to feel happy and calm."


Lieberman Thrives on His Fast-Paced Life
IN the quiet of his French country-style home in the Westville section of New Haven, Joseph I. Lieberman settled into a living- room chair and cradled a cup of tea.
Cutting a lean, athletic figure in a denim-blue shirt and red tie, Connecticut's junior United States Senator said he had just returned from a conference in Budapest that explored the political transitions taking place in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
He said the region's academicians, writers and politicians were both tense and optimistic.
"Most people are worried about whether Yugoslavia is an indication of the whole region," he said.
"The situation is very similar to a bottle with a cap on it with all sorts of pressures building up inside."


A Side-Wheeler in the Sound Provides a Window on History
ON a gray and drizzly Sunday last weekend, 92 passengers hopped aboard the Thomas Jefferson, a reproduction of a turn-of-the-century side-wheeler, for a journey into Westchester County's past.
The Westchester County Historical Society sponsored the autumn tour of the Long Island Sound aboard the paddle-wheel boat, which meandered at a five-knot pace from New Rochelle south to Hart Island and back north to Mamaroneck.


Venison, a Meat for the 90's
VENISON is traditionally eaten in the fall and winter.
But now, along with farm-raised game like quail and pheasant, it is showing up with increasing frequency on restaurant menus year round.
Chefs are preparing venison in a wide variety of ways, from traditional stews and roasts to venison tartare seasoned with truffle sauce and green venison chili topped with an avocado salsa.
Farm-raised venison does not have the rich gamey taste of animals from the wild.
It is a much milder meat, more like well-aged beef or lamb, fine-grained and velvety in texture with a faint grassy taste.
But in addition to its flavor, the greatest appeal for venison these days is its low fat.


Making a Difference; Mr. Bossidy's Action Plan
Wall Street was delighted when Allied-Signal Inc. managed to lure Lawrence A. Bossidy from the General Electric Company to take over as its chief executive this past July.
Long troubled by poor profit margins and expenses that outstripped its cash flow, Allied-Signal seemed to be sorely in need of the kind of skills the 56-year-old Mr.
Bossidy had demonstrated in his 34-year climb through the ranks of G.E. to the job of vice chairman.
So far, Mr.
Bossidy is living up to the high hopes that sent Allied-Signal's shares up more than 10 percent on July 1, the day of his appointment.
In fact, when he unveiled his plan for Allied-Signal last Wednesday, the shares jumped even more dramatically, even though the plan included a sharp cut in dividends, to 25 cents a quarter from 45 cents.


Young Volunteers Prepare for Budapest
THE three young people sat on tree trunks at the Marshlands Conservancy here like other members of the environmental training class for Westchester County's Volunteers in Parks program.
Some of their 20 classmates included an out-of-work medical researcher, a former corrections worker, a flight instructor, a merchant seaman and several teachers on leaves of absence.
During the next four months, all the volunteers will learn to prepare biological surveys, map trails and greet visitors to the county's parks.
They will also learn to teach about ecology in local elementary schools.
But after studying such subjects as forest biology, saltwater and freshwater ecology and the shoreline of Long Island Sound, the three young people will part company with their classmates and leave for Hungary.


Review/Film; Boutiques and Bullets In Beverly Hills Tale
Now and then a car smashes through the facade of a store like Gucci, but otherwise there's nothing fancy about "The Taking of Beverly Hills," the silly action film that opened Friday at the National and other theaters.
The plot is elaborate, involving a robbery, insurance fraud, poison gas and the alphabet soup of SWAT, L.A.P.D. and E.P.A.
But these elements lead to little more than violent episodes during which flying bullets, shooting flames and screeching tires are accompanied by pounding, upbeat music.
There is so much of this that the credits cite an "armorer" who supplied the guns.
Ken Wahl plays Boomer Hayes, a football hero who helps to preserve what looks like Rodeo Drive and its environs (although much of the film was shot in Mexico).
Mr.
Wahl mumbles his way through this role and makes it easy to understand why he can more often be seen on the small screen than on the large one.
Also on hand are Robert Davi as a diabolical kingpin and Harley Jane Kozak, who when cornered by him utters the memorable, "Let me get this straight -- it's my wedding or my funeral, is that it?" Another heavy is played by Lee Ving James, who used not to have a last name but can always be counted on to make a good villain.


Pamela J. VanderKloot Is Married
Pamela Jane VanderKloot, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic J. VanderKloot of Warwick, N.Y., was married there yesterday to William George Bartel 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Bartel of Wayzata, Minn.
The Rev.
Allan B. Ramirez officiated at the Reform Church.
Mrs.
Bartel, who is 25 and a graduate of Connecticut College, is the marketing director at Ballistic Products, a sporting goods company in Long Lake, Minn.
Her father is a real-estate consultant in Warwick.
Her mother, Jo VanderKloot, is a social worker in New York.


Contradictions
One of the Reagan Administration's fiercest backers of the Nicaraguan contras, Elliott Abrams, pleaded guilty last week to two counts of withholding information from Congress.
The former Assistant Secretary of State had given the testimony just as the contras' secret supply network began to unravel when a cargo plane was shot down on Oct. 5, 1986, and an American, Eugene Hasenfus, was captured aboard.
Five days later, Mr.
Abrams told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the Administration knew little about such military aid by private citizens.
But last week he admitted in court that he had had many discussions about it with Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North.
In another hearing in 1986, on Oct. 14, he told the House Intelligence Committee that reports that foreign governments had been asked to bankroll the contras were false.
Prosecutors said last week that Mr.
Abrams himself had solicited $10 million from the Sultan of Brunei.


Can the Getty Buy Design Happiness?
The sprawling, six-building arts complex that will be known as the Getty Center was conceived nearly a decade ago, after J. Paul Getty left more than a billion dollars to the small museum he had founded in Malibu, Calif.
Suddenly the richest art institution in the world, the Getty transformed itself into a virtual conglomerate, and set out to build not just a bigger museum, but research and conservation institutions as well.
To give physical form to all this ambition, it embarked on a long and highly publicized international search for an architect, which culminated in the choice of the American modernist Richard Meier in 1984.
For seven years Mr.
Meier has labored on the commission of a lifetime: negotiating, planning, designing, revising, negotiating, planning, designing, revising.
It has gone on so long and become such an enterprise that an elaborate book is being published this month called "Getty Center: Design Process" that purports to tell the saga of the vast art complex's making.


Handling of Study on Court Bias Faulted
ASOON to be released report on racial discrimination in the state courts will include a controversial study that says that a significant number of the state's Superior Court judges and court managers perceive a "substantial bias" against minorities in the state's justice system.
The study, which was completed in 1989 but has not yet been officially released, identifies perceptions of bias in the way juries react to minorities in trials, prosecutors charge members of minority groups with crimes, court managers deal with minority litigants, and judges set bail for minority defendants.


Victor L. Ridder Jr., 49, and Wife, Mary Ridder, 48, Active Catholics
Victor L. Ridder Jr., president of a century-old publishing company for Roman Catholics in the New York region, and his wife, Mary Jane, died in an automobile accident last Sunday.
Mr.
Ridder, 49 years old, and Mrs.
Ridder, 48, lived in New Rochelle, N.Y.
They were killed in a collision when another car crossed over the median divider on a highway near Baltimore, relatives said.
The couple was returning from Washington.


Italian Fare With Gusto and Imagination
WHILE Italian restaurants have been opening in Connecticut with the speed of a Lamborghini, few of them have attained the quality and performance level of Bella Luna in Greenwich.
Occupying two floors of a 1908 stone building that has housed several restaurants including one called Tapestries, Bella Luna has kept the upper floor as the main dining room (with the open grill area created by Fives, the last tenant) but has turned the larger ground-level space into a cheerful, welcoming trattoria, with garlands of red pepper pods and garlic along the walls of a hearth-like cucina, which is as pretty as a stage set.
Only the trattoria is open for lunch; in the evening guests can dine upstairs or enjoy the lighter fare of the trattoria.
Both dining areas have soft lighting that gives the pale apricot-color walls a warm glow, but the dining room could use pictures or posters to liven it up.


Creeping Nincompoopism
BAD
Or, the Dumbing of America. By Paul Fussell. 201 pp. New York: Summit Books. $19.


Corrections
The Perspectives column last Sunday, about residential investments in Brooklyn, referred incorrectly to the head of the commercial investment division of the William B. May Company in Brooklyn and misstated the opening date of her office.
She is Roberta L. Faulstick; the office opened two months ago, not two years.


Caribbean Voices


On Streets, Confusions And Talk of Harassment
Before setting out for a few hours of sightseeing through the steel canyons of this city's Loop, Diane Tupper and her 16-year-old son, Lee, spent much of this morning in their hotel room watching Judge Clarence Thomas testify before the Senate Judiciary Committee.
"It's all very confusing," she said.
"It's so black and white. Either she's really bad or he's really bad. I have no idea who's telling the truth."


How Railroads Cut Jobs Without Drawing Blood
When Jerry Dyneck Jr. was given the choice of moving to Little Rock to keep his Union Pacific Railroad job or leaving the company, he was apprehensive.
"I lived there all my life," he recalled.
"My father had lived in Omaha. These were real roots. I was looking forward to retirement in three to four years."


A la Carte: Restaurants' Coping With No-Shows
NO-SHOWS, people who make restaurant reservations and neither keep them nor call to cancel, are not unique to Long Island.
But many restaurateurs say the Island may well be the no-show capital.
On three occasions, a man who said he was a doctor called Mirko's Restaurant in Water Mill for reservations.
He requested a table for six on Memorial Day, the Fourth of July and Labor Day.
Each time a different name was given, although all the calls came from the same telephone number.
The reservations were not canceled, but nobody showed up at the appointed hours.


New Flights To Caribbean
The French airline Minerve will begin charter flights between Kennedy International Airport in New York and Martinique and Guadeloupe in the French West Indies -- which do not have direct scheduled flights from New York -- on Dec. 13.
Some seats will be taken by Club Med vacationers going to the two islands, but others are being sold to independent travelers and in packages that combine round-trip flight with seven nights' accommodations in one of about 40 hotels on the two islands.
There will be one round-trip flight on Friday, Saturday and Sunday, leaving Kennedy at 9 A.M. and arriving in the early afternoon.
The Friday flights will be nonstop to Guadeloupe; the Saturday and Sunday flights will be nonstop to Martinique.
Return flights leave the islands in the afternoon, arriving at Kennedy at 7:30 P.M.
Friday, 7:40 Saturday and 9:15 Sunday.


Copenhagen Begins Lending Of Free Bicycles
Copenhagen plans to re-establish itself as a bicyclist's city by allowing residents and visitors to borrow bikes free of charge.
The program, called Bycyklen (City-Bike), is being started on a small scale this month and then increased to full operation by next spring.
Under the program, riders may borrow a City-Bike by inserting a 20-krone coin (about $3.10) in one of hundreds of special bike racks to be installed all over the city but concentrated in the downtown area.
The bike can be returned to any rack and the coin will be refunded.
Eventually there will be 3,000 bikes available.


Answering The Mail
Q.
A contractor recently ripped up my asphalt driveway
and
put down new asphalt that has a "rocky-looking" finish.
I asked the contractor if I should apply a sealer, but he said it was not necessary.
Do you think a sealer would protect the new asphalt and also help to cover its "rocky" appearance?
A.
I do not know what you mean by a "rocky" appearance.
New asphalt should be smooth and uniformly black, with no stones, rocks or other fillers showing.
A sealer is usually not necessary on new asphalt in the first year, but it is a good idea after about two or three years.
That should be repeated at regular intervals, the intervals depending on the amount of exposure and wear.
The sealer helps prevent drying out from the sun, as well as water penetration and freezing damage.
It also keeps the driveway looking better.
But I do not see how a sealer could smooth over or correct a "rocky" appearance, except to make the driveway all uniform in color.


A QUESTION OF MERCY
Your article on assisted suicide implies that an individual in the terminal phase of an illness who is no longer taking fluids by mouth will slowly "die of thirst." As a hospice nurse, I have had many opportunities to observe the effects of dehydration during terminal care.
Patients approaching death are often unable to swallow, and fluid intake becomes minimal.
Such patients can almost always be kept comfortable, even as the natural process of dying and the concomitant dehydation take place.
I don't know if R. had ever been referred for hospice care, but I'd like to think that a hospice team could have helped him and his care-giver to cope with the terminal phase of his illness.
PATRICIA VIGILANTE, R.N.
Fair Haven, N.J.


The Ginnie Mae Rate Puzzle
Today's falling interest rates are good news for bondholders because lower rates mean higher bond prices.
For investors in Ginnie Mae funds, which hold issues of the Government National Mortgage Association, the story is more complicated.
Lower interest rates prompt homeowners to refinance their mortgages.
When mortgages are prepaid, the money flows to the funds to be reinvested, but the rates now in effect pull down the fund's yield.


Ms. Solomon Has Wedding
Jennifer Faye Solomon, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Solomon of Washington, was married there last evening to William Harry Feingold, the son of Richard Feingold of Berkeley, Calif.
Rabbi Joseph P. Weinberg officiated at Washington Hebrew Congregation.
The bride, 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
She will begin working as an equity analyst at Argus Research Corporation in New York this month.
Her father is associate chief of the Washington appeals office of the Internal Revenue Service.
Her mother is a partner in the law firm of Solomon &amp; Robinson in Washington.


RECORD BRIEF
Pooh Sticks: 'The Great White Wonder'
Sweet Virginia SFTRI 123/Sweet VA 002; all three formats (available from Sweet Virginia, 4901 Virginia Ave., Long Beach, Calif. 90805).


Sunday Dinner; Spots Where Italian Food Gets a Northern Accent
Not so long ago almost all Italian restaurants served Southern Italian cuisine.
Today it seems that it's just the opposite, with dozens of new restaurants and trattorias describing themselves as Northern.
One can find food from just about any region of Italy in New York City.
Here are three places that reflect that diversity.
Ca'Nova
696 Madison Avenue, near 62d Street in Manhattan, (212) 838-3725 -- Lusty sunny Mediterranean food is served here in a subdued and elegant setting with glowing wood wainscotting, tapestry-covered walls and double sconces with pleated shades.
Appetizers on the current menu include a mesclun salad with Gorgonzola cheese, bacon and honey-roasted walnuts; snails with pancetta and a garlic creme nested in a phyllo crust; seared tuna with warm potato salad, and pistou of fresh vegetables.


When Hateful Words Lead to Hateful Deeds; Common Culture
To the Editor:
Michael Levin (Op-Ed, Sept. 26) claims that Leonard Jeffries Jr.'s views exemplify the "real content" of multiculturalism .


Foreign Affairs; Mr. Bush Packs the Court
The Senate Judiciary Committee has stripped away the dignity of two apparently good people and lost its own in the process.
Having botched its first round of hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court, the committee started a second on Friday based on Prof.
Anita Hill's charges of sexual harassment and turned it into a freak show.
Senators bear their own guilt.
But they, like the judge and the professor, are also victims -- caught in the vortex of President Bush's decision to elevate an underqualified Judge Thomas to the nation's highest court, and thereby forge a decisive conservative majority.


In Defense of the Baldrige Award
To the Editor:
"Being 'Baldrige-Eligible' Isn't Enough" (Forum, Sept. 22) criticized the Baldrige Award for not focusing on "forward quality" on new product or service innovation; for ignoring long-range planning and financial results, and for leaving nonwinners too discouraged to continue improvement efforts.
Each point lacks substance.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 29 about the history of Jewish farmers in Farmingdale misstated a source of funds for a film documentary on the subject.
It was the New Jersey Historical Commission.


Hearing Captures Big TV Audience LP&gt;The television audience for the Friday session of the Senate hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas was significantly larger than the networks typically draw on a Friday, whether morning, afternoon or night.   The ratings for the hearing so reduced the number for CBS's coverage of the Minnesota-Toronto playoff game, which ran against the hearing coverage on the two other major networks, that the game apparently attracted the smallest audience of any post-season baseball game ever.


Shrubs That Add to Autumn's Glory
THE Northeast is famous for its fall foliage.
Anything from brilliant red to orange to soft yellow to bronze can be seen in the trees now.
But what about shrubs?
Gardeners in the Northeast are lucky; if theydon't have room to add a tree of brilliant color, they might have space for a shrub, maybe even two.
Selection should be made of a cultivar that is the most colorful now.
It is important to see the shrub before purchase; sometimes the foliage color is not what is expected.
The leaf color of a particular shrub is not going to get any better with the years after planting.
If the nursery does not have a particular shrub available, perhaps it can be ordered.
Planting can go on to the end of the month, as long as the ground is open and can be dug easily.
Root development will continue until early December in the top few inches of the soil.


Macho Men and the Women Who Love Them
BEYOND DESERVING
By Sandra Scofield. 310 pp. Sag Harbor, N.Y.: The Permanent Press. $21.95.


Nuclear Winter of the Psyche Fading Away
BURT THE TURTLE can finally relax, at least a little.
In one hard-to-forget 1950's civil defense film, Burt was the cartoon character with the official-looking helmet who knew just what to do in case of a nuclear explosion.
"Duck! And cover!" the deep-voiced narrator declared as the ever-vigilant Burt retreated into the safety of his shell.
This was supposed to teach schoolchildren to dive under their desks and clasp their arms over their heads the moment they saw the flash of an atomic blast.
The flash has not come.
And now that Presidents Bush and Mikhail S. Gorbachev have turned to talking about destroying a good portion of their nuclear weapons, so much that informed the generation that grew up on Burt the Turtle and air-raid drills and bomb shelters seems likelier than ever to become useless baggage.
Lyndon B. Johnson's mushroom-cloud-and-daisy commercial no longer packs the landslide-producing punch that it did in 1964.
Even Ronald Reagan's evil empire seems long ago and far away.
Deterrence came into the language as a rationale for building weapons designed never to be used.
Now the word itself sounds different -- less infused with fear.


In Singapore, a Search for a Second Act
Koh Boon Hwee is the kind of young executive Singapore would love to clone.
Still a teen-ager when this island city-state was cast off from neighboring Malaysia, which distrusted its ethnic Chinese elite, he was educated in England and the United States and ran the Hewlett-Packard Company's giant manufacturing operations here upon his return, persuading the computer maker to develop new products for Asia using a potent mix of Singaporean engineers and American technology.
He cultivated Singapore's strong-willed leadership and its legions of industrial planners, who have left nothing to chance in building one of Asia's most incredible economic success stories.
In the 1980's, he learned to cut deals with the Japanese, who with lightening speed have supplanted Americans as the region's most important investors.
And a year-and-a-half ago, Mr.
Koh fullfilled his Government's dreams, returning to the fold as head of Singapore Telecom, the state-owned and surprisingly dynamic telecommunications company.


Crime
TERRY MARLOW HAS TO WRITE REAL LOUD to make himself heard above all the gunfire in TARGET BLUE (Putnam, $21.95), a go-for-guts action novel that depicts Dallas as the battlefield of a major crime war.
A first effort for Mr.
Marlow -- a pseudonym shared by a detective sergeant and a former SWAT captain with the Dallas Police Department -- this hyperkinetic procedural delivers the best in-house stuff since William J. Caunitz's "One Police Plaza."
Even though they call themselves "the Junkyard Dogs," the guys in this unit take themselves very seriously.
"He liked to think that what he did with stolen cars was like a pathologist doing an autopsy on a murder victim," Mr.
Marlow writes of one of these automotive artistes.
Indeed, it is their commanding officer, Sgt.
Wild Bill Clark, who methodically works out the convoluted plot, sorts out all the body parts and emerges as a sure bet for a series hero.


Handley Says Baker Is Better
Giants split end Stephen Baker has shown improvement in his a twisted back, Coach Ray Handley said today.
Although Baker remained hospitalized, Handley said there was a slight chance Baker would play Monday night against the Steelers.
James Milling, a wide receiver on injured reserve, will travel to Pittsburgh with the team Sunday and may be activated.


Arrest for 49ers' Harris
Linebacker TIM HARRIS, acquired by the San Francisco 49ers less than two weeks ago, was arrested in San Jose, Calif., for investigation of drunken driving early Friday morning, one day before he was scheduled to be activated for today's game against the Atlanta Falcons.
Police officers in San Jose said Harris was arrested at 2:45 A.M.
Friday.
After a contract dispute kept Harris from coming into training camp, Green Bay traded him, and he signed a two-year contract with the 49ers worth a total of $1.7 million, including incentives.


AS YOGI SAYS . . .
In his collection of quotes, "The Fourth, and By Far the Most Recent, 637 Best Things Anybody Ever Said," Robert Byrne cites another Yogi-ism that underlines the point of Rosenthal's article: "I didn't really say everything I said." DONNA YOUNG
Vestal, N.Y.


Janet L. Bendix, Banker, Weds
Janet Lynn Bendix, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William B. Bendix of Kinston, N.C., was married yesterday to Michael Hart Stoner, the son of Howard M. Stoner of New York and Mary K. Sweet of Haverford, Pa.
The Rev.
Stephen Michie officiated at the Bryn Mawr Presbyterian Chapel in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
Mrs.
Stoner, 27 years old, is an assistant vice president of commercial banking for the Bank of New York.
She graduated from Kenyon College, as did her husband.
Her father, who is retired, is a dentist.


Cute Is Out, as Odd Couples Meet in Weird Ways
In the rustic drama "Paradise," Ben Reed (Don Johnson) tells the story of how he met Lily (Melanie Griffith), who is now his wife.
It happened in their hometown, and she was the prettiest girl he had ever seen.
So they fell in love.
From the standpoint of current Hollywood storytelling chic, this is just about as wrongheaded as it can be.
There are several reasons: The setting is unremarkable.
The characters, even though Ben is supposed to be a shrimp fisherman, are actually well matched.
They are even members of the same generation.
And at the time of their meeting, neither one was dead, dreaming or on another astral plane.


Elizabeth Short Wed
Elizabeth Cotton Short, an assistant vice president at Citicorp, and Timothy James Chandos Steele, a senior associate at the National Westminster Bank, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley officiated at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest.
Mrs.
Steele, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Colorado and received a master's degree in international management from the American Graduate School of International Management.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robertson H. Short of Santa Barbara, Calif.
Mr.
Steele, 27, graduated and received a master's in engineering sciences from Oxford University.
He is a son of Maj.
Gen.
Michael C. M. Steele of the British Army, retired, and Mrs.
Steele of London.


The Many Pros and Cons of the 55-M.P.H. Speed Limit
In a Forum page article on Sept. 29, Donald L. Pevsner proposed raising the 55 mile-an-hour national speed limit on Interstate highways.
He argued that the limit, set during the oil crisis of the early 1970's, is retained because it is a source of income for states, insurance companies and makers of radar-detection equipment.
He suggested raising the Interstate speed limit to 70 m.p.h. except in congested urban areas and in unsafe terrain.
Some of the letters received in response follow.
Graduated Speed Limits?


Marsala: The Sicilian City and Its Seductive Wine
MARSALA'S harbor, like the reputation of its wines, has shrunk greatly.
A small fishing and commercial basin and a palm-lined promenade are all that remain of the deep and generous port that once blessed this pretty, rather sleepy city on Sicily's western coast.
On either side stretches a strip of barren waterfront, North African in its light and its colors.
There, like giant bones bleaching in the sun, are the remains of bagli, typical walled farmhouses of western Sicily, constructed around a central courtyard and protected by a heavy gate.
The ones in Marsala are huge, for they embrace enormous warehouses, built to accommodate row upon row of wooden barrels in which to age and store Marsala's famous wine.


Yale Law Alumni Focus On Reunion, or Try To
Prof.
Elias Clark, who has taught at Yale Law School for 40 years, sat in the cavernous Yale Commons, where 450 graduates gathered on Friday evening to toast their alma mater and their own lost youth.
It was the beginning of the law school's annual alumni weekend, and so strong is the pull of this place over its graduates that the assembled diners had chosen an evening of windy oratory, rubber chicken and some singing law students calling themselves Habeas Chorus instead of another reunion of Yale alumni, which was being televised from Washington: the hearings into sexual-harassment charges against Judge Clarence Thomas.


Bruce Smith Still Out
BRUCE SMITH's season is still on hold.
Smith, the Buffalo Bill All-Pro defensive end, will be placed on injured reserve because of fluid and swelling in his left knee, the team announced yesterday.
Smith, who has missed all but one of Buffalo's first six games, is expected to miss a minimum of three more games, including the one today against Indianapolis, Bills officials said.(AP)


Sarah Stefani, A Banker, Wed
Sarah Ann Stefani, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Stefani of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Robert Joseph Morena, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred Morena of North Plainfield, N.J., at the interdenominational First Church of Round Hill in Greenwich.
The Rev.
Avery C. Manchester, the church's pastor, officiated.
Mrs.
Morena, 30 years old, is the assistant vice president of global management for the Bank of New York in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father, who is retired, was I.B.M.'s director of marketing in Europe, the Middle East and Africa.


Jean Schulte Marries
Jean Ann Schulte, a daughter of Alvin L. Schulte of Covington, Ky., and the late Mary Schulte, was married at Trinity Episcopal Church in Boston yesterday to Christopher DeVany, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard DeVany of Nutley, N.J.
The Rev.
Roger Greene officiated.
The bride is a business development manager for DRI/McGraw-Hill, an economic consulting firm in Lexington, Mass.
A graduate of Georgetown University, she has a master's degree in art history from Columbia University.
She is 34 years old and is keeping her name.
Mr.
DeVany, 30, is an agent with Prudential Insurance in Boston.
He received a B.A. and an M.A. in international relations from Boston University.


Adventures With Ike and Schoenberg
That Paul Henry Lang wrote history vividly and beautifully is a matter of public record.
But as anyone who regularly conversed or corresponded with him can attest, he was an even more colorful and entertaining storyteller with respect to events experienced firsthand.
"Some day," he promised in a particularly delightful letter of May 1980, "when I feel senility descending upon me, I will stop writing new things and write up the many funny stories in my life."
Lang, best known to inveterate music lovers as the author of the monumental survey "Music in Western Civilization" (1941), which has remained steadily in print for 50 years, died recently, at the age of 90.
The very good news is that senility never descended, and he continued to write new things to the extent that a relentless round of physical ailments allowed.
The bad news is that this brilliant and influential musicologist, critic, editor and teacher, who crossed paths with many of the great musical figures of this century, never paused to reminisce in any concentrated way, despite the impertinent badgering of at least one younger colleague.


Inventions
The desire to reinvent the chair, the table, the candlestick, the vase, the lamp, the rug -- virtually every household staple -- is irresistible.
Artists, architects and designers all over the world are constantly turning out sketches, models and prototypes for furniture and objects.
Only a handful are actually produced.
And only the best are remembered a year or so after their introduction.
Frequently, these new designs reflect the spirit of the country where they originated.
The French, for example, have a flair for the bold and sophisticated, while the Italians display a slick yet somewhat outrageous sense of style.
Shown here are memorable furnishings created by some of today's younger designers.
Milan
Young Italians experiment with unexpected surfaces and original shapes.
New York Los Angeles
From coast to coast, American designers are testing their metal and putting a new shine on old finishes.
London
With quirky details and cartoon touches, the British continue a tradition of eccentric design.


Court Voids Wisconsin U.'s Ban on Hate Speech
In a case that could eventually have implications for colleges around the country, a Federal district judge has voided a University of Wisconsin rule against hate speech, saying it is unconstitutionally broad.
The rule, adopted two years ago by the university's Board of Regents, barred speech that was intended to create a hostile learning environment through the demeaning of a person's race, sex, religion, color, creed, disability, sexual orientation or ancestry.
The rule called for punishment ranging from public service to suspension.


Improvise
Twenty-five-year-old Victoire de Castellane loves leather and chains, Madonna and rap music, flea markets and 1950's biker movies, contemporary ceramics and 18th-century furniture.
She thinks home design should be provocative and fun, not serious or planned.
As an assistant to the fashion designer Karl Lagerfeld at Chanel in Paris, Castellane prides herself on being at the forefront of style.
She is not alone.
Around the world, a new breed of trendsetters work with talents that are instinctive, not taught, with nerve greater than their pocketbooks.
This international chain has a common link: an uncanny talent for improvisation.
Whether they are pulling together rooms or designing landscapes, remodeling houses or amassing esoteric antiques, they ignore conventional rules in favor of personal expression.
Even some of today's young architects could be called improvisers as they struggle to break free from the academic tone of their masters' voices.
Part of the new media generation, this group likes its audio equipment realer than real, its video systems bigger than life.
Some are serious "techies" who satisfy what they describe as "techno-lust" by joining computer networks.
And just as communications today reach all ends of the earth, this group travels, often settling abroad and, in the process, transforming some of the dreariest homes into charming fantasies.
Wherever they go, they give new meaning to the word "style."  Paris: Fashion Statement
It all began with the Hermes box.
That simple, impeccable orange package haunted Gerald Schmorl.
"It's the peak of luxury," he says.
And the shade, inspirational.
So inspirational that rather than collect just an object as most people do, Schmorl collected a color.
His living room walls are orange.
So are the curtains, an assemblage of Burmese lacquer boxes, several chair cushions and a pair of lamps.
As a window and display designer for the Paris couturier Christian Lacroix, and his former fashion assistant, Schmorl learned about creating the total look.
"It's a bit over-the-top and American and fun," he explains.
Still, invention was necessary to pull off the scheme.
"Since I only rent this flat, I didn't want to spend a fortune on a proper renovation, so I had to be creative." Faced with old turquoise bathroom tiles he thought were beyond help, for example, he gave them style by painting the walls in a matching stripe.
Inventive decorations can be found all over the apartment.
In the entryway he applied gilded bronze stars and a moon to the doors.
"My ideas come from everywhere," says Schmorl, who moved to Paris from Berlin six years ago.
"This is definitely a place where fashion and design meet." New York: Lofty Views


Jennifer Jakobson, Composer, Wed
Jennifer Jakobson, a daughter of John R. Jakobson and Barbara Jakobson, both of New York, was married yesterday at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York to Damon Charles Torres, a son of James C. Torres of Riverdale, the Bronx, and Mrs.
Frederick Devan of Secaucus, N.J.
The Very Rev.
James Parks Morton, Dean of the Cathedral, performed the Episcopal ceremony.
Mrs.
Torres, a rock composer and performer known professionally as Jenny Sunday, attended Sarah Lawrence College.
Her father is an investor.
Her mother is an editor of International Design magazine in New York.


A QUESTION OF MERCY
L, M and Me sound like the three stooges, not three people who have agreed to support a dying man in a carefully thought-out decision.
You don't lie to the dying; you don't "take the train to New York for the night"; you don't rescue him and put him on a respirator and then watch him die slowly for 12 days.
All three had better read "Final Exit." MARGERY K. TOWNSEND
Washington


Bridge
The World Bridge Federation's NEC World Team Championships, which ended on Friday in Yokohama, Japan, were perhaps the most remarkable in a series stretching back to 1950.
They were played in a new hotel and convention center complex, the Grand Intercontinental Hotel and the Pacifico Yokohama, insuring maximum comfort for the players, officials, spectators and press.
Planning by the Japan Contract Bridge League, aided by sponsorship and technical support from NEC, the communications and technology corporation, resulted in several breakthroughs.
The clarity of the Vugraph display was outstanding, permitting spectators to watch the details of bidding and play and listen to expert commentary in a theater.


Coins
For nearly 3,000 years, mine owners have seen coins as a wonderful way to sell bullion.
The Lydians under Croesus did it.
The Comstock Lode owners in Nevada did it.
And so did William Wood.
The Lydians struck their electrum alloy -- silver and gold -- into staters that became the very first coins.
Comstock silver went into millions of United States "cartwheel" silver dollars.
William Wood turned to lesser metals.


Thomas Denies Reports of Asking for Dates
Judge Clarence Thomas today denied published reports that he told investigators that he had asked Anita F. Hill several times to go out with him but dropped his advances when she repeatedly declined.
"That is wrong," Mr.
Thomas told members of the Senate Judiciary Committee on the second day of hearings on Professor Hill's accusations that he sexually harassed her when they worked together in the early 1980's.
"At no time did I ever indicate that I ever asked her out," he said.


Making a Difference; Back From Retirement
Stung by the need to take a $1.68 billion write-off, the Westinghouse Electric Corporation called one of its executives out of retirement last week to stanch the financial hemorrhaging at the company's troubled credit subsidiary.
Leo W. Yochum, who is 64 years old, left Westinghouse in 1988 after 17 years as chief financial officer.
He returns as chairman and chief executive of Westinghouse Financial Services Inc., reporting directly to the parent company's chairman, Paul E. Lego.
He replaces William A. Powe, who was named a special consultant.


Colombia Struggles to Seal Its Judges' Armor
In a small, cluttered office, Omar Eduardo Garces, president of the Cali Judges Union, was searching for ways to illustrate the vulnerability of Colombia's judicial branch in the face of the country's powerful drug dealers.
First he produced the written death threat he received two years ago, then a photograph of four judges from his department, three of whom were killed while trying cases.
Finally, when a judge who was wounded in 1987 dropped by the office, Mr.
Garces pressed him to show where the bullets entered his body.


Thomas Testimony: Sex, Race and Anger Explode on Screen
It was not Saturday morning kid stuff.
Network anchors warned parents that something different from "Bugs Bunny" was about to come their way, no doubt expecting more of the references to sexual organs that had made members of the Senate Judiciary Committee squirm a little at Friday's dramatic hearing.
But even the anchors could not foresee the linking of sex and race, the profoundly troubling, often evaded reality of American history, that exploded from Judge Clarence Thomas yesterday.
It was Judge Thomas's day.


The Executive Life; After-Hours Music To Shrug Off the Street
The clock was striking 6 on a recent evening as Joe Grunfeld dashed up the steps of an old brownstone near City Hall.
Tossing off his doublebreasted jacket and loosening his paisley tie, he entered a soundproof music studio on the top floor.
"Hey guys, how's it going?," said Mr.
Grunfeld, 34, a senior vice president of investments at Shearson Lehman Brothers.
From a small black briefcase, he drew out a set of gleaming harmonicas.
"Are we going to play some serious blues tonight?"


Light on Electricity
To the Editor:
John R. Stilgoe, reviewing David E. Nye's "Electrifying America" (Sept. 15), has overlooked one of the titanic battles of the late 19th century.


Ms. Stein Wed To D. D. Miller
Suzanne Beth Stein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Otto L. Stein of Amherst, Mass., was married yesterday to Daniel Dodd Miller, a son of Susan A. Miller of Amagansett, L.I., and the late Paul R. Miller Jr.
The Rev.
Arnold Westwood, a Unitarian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the New York Room in Mary Wooley Hall at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Mass.
The bride, 30 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Barnard College.
She is an administrator for Arts Partners, an arts education program sponsored by the City of New York.
Her father is a professor emeritus of botany at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
Her mother is a professor of biology at Mount Hoyoke.


Sorting Out Gates Case
The Senate testimony of Robert M. Gates, nominated to head the Central Intelligence Agency, suggests that he was both truthful and evasive.
The Senate Intelligence Committee has the daunting task of sorting out the facts before its vote Friday.
Article, page 24.


Perspectives: The Zuccotti Role; Looking Beyond Downtown's Downturn
A MAN who builds a reputation on both the public and private sides of the fence does not spend his time sitting on it.
John E. Zuccotti is no fence-sitter.
"The principal problem doing business in New York City is cost -- taxes and other costs," says the 54-year-old former First Deputy Mayor and City Planning Commission chairman, who became president of Olympia &amp; York (U.S.A.) in January 1990.


Style Makers; Virginia Buchan and Nora Ligorano, Paper Designers
Coating 2- by-3-foot sheets of paper with a mix of rice-starch paste and pigments is grueling, but Virginia Buchan and Nora Ligorano have made a habit of it.
Proprietors of Lost Link Bindery, they generate 14,000 square feet of high-style paper each year for book bindings, graphic design and lampshades.
They keep their colors quiet, concentrating on mauves, grays, soft greens and burgundies with occasional gold highlights.
Their patterns, however, are hectic.


NEW YORK INMATES SUE ON TRANSFERS
For a decade New York City and State officials have blamed each other for slowdowns in transferring inmates from city jails to state prisons.
In a new attempt to untangle the problem, a prisoners-rights group has filed a class-action lawsuit in behalf of 3,000 city inmates who demand transfers to state prisons.
The city inmates say conditions in the prisons are better than in the Rikers Island jails and that they are being detained illegally because of incompetence by city and state administrators.


Commercial Property: Union Square; Cinderella Waits for the Other Glass Slipper to Drop
HARD times are palpable in Union Square.
It requires no imagination to see the economy's impact on 14th Street, lined as it is by failed or stalled or distressed developments.
There is plenty of life, too, as any restaurant patron or greenmarket shopper would attest.
And the commercial real estate scene may see another turnaround, given the announcement three days ago that the Macmillan/McGraw-Hill School Publishing Company would move into at least 100,000 square feet of the office space at Zeckendorf Towers.


Mary C. Via Marries Mark A. Cuoco
Mary Carroll Via, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold A. Via of Charlottesville, Va., was married yesterday to Mark Alan Cuoco, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel A. Cuoco of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Andrew MacBeth, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Eastern Shore Chapel in Virginia Beach, Va.
Mrs.
Cuoco, 26 years old, graduated from Sweet Briar College.
She and her husband are insurance brokers at Marsh &amp; McLennan in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was an account executive at Marsh &amp; McLennan.


A Musical for Children
THE Fort Hill Players started before the summer earlier than usual -- to rehearse "The Mysterious Disappearance of King Sam," an original musical for children, which opens Friday at 8 P.M. at the Rochambeau School on Fisher Avenue here.
The play's creators and the seven-member cast have been "working it out together," said one of its lyricists, Libby Saines.
In true Broadway fashion, changes were still being made at the next-to-last rehearsal.
"Oh, no!" said Joan Crosser in mock despair, pretending to quit as new lines were suggested.
Ms.
Crosser, a schoolteacher by day who plays Queen Edna to John Ahrens's King Sam, reconciled herself to more memorizing and the scene went on.


On the Hearing Schedule: Eight Further Witnesses
The Judiciary Committee will reconvene at noon Sunday to hear eight witnesses.
Four are expected to corroborate parts of Prof.
Anita F. Hill's testimony; the others are character witness for Judge Clarence Thomas.
Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the Judiciary chairman, said he hoped the committee would finish its work on Sunday.


Venison, a Meat for the 90's
VENISON is traditionally eaten in the fall and winter.
But now, along with farm-raised game like quail and pheasant, it is showing up with increasing frequency on restaurant menus year round.
Chefs are preparing venison in a wide variety of ways, from traditional stews and roasts to venison tartare seasoned with truffle sauce and green venison chili topped with an avocado salsa.
Farm-raised venison does not have the rich gamey taste of animals from the wild.
It is a much milder meat, more like well-aged beef or lamb, fine-grained and velvety in texture with a faint grassy taste.
But in addition to its flavor, the greatest appeal for venison these days is its low fat.


Who Really Pays for the Manicure?
To the Editor:
Regarding "The New Office Order in Grooming Rituals" (The Executive Life, Sept. 29), I wonder how the clients of the Chicago law firm of Barack, Ferrazzano, Kirschbaum &amp; Perlman view the fact that the firm picks up the tab for employees to receive a manicure at the office.
Frugal clients might wonder if such largesse translates into marginally higher billing rates.
If they don't, perhaps they should.
LOUIS S. SORELL  Katonah, N.Y., Sept. 30


Why Have Parking Meters?
Hallelujah!
Town of Oyster Bay commuters no longer have to dig for quarters to feed the 12-hour parking meters at railroad-station lots  [ "Long Island Journal," Sept. 8 ] .
As Town Supervisor Angelo Delligatti put it, the meters "are not serving the best interests of either commuters or the town."
It's a pity the supervisor did not elaborate on just how the meters served the best interests of commuters.
Apart from the inconvenience, they added some $100 yearly to the commuter's expenses.
But the reference to the town's interests invites some thought on why the cost of local government is so high here on Long Island.


When Hateful Words Lead to Hateful Deeds; Standards for Tenure
To the Editor:
"Lessons of Hate" by Prof.
Michael Levin (Op-Ed, Sept. 26) unwittingly highlights the major issue of the Levin-Jeffries controversy, the standards of academic quality by which tenure is granted at the City University of New York.


A QUESTION OF MERCY
As a physician, I found Richard Selzer's article disturbing.
The means of suicide are many and varied.
A terminally ill patient who is serious about taking his own life can find the means to do so.
If he needs assistance, a friend or relative who is
not
a physician can provide it.
I suspect that when a patient asks a physican to assist in his suicide, what he is really requesting is that the doctor, as an authority figure, take part of the responsibility and part of the guilt for this act.
This would indicate to me that the patient is not really sure, in his own mind, of what he wants to do.
Asking this of a physician is also unfair.
Doctors already have enough life-and-death responsibility.
If a patient who is beyond help wants to take his own life, let him also take the full responsibility for his own final act.
ROBERT J. YAES M.D.
Lexington, Ky.


Sabrina Setareh Wed
Sabrina Bebe Setareh and Jeffrey Scott Isaacs were married last evening at the New York Hilton by Rabbi Martin Zion.
Mrs.
Isaacs, 25 years old, graduated from Colgate University and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Abby Setareh of New York.


Cuttings; Soaking in the Color on a Garden Break
In a week or two, a wind will blow down Literary Walk in Central Park and the golden yellow leaves of the elms will fly through the air, silhouetting their dark trunks and branches.
"That's when the beauty and shape of the elm tree becomes really apparent," said Neil Calvanese, the director of horticulture for the Central Park Conservancy.


Traffic Alert
East 50's Association Fair: Third Avenue will be closed today between 46th and 56th Streets from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Hispanic Columbus Day Parade: Fifth Avenue will be closed today between 44th and 72d Streets from 11 A.M. through late afternoon.


The Suits Over the State's Fiscal Finagling
THE court case making big news here these days is Wachtler v.
Cuomo, the audacious effort by the state's Chief Judge, Sol Wachtler, to wring money for his courts from the budget fashioned by the Legislature and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
If Mr.
Wachtler wins, it could cost $77 million that the Governor says the state does not have.
But Judge Wachtler is by no means the only plaintiff who has turned to the courts in an effort to get a better deal from the state.
As the state has turned increasingly to desperate measures to balance its budget, like selling prisons to quasi-public authorities and delaying salary payments to workers, its fiscal manipulations have generated a host of legal challenges.


Answering The Mail
Q.
A contractor recently ripped up my asphalt driveway
and
put down new asphalt that has a "rocky-looking" finish.
I asked the contractor if I should apply a sealer, but he said it was not necessary.
Do you think a sealer would protect the new asphalt and also help to cover its "rocky" appearance?
A.
I do not know what you mean by a "rocky" appearance.
New asphalt should be smooth and uniformly black, with no stones, rocks or other fillers showing.
A sealer is usually not necessary on new asphalt in the first year, but it is a good idea after about two or three years.
That should be repeated at regular intervals, the intervals depending on the amount of exposure and wear.
The sealer helps prevent drying out from the sun, as well as water penetration and freezing damage.
It also keeps the driveway looking better.
But I do not see how a sealer could smooth over or correct a "rocky" appearance, except to make the driveway all uniform in color.


Objects of Desire


Taking Veteran's Place in Greenburgh
WHEN Paul J. Feiner, a four-term County Legislator, decided earlier this year that he would seek election to the post of Greenburgh Supervisor, he assumed that the nine-term incumbent, Anthony J. Veteran, would be retiring.
Both are Democrats, and Mr.
Feiner did not want to test the popular Supervisor in a primary.
Mr.
Veteran did not announce his retirement, perhaps because of Mr.
Feiner's bid.
But the politically powerful Mr.
Veteran is gone, a victim principally of political miscalculations, leaving the race to two major candidates, Mr.
Feiner and a Republican, Louis Giampiccolo Jr.
There are two others on the ballot: Robert J. Johnston, the Right to Life candidate, and Patrick L. Colucci, an independent.


Artistic Directors Invigorate Theater Season
MORE than the playwrights or the players, artistic directors command the spotlight in the state's new theater season.
In New Haven attention is being twice paid to the artistic forces that establish a theater's identity and elucidate its purpose.
Anticipation centers on Stan Wojewodski Jr., who will set the tone for the Yale Repertory and, as dean, for the university's School of Drama, after 13 years of heading the Center Stage in Baltimore.
In contrast to the newly arrived Mr.
Wojewodski, Arvin Brown marks his 25th year as the artistic head of the Long Wharf Theater.


Shrubs That Add to Autumn's Glory
THE Northeast is famous for its fall foliage.
Anything from brilliant red to orange to soft yellow to bronze can be seen in the trees now.
But what about shrubs?
Gardeners in the Northeast are lucky; if theydon't have room to add a tree of brilliant color, they might have space for a shrub, maybe even two.
Selection should be made of a cultivar that is the most colorful now.
It is important to see the shrub before purchase; sometimes the foliage color is not what is expected.
The leaf color of a particular shrub is not going to get any better with the years after planting.
If the nursery does not have a particular shrub available, perhaps it can be ordered.
Planting can go on to the end of the month, as long as the ground is open and can be dug easily.
Root development will continue until early December in the top few inches of the soil.


The Many Pros and Cons of the 55-M.P.H. Speed Limit
In a Forum page article on Sept. 29, Donald L. Pevsner proposed raising the 55 mile-an-hour national speed limit on Interstate highways.
He argued that the limit, set during the oil crisis of the early 1970's, is retained because it is a source of income for states, insurance companies and makers of radar-detection equipment.
He suggested raising the Interstate speed limit to 70 m.p.h. except in congested urban areas and in unsafe terrain.
Some of the letters received in response follow.
The Driving Privilege


Choristers Win Prize Of $10,000 From Pepsi
THINK Handel: The Hallelujah Chorus, for example, and the part that goes "Hallelujah, Hallelujah, Hal-lee-ee-lu-ya." Substitute "You've got the right one, the right one, the right one, ba-a-a-a-by."
Now, turn on the television this week and watch the Diet Pepsi commercial to be shown on a number of prime-time shows.
It will feature members of the Westchester Choral Society brandishing Pepsi cans and singing their entry in Pepsi-Cola's nationwide home video talent contest, an effort that won them a $10,000 grand prize.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
WIDE-OPEN FLOWER SHOW
FOR those who show dogs, cats or horses, not winning a ribbon in one show simply means moving on to the next.
For those who show flowers, there is no next.


Sabres-Jets Trade
The Buffalo Sabres, without a victory going into last night's game with the Nordiques, have made a move.
One week into the National Hockey League season and seeking speed and youth, the Sabres executed a five-man trade with the Winnipeg Jets on Friday.
Buffalo sent left wings MIKE HARTMAN and DARRIN SHANNON and defenseman DEAN KENNEDY to the Jets for center DAVE McLLWAIN, defenseman GORD DONNELLY and future considerations.


Making a Difference; Time for Hollywood
Joichi Aoi did not come to the presidency of the Toshiba Corporation the way he had planned.
An engineer who spent his career working with heavy machinery and nuclear power equipment, he was thrust to the top four years ago.
That was when Toshiba's chairman and president resigned amid charges that one of the company's subsidiaries, Toshiba Machine, had illegally shipped equipment to the Soviet Union that allowed it to build super-quiet nuclear submarines.
Since then Mr.
Aoi has developed a reputation as a cautious leader, pushing to invest heavily in semiconductors and laptop computers, but steering clear of the kind of flashy purchases that drove his rivals, the Sony Corporation and Matsushita Electric Industrial, into Hollywood.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Home Design/Magazine Part 2


Vandeweghe Enjoys Job As Backup to McDaniel
Kiki Vandeweghe was in an automobile accident last month in Los Angeles, and he came away from it with two broken ribs.
It could have been much worse.
The accident was a head-on collision.
"He was going about 60 miles an hour, and I was going about 30," said Vandeweghe, the Knicks' veteran small forward.
"He swerved across into my lane and got me. I was lucky."


Airline Baggage Handler Dies After Walking Into Propeller
A 37-year-old baggage handler for Continental Express died today after walking into the propeller of a plane preparing to take off for Newark, N.J.
Nancy Antignani of Bridgeport apparently walked into the moving propeller of a stationary plane at Sikorsky Memorial Airport, said Peggy Mahoney, a Continental Express spokeswoman.


Wall of Silence
To the Editor:
It was disturbing to read the letters attacking JoAnne Akalaitis for her perceptive and literary account of Palestinian drama  [ Letters, Sept. 29, and "Palestine Drama Is an Expression of Identity, 'Even Sanity,' " Sept. 15 ] .
Why is it that so many American Jews cannot tolerate even an artist's account of one Palestinian expression of their tragedy when in Israel there are so many people who deplore the occupation and the increase in settlements in the territories?


Private Schools Wrestling With Diversity and Identities
THE most recent entries on the valedictorian plaque at the Pingry School in Martinsville would probably surprise John Francis Pingry, a Presbyterian minister who founded the school in 1861 for the sons of wealthy Elizabeth business leaders.
The names Schmulewitz, Cheng, Friedland and Sachs have a distinctly different ring from the patrician surnames of those who attended his school back then.
The changes in Pingry's student body are not only reflected in academic achievement: This year's school president is Korean, as were the co-captains of last year's football team.
There is the Afro-American Scholars' Society and the Asian Awareness Society.
The halls are filled with students from different racial, ethnic, religious and economic backgrounds.


In Rebuttal to Senate Panel, C.I.A. Nominee Seems Truthful but Incomplete
Robert M. Gates staked his nomination to head the Central Intelligence Agency on an impassioned 20-point rebuttal to charges that he slanted analysis.
But a review of his testimony suggests that he was both truthful and evasive, careful and incomplete, that he effectively rebutted some allegations but offered technical and misleading denials of others.
The Senate Intelligence Committee, which is to vote on his nomination on Friday, is struggling with the daunting task of sorting out the facts on a number of complicated, often murky issues.


CAMPUS LIFE: Bates; Indexing Manuscripts Of the Byzantine World
A Bates College faculty member is opening a long-shut window through which scholars interested in Byzantine civilization may peer.
Robert W. Allison, an associate professor of religion, is completing work on the first of three volumes of a catalogue that will provide detailed descriptions of about 400 rare Greek manuscripts that are in the library at the Philotheou Monastery on the island of Mount Athos, Greece.


World Ought to Synchronize Its Clocks
To the Editor:
In "Soviets Turn Back the Clocks" (news item, Sept. 30), The Associated Press reports that Soviet citizens turned back their clocks an hour "to correct a mistake dating from 1930, when officials forgot to return to winter time after six months of daylight saving time." The French also turned back their clocks Sept. 29, so that Paris is now only five hours ahead of New York.
Until 3 A.M. on Oct. 27, that is when our falling back will again make it six hours.
Next spring, there is likely to be a one-week period of a seven-hour difference.
In view of the havoc this creates with plane schedules and business communications, international synchronization of when to spring ahead and fall back seems highly desirable.
The six-hour difference prevailing most of the year reflects that France has been on central European time since World War II.


The Executive Computer; The Brave New World of I.B.M. and Apple
The contract was a foot thick, which gives some idea of the complexity of the deal signed earlier this month by Apple Computer Inc. and the International Business Machines Corporation.
Reduced to essentials, Apple and I.B.M. have agreed that they must join forces if they are to salvage any meaningful role in the personal computer industry of the 21st century.
The two biggest PC makers vowed to work together to develop a generation of powerful business computers and an operating system for those computers.
They hope to be done by the mid-1990's, meaning it will be years before the main results of the alliance are evident -- if the effort does not collapse under its own weight before then.


PRINCETON'S PUBLIC INTELLECTUAL
Robert Boynton's article on Princeton's Cornel West captures the spirit of the man in the way in which I remember him ("Princeton's Public Intellectual," Sept. 15).
As a graduate student at Columbia University, I had the joy and privilege of studying with West when he taught at Union Theological Seminary at the beginning of his career.
One course I especially recall was "The Attack on Religion and the Religious Response." Though a professing Christian, West believed that ideas emanating from all traditions had to be taken seriously as contributions to a continuous cultural dialogue.
He refused to give an undialectical "no" to any thinker, just as he refused to give anyone an undialectical "yes" (although he once, in an aside, stated that he thought Pascal came closest to the truth).
JOSEPH CHUMAN
Teaneck, N.J.


Rangers Need Defense Back in Defensemen, Neilson Says After Loss
Upset by missed assignments and 33 more tough shots on the Rangers' goal, Coach Roger Neilson said tonight that his defensemen had better stop believing they are all Mark Messier.
"What happened is we got on a roll the first few games, and the guys go out thinking of goals," said Neilson, after the Rangers dropped their second game on the road in two nights, 5-2, to the Whalers.


Elderhostel
To the Editor: The article on Elderhostel (Aug. 25) neglects on important point: these courses offer a wonderful way for single people to travel.
Whether you pay the single supplement or take your chances with a strange roommate, all the other people in the class have signed up for the same classes that you have, so that you already know that you have something in common.
How good can a course be?
At my last program, on the last day of classes, the people in the front of the lecture hall smelled an odor like the one associated with the burning of an electrical part.
The professor went out to call for help, and when he returned, found that none of us had moved.
He went on with his lecture while the room swarmed with security and maintenance people, and none of us missed a thing.
That was at Albright College, in Pennsylvania, and we slept in a dorm with the bathrooms down the hall, but I wouldn't have missed it for the world!
BERNICE SISSON Swarthmore, Pa.


Nets Fall To Hornets
Exhibition openers in the National Basketball Association are often more notable for the players who didn't participate than for those who did.
That was the case tonight when the Nets lost to the Charlotte Hornets, 110-93, at the Greensboro Coliseum.
Each team has yet to sign its top draft pick: Larry Johnson for the Hornets and Kenny Anderson for the Nets.


When Hateful Words Lead to Hateful Deeds
To the Editor:
Prof.
Michael Levin of City College, in "The Lessons of Hate" (Op-Ed, Sept. 26), his blatantly self-serving defense of freedom of speech for hatemongers and racists, skillfully recasts the child's nursery rhyme "Sticks and stones will break my bones, but names will never hurt me" in terms of John Stuart Mill's philosophy of liberty.
I would certainly agree that odious deeds count for more than odious words.
The sound of a truncheon cracking a skull in Soweto is more ominous than the half-whispered epithets that hover, like escaping sewer gases, over so many public arenas in New York City these days.


Old Tribal Rivalries In Eastern Europe Pose Threat of Infection
THE shorthand for optimism in Western Europe used to be 1992, at the end of which the 12-nation European Community is to abolish its borders.
Even when Communism began to crumble it was assumed that the drive toward Western European unity need not change; indeed, it was felt, Western Europe would be in a position to offer support with one voice to the emerging markets and democracies of the East.
But with 1992 only months away and much of Eastern Europe wracked by nationalist fever, the virus of revived tribalism is proving somewhat contagious, and it threatens increasingly to infect Western Europe.
It is not at all clear to what extent old rivalries can or will disrupt the momentum for integration in Western Europe, but it is already apparent that Western Europe is not of one mind on how to confront the challenges posed by the emergence both of new markets and of instability in the East.


Chris Evert Gives Birth To a Son, Alexander
CHRIS EVERT delivered her first child, an 8-pound-6-ounce boy, early yesterday morning at Broward General Hospital in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The retired tennis star and her husband, Andy Mill, a former Olympic skier, named the child ALEXANDER JAMES.
Evert is 36 years old and was born in the same hospital in which she gave birth.


Realty Office Challenges Tradition
LAST month, John Piazza, who is 28, opened a Re/Max franchise real estate office in Somers and, in doing so, challenged the whole real estate brokerage system in Westchester.
Sales agents at traditional real estate concerns work on a split-commission arrangement, giving 40 or 50 percent of their commissions to the owner of the brokerage office.
Mr.
Piazza's seven sales agents pay him only 5 percent of their commissions, keeping 95 percent for themselves, but they also pay him a monthly fee for office space and administrative costs.
There are other differences, too.


'Grace for Grace': A Performing Space Gets Into the Act
On Saturday, the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in upper Manhattan will present "Grace for Grace," an evening of music, dance and dramatic readings staged by Robert Wilson.
Featured artists include Jessye Norman, in Spanish lullabies, and Philip Glass, in excerpts from "Einstein on the Beach." Here, Mr.
Wilson discusses his conception.
Last Spring, when I was asked to stage a performance at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, I was excited for two reasons.
First, working in Europe as much as I do, I am always grateful for an opportunity to work in New York, my hometown.
Second, as an artist who directs and designs for the theater, I have long believed that new avenues must be sought for the presentation of theater, new spaces explored beyond the traditional venues.
This is vital for the continual development of the art.


The Many Pros and Cons of the 55-M.P.H. Speed Limit
In a Forum page article on Sept. 29, Donald L. Pevsner proposed raising the 55 mile-an-hour national speed limit on Interstate highways.
He argued that the limit, set during the oil crisis of the early 1970's, is retained because it is a source of income for states, insurance companies and makers of radar-detection equipment.
He suggested raising the Interstate speed limit to 70 m.p.h. except in congested urban areas and in unsafe terrain.
Some of the letters received in response follow.
The European Approach


Budget Shell Game Hides Funds for Jobless
To the Editor:
In "A Standoff Won't Help the Jobless" (editorial, Oct. 3), you paint a one-sided picture of extending unemployment benefits by advocating additional employer taxes to pay for any extension.
You favor the extension but argue the provisions of the 1990 budget agreement must be met: If you want more domestic spending, find the money to pay for it.
What a charade! Consider:


Iranians to Withdraw Troops From Lebanon
Iran has decided to withdraw hundreds of its revolutionary guards from Lebanon, a move that could weaken fundamentalist Shiite Muslim groups here.
Security officials, who spoke on condition that they not be identified, said Teheran had informed the Lebanese Government of its decision on Friday.


Principal Accused of Sex Harassment Suspended
The executive principal of the largest high school in New Jersey was suspended with pay on Friday after a teacher said that he had had kissed and fondled her and had hinted strongly that her job hinged on his goodwill.
The superintendent of schools in Elizabeth, N.J., Thomas G. Dunn Jr., said that he would not discuss the allegations of sexual harassment against the principal of Elizabeth High School, Dominic Parisi, in detail, except to say that the all the evidence "clearly supports the charges."


Laura Taylor Weds Andrew Swain
Laura Anne Taylor, the daughter of Madeline V. Taylor of Brooklyn and Justus E. Taylor of Athens, N.Y., was married yesterday to Andrew John Swain, a son of Peter and Marjorie Swain of Stockport, Cheshire, England.
The Rev.
Christopher A. Brown, an Episcopal priest, officiated at Grace Church in New York.
Mrs.
Swain, 32 years old, is an associate at the law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton in New York.
She is also a member of the New York State Board of Law Examiners.
She graduated and received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her mother, a medical librarian, is the director of the George F. Smith Library and assistant university librarian of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in Newark.
Her father, who is retired, was a lawyer in New York.


Anne Weintraub Wed to David Fass
Anne Weintraub, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton M. Weintraub of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there last night to David Victor Fass, a son of Peter J. Fass of Larchmont and Elizabeth Fass of Minneapolis.
Rabbi Leonard Poller performed the ceremony at the Larchmont Temple.
Mrs.
Fass, 27 years old, graduated from Boston University and is an assistant photography editor at People magazine in New York.
Her father is the president of A. W. Pistol Inc., a custom lighting firm in Stamford, Conn.
Her mother, Beatrice R. Weintraub, is a vice president of Burbank-Whittemore Real Estate in Larchmont.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Purple Turtles
Q.
At a local nursery recently, I came across a beautiful purple flowering plant called turtlehead.
What is it, and what does it need to grow well? -- Tracy Wilcox, Danbury, Conn.


Anne Foxley, Editor, Marries
Anne Foxley, a decorating editor for HG magazine, and Nicolas Pierre Kerno, a systems analyst for Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert Robbins officiated at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in New York.
The bride, 27 years old and a graduate of the University of Colorado, is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Kenneth Wood Washburn of Providence, R.I., and William C. Foxley of La Jolla, Calif.
Mr.
Foxley is the chief executive of the Foxley Cattle Company in Omaha and the founder of the Museum of Western Art in Denver.


Samantha Fishman and Hal Weinstein to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Esgar of Woodmere, L.I., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter, Samantha Jill Fishman, to Hal Miller Weinstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jonathan Weinstein of Hewlett Neck, L.I.
The future bride, 23 years old, teaches elementary school in Howard Beach, Queens.
She graduated from George Washington University and is studying for a master's degree in counseling at Hofstra University.
Mr.
Weinstein, 24, is an assistant district attorney in Queens County.
He graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.


Tarnished Testimony
GALILEO'S REVENGE
Junk Science in the Courtroom. By Peter W. Huber. 274 pp. New York: Basic Books. $23.


CAMPUS LIFE: Michigan State; Televised Course For 1992 Approved Despite Protests
Michigan State University's Academic Council approved the institution of a mandatory course last week that would be taught, in part, in televised lectures, despite student protests.
The course, Arts and Humanities 201, would become part of the core curriculum in the 1992 academic year and would be required for all freshmen and sophomores.
The course would handle approximately 6,000 students each year.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Briarcliff Manor, N.Y. 400,000
739 Long Hill Road West
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; fireplace, dining room, patio, open study/den, pond, 1.2 acres; taxes $9,697.
Bronxville, N.Y. 340,000
231 Pondfield Road West
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 59-year-old English stucco; fireplace, butler's pantry, eat-in kitchen, sun room; taxes $5,367.
Rye, N.Y. 328,500
44 Oakwood Avenue
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 66-year-old colonial; enclosed front porch, stone fireplace, breakfast room, den; taxes $4,984.
Darien, Conn. 1,050,000
8 Stonewall Lane  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 140-year-old colonial; 2 terraces, fireplace in master suite, 2.1 acres; taxes $7,291.
Litchfield, Conn. 215,000
Sheldon Lane
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old cape cod; dead-end street, walk to green, 2,400 square feet, 1 acre; taxes $3,407.
Washington, Conn. 179,500  Bee Brook  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, triplex-style condominium; decks, 1,800 square feet; common charges $84; taxes $2,028.
OTHER AREAS Brookside, N.J. 450,000
4 Michael Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; professionally decorated, oak paneling, formal dining room; taxes $7,406.
Farmingdale, L.I. 185,000
17 Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old ranch; dining room, den, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
Mill Neck, L.I. 485,000
Darthy Lane  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old ranch; den, fireplace, 2-car garage, 3.6 acres; taxes $7,500.


CAMPUS LIFE: Bucknell; Assembly Focuses Debate on Series Of Social Changes
Bucknell University recently revived a 25-year-old tradition in which the campus community, under the leadership of speakers from across the United States, debates a theme involving social change.
The last such assembly was held in 1978.
But with a series of disruptive changes on the campus -- including a tightening of alcohol policies, a faculty attempt to jettison the Greek system and an increasingly aggressive feminist movement -- and what is generally acknowledged as an apathetic student body, community members decided that an assembly, or colloquy, would bring people together and shake them up.


UP AND COMING: Adam Hann-Byrd; Wanted: A Genius. He Passed the Test.
Adam Hann-Byrd made his acting debut in his first-grade class play, a fantasy about a man who sells Dunkin' Donuts on Mars.
Adam played the part of a schoolboy.
The next year he was in the sequel.
Then, with two school plays under his belt, the 7-year-old landed the role of Jodie Foster's son in a movie the actress was directing, "Little Man Tate." The Orion Pictures release opened last week in New York, Toronto and Los Angeles and will open elsewhere on Friday.
Ms.
Foster had not been looking for the typical cute child for the role.
In fact, she has said, she picked Adam because he was a "real person" and because she was impressed with his "Zenlike concentration."


Lithographs Keep Old Ball Parks Alive
ON the face of it, Bill Goff seemed to be the quintessential New Yorker, an art dealer who had operated studios on 57th Street and on the Upper East Side for years.
But Mr.
Goff loves the country and has a passion for baseball, especially if the games are played in old stadiums like Fenway Park in Boston and Wrigley Field in Chicago.
That passion has evolved into a successful business: selling lithographs of major league ball parks, past and present.
Since 1986 Mr.
Goff has offered 40 different ball park lithographs and sold thousands of them.
All the lithographs are currently on display at the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum in Cooperstown, N.Y.
Mr.
Goff moved his unusual ball park lithograph business in July to Kent, in northwestern Connecticut, which is about as far removed, figuratively, from mid-Manhattan as Fenway Park is from the Houston Astrodome.
The move has given Mr.
Goff, 45 years old, and his wife, Betsy, a lawyer, ample time to indulge their love for the countryside.


Birds Do It, Bees Do It, So Does TV
Murphy's preggers.
Doogie'S no longer a virgin.
Roseanne's teen-age daughter is on the pill.
Perfume ads are pushing the equivalent of soft porn.
Even up in the northern exposure of Alaska, Chris the poetic D.J. is emitting a body scent that reduces women to eager slaves.
There's hardly an hour on network entertainment schedules these days without sexual reverberations.
Sex is on a rampage, promising the ultimate in quick-fix escapism, with perhaps a cuddly doll-like baby down the line to make studio audiences go "aaahhh" in soundtrack unison.
Much of this whoopee-making might well be cause for celebration.
This country tends to be prudish, sometimes ridiculously so.
Assorted television watchdogs get far more upset about a glimpse of nudity than about a steady stream of blood-curdling violence.
Healthy, uninhibited attitudes toward sex certainly deserve encouragement.


Someone Has to Win And Columbia Does
There was a blue-gray October sky, there was the Hudson as a backdrop, and there were remembrances of victories past for Columbia's Class of '61.
For Columbia won a football game yesterday on homecoming day.
On one glorious afternoon, the Lions matched last year's victory total, defeating a jittery Penn team, 20-14.


Venison, a Meat for the 90's
VENISON is traditionally eaten in the fall and winter.
But now, along with farm-raised game like quail and pheasant, it is showing up with increasing frequency on restaurant menus year round.
Chefs are preparing venison in a wide variety of ways, from traditional stews and roasts to venison tartare seasoned with truffle sauce and green venison chili topped with an avocado salsa.
Farm-raised venison does not have the rich gamey taste of animals from the wild.
It is a much milder meat, more like well-aged beef or lamb, fine-grained and velvety in texture with a faint grassy taste.
But in addition to its flavor, the greatest appeal for venison these days is its low fat.


Liberty Lyric


Harvard Visits the Bronx and Gets Lost
It took Harvard 116 years to reach the Bronx for a football game yesterday against Fordham, the Crimson's first at Jack Coffey Field where an apparent victory slipped away and became a painful defeat.
The Rams won, 14-7, although outgained and outplayed for most of the contest.
Two quick drives of 74 and 70 yards resulted in fourth-quarter touchdowns that came on passes of 30 and 15 yards from Gary Brennan to Tom Garlick.


Patricia Brinton, Teacher, Is Married
Patricia Carr Brinton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
S.
Jervis Brinton Jr. of Morristown, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert Aloysious Kenny Jr., a son of Elizabeth S. Kenny of Hackettstown, N.J., and Mr.
Kenny of Port Murray, N.J.
The Rev.
Beth Graham, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the First Parish in Concord.
The bride, 38 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Wheaton College and received a master's degree in education from Boston University.
She is a teacher at Children's Place, a corporate day care center, in Waltham, Mass.
Her father is the president of Brinton Eaton Associates, a financial planning concern in Morristown.


HAITI POLICE SEEN AS GAINING IN COUP
Just as a platoon of soldiers had finished setting up two 75-millimeter field guns outside the National Assembly here on Tuesday for the ceremonial salute to Haiti's new provisional President, a dozen or so blue-uniformed police officers showed up and ordered them to truck the guns off to another site.
The swearing-in of Joseph Nerette, a Supreme Court Justice named by Parliament in defiance of international protest to replace the democratically elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, went off without a hitch.
Many observers here said the incident was one of the abundant signs that the Haitian police have been close to the center of power in the country since the coup that deposed President Aristede on Sept. 30.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE MARVELOUS JOURNEY THROUGH THE NIGHT.
Written and illustrated by Helme Heine.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) A yawn at bedtime is the secret sign that often begins the journey to sleep.
In these rich and mysterious watercolors by a distinguished German artist, the voyage leads to "the paradise of dreams."


Political Talk
Miller's Scheduling Conflict
It is too early to say whether Mel Miller's personal travails will collide with his professional duties as Speaker of the New York State Assembly.


A Show of Works That Define or Simply Allude to Landscape
THE landscape show playing the Gallery at Hastings-on-Hudson here is called "The Natural Perception," a title that implies the existence of an alternative.
But if there is such a thing as an unnatural perception, Bruce Crane's "Storm Over Paradise" might qualify as an example.
Reigning over this composition is a fuzzy gray and pink cloud shaped rather like a breaching whale.
Below it is emerald-green countryside with a tree stump engulfed by leafy fronds and a hut with a tall pylon on the roof.
Tiny statues litter the ground between, and near the hut is a lamp pouring out yellow light as if it were liquid (and as if there were not enough light from the sky).


Tokyo's Reversal on Soviets: Islands for Aid?
Amid Japan's struggle last week to name a new prime minister, its Government quietly made another change that may have far more impact in the Pacific: It reversed its postwar strategy for dealing with the Soviet Union, betting that the next few months may offer a brief opportunity to win back a handful of the Kurile Islands.
For decades the Japanese have refused to offer economic aid to the Soviet Union, except for a small amount of humanitarian assistance, until it resolved the territorial dispute over the islands, which the Soviets captured in the closing days of World War II.


In the Offing: Discounts and Bigger Ships
ANYONE still wondering whether to take a cruise this fall might be interested in the advice of W. Bruce Turner, a cruise analyst with Raymond James &amp; Associates, a brokerage in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
"It's a great time to do it," he said, "because prices are falling and overcapacity has made deep discounts more widespread than ever."
Many fall cruises still have space available, travel agents say, because -- as the airlines and hotels have discovered -- Americans are increasingly waiting until the last minute to make travel plans.


Jordanians Urged to Back Talks
King Hussein urged his people today to support Jordan's decision to attend a Mideast peace conference, saying peace was the key to "a brighter future we all seek."
"Peace is essential to us in leading a normal life," the King said in a nationally televised address before about 2,500 people representing a broad spectrum of Jordanian society.
Jordan's economy has been hit hard by the Persian Gulf crisis and the return of about 250,000 Jordanians from Kuwait because of the war.


Terry A. Rostov Wed in Vermont
Terry Ann Rostov, a daughter of Mrs.
Charles I. Rostov of Greenwich, Conn., and West Dummerston, Vt., was married yesterday to John David Heinzmann Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Heinzmann of Berlin, Conn.
Calista Kristenson, a justice of the peace in Brattleboro, Vt., performed the ceremony at the bride's mother's home in West Dummerston.
Mrs.
Heinzmann, a corporate meeting planner in the San Francisco Bay area, graduated from Tufts University.
Her late father was the president of the Trans-Ocean Import Company in New York.


Chess
The Soviet team of Grandmaster Vladimir Epishin, International Masters Maxim Sorokin and Konstantin Sakayev and the untitled players Vladimir Kramnik, Ildav Ibragimov and Andrei Kharlov won first place in the 1991 World Under-26 Team Championship.
They scored a decisive 33-3 in the two-week tournament in Maringa, Brazil, which ended Sept. 13.
The United States team of Grandmaster Patrick Wolff, International Masters Ilya Gurevich and Alexander Fishbein, and Daniel Edelman, Ronald Burnett and Vladimir Strugatsky took second place in the 18-team competition.
The team, sponsored by Bankers Trust of New York, the American Chess Foundation and the United States Chess Federation, tallied 26-10.
Argentina was third.


Ms. Min Is Wed To P. F. Alliegro
Charrisse Ada Min, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Min of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday in Skillman, N.J., to Peter Francis Alliegro, a son of Madeline Alliegro of Ocean City, Md., and the late Francis J. Alliegro.
Mayor Joan Blessing of Montgomery Township, N.J., performed the ceremony at the Bedens Brook Club.
Mrs.
Alliegro, 26 years old, is a corporate planning project leader in New York for Dean Witter Reynolds.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Modern Industrial Neotech, an engineering consulting firm in Princeton.
Her mother is a lawyer in Princeton.


Again, Solti Finds Unexpected Magic In Mozart's 'Flute'
After more than 20 years, Sir Georg Solti's first recording of Mozart's "Magic Flute" still sounds fine, and it's still one of the opera's most successful renderings.
It was the rare case of a question-mark-riddled cast that uniformly performed beyond expectation.
The Vienna Philharmonic played and the Vienna State Opera Chorus sang with the vitality and intuitive understanding that made them obvious first choices for this music.
The conducting demonstrated a seemingly effortless mastery of a score that hides awesome complexities behind a facade of simplicity.
All the same, the conductor's new recording (London 433 210-2; CD), also made in Vienna, advances strong claims of its own.
In a cast that contains few household names, once again the surprises are mostly happy.
And Sir Georg's thinking about the piece has evolved into a streamlined conception that may sacrifice pleasures along the way but makes for a taut, forward-moving presentation.


An Invitation
To the Editor:
Your publication of JoAnne Akalaitis's moving account of the efforts of Palestinians, under dire circumstances of occupation, to create theater expressing their hopes, frustrations and dreams is to be applauded.
After four years of the intifada,Americans still know precious little about day-to-day experiences of Palestinians under occupation.
Stories like Ms.
Akalaitis's help to bring us beyond the daily headlines and to humanize a population often dismissed and stereotyped.


The Accent Is French, Mon Cheri, but . . .
A NEW French restaurant opening on Long Island is as rare as taking a dip in the Sound on Columbus Day.
Neither is unknown, but both are infrequent enough to be events.
Alouette took the plunge six weeks ago, when it opened in a tiny strip shopping center in Melville, specifically in quarters that previously housed La Sorbonne.
This mere slip of a restaurant has a European family air.
The owner-chef is in the kitchen, his wife is in the dining room, and on weekends their young son serves baskets of bread and glasses of water.


S. M. Laba Wed To Ms. Leidner
Alison Thea Leidner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin J. Leidner of Greensboro, N.C., was married last evening to Stuart Michael Laba, a son of Sandra S. Laba of Florham Park, N.J., and Marvin Laba of Studio City, Calif.
Rabbi Donald Roffoff officiated at the Headquarters Plaza Hotel in Morristown, N.J.
Mrs.
Laba, 25 years old, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is a handbag sales representative for Kenny Horowitz Inc. in New York.
Her father is a senior vice president of the Kayser-Roth Corporation in Greensboro.


Beware of Batteries
To the Editor:
James J. Donahue Jr., a Duracell spokesman, misses the point about discarding batteries in claiming that "in the absence of recycling there is no better method of disposal than the household trash." ("Keeping a Gadget-Mad Nation Charged Up -- and Safe," Sept. 22.) Improperly discarded batteries are a scourge on the environment.
Most heavy metals in the household hazardous waste stream come from batteries, and those metals are toxic and linked to neurological illnesses and cancer.
Emissions and residual ash from battery incineration and the potentially damaging effect on groundwater from disposal in landfills point to one conclusion: batteries must be removed from the solid waste stream.


Pirate Hopes Faint After Pitching Fails
For the Pirates, it is no idle figure of speech.
It is the literal truth.
Their prayer has been reduced to a man called Whisper.
The Pirates, whose character pitcher was sidelined with an injury in Game 1 and whose statistical ace was exiled today because of ineffectiveness, will have to send Randy Tomlin, a.k.a.
Whisper, to the mound for Game 4 of the National League playoff against the Braves Sunday night at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium.


When Hateful Words Lead to Hateful Deeds; Noxious Ideas
To the Editor:
I read with concern Prof.
Michael Levin's defense of the right to speak of Prof.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. (Op-Ed, Sept. 26).
It seems to me that both professors -- and those who defend them or fail to denounce them -- are confusing different issues.


'This Is No Life'
WILD DESIRE
By Karen Brennan. 192 pp.
Amherst, Mass.: University of Massachusetts Press.
Cloth, $22.50.
Paper, $9.95.


POSTINGS: High Cost of Chic; New York Places 4th In Housing
It's no surprise to hear that Tokyo leaves New York City behind in the cost of luxury housing, but the findings of a recent survey might make New Yorkers feel less aggrieved over still-high housing costs here.
According to the Corcoran Group of Manhattan, a residential real estate company, the average price of a residence in the Azabu section of Tokyo, one of that city's most expensive addresses, is nearly three times the cost of a comparable apartment on Fifth Avenue.
The Corcoran survey found that $2,143 was the average price per square foot of a two-bedroom apartment in Azabu, while on Fifth Avenue, between 60th and 86th Streets, a similar apartment cost about $725 a foot.


Theater of Pain; A Terrible Wrong Has Been Done, But to Whom
WATCHING the trial-by-television of the case of Prof.
Anita Hill v.
Judge Clarence Thomas, in which the imperatives of politics, society and governance collided head-on, it was hard to escape the gnawing feeling that some great injustice had been done.
It was just not clear to whom the injustice was done -- the Supreme Court nominee or the lawyer who accused him of sexual harassment -- or to what extent the President of the United States, the constitutional process or the American people were also harmed.


Troubled Buildings
To the Editor:
The Times is to be commended for informing the public about an important new law on the books to help troubled co-ops and condos  [ Muscles for Boards, Postings, Aug. 18, 1991 ] .


Correction
A letter on Sept. 22 about the painter Artemisia Gentileschi carried a misspelled signature.
The writer was Mary D. Garrard.


Lavinia Lemon, Student, Weds
Lavinia Fletcher Lemon, a daughter of James H. Lemon Jr. and Mrs.
George R. Packard 3d, both of Washington, was married yesterday to Andrew Conklin Pitzer, a son of Colette Pitzer of Charlottsville, Va., and the late Charles L. Pitzer Jr.
The Rev.
John Harper officiated at the St.
John's Episcopal Church in Lafayette Square in Washington.
Mrs.
Pitzer, 25 years old, graduated from Hollins College.
She is studying for a master's degree in education at Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Johnston, Lemon &amp; Company, investment bankers in Washington.
Her mother, Lavinia P. Packard, owns Lavinia Lemon Interiors in Washington.


Mt. Rushmore Gets Face Lifts
A new silicon-based material is being used to give the four faces of freedom on Mount Rushmore National Memorial a face lift this fall.
The mixture is helping National Park Service workers seal hundreds of cracks in the sculptured busts at Keystone, S.D., after studies showed that the patching material of white lead, granite dust and linseed oil developed more than 50 years ago was not preventing moisture from entering the sculpture.
Newly exposed cracks as well as old ones are being treated and some of the older patching material is being removed.
The project is scheduled to be completed in the middle of this month.
The Mount Rushmore Society, through its preservation fund, is paying for the work and is attempting to raise $40 million to preserve the memorial and improve visitor facilities, which it describes as outdated.
Information: (800) 882-0500.


In Haitian Coup, Rapacious Army-Police Alliance Triumphs
To the Editor:
Haitian army officers, in an attempt to justify their bloody coup, maintain that President Jean-Bertrand Aristide was trying to create his own paramilitary force reminiscent of the deposed Duvalier family's infamous Tontons Macoutes.
You report in your Oct. 4 front-page article that some foreign diplomats in Haiti have repeated this allegation, adding that the army was "alarmed by the arrival of Swiss police experts last week to accelerate the training of a presidential militia."


Dark Domestic Visions? So What Else Is New?
Parents' night at my son's school, and at the end of a long evening I mentioned to a group of weary parents bound for home and baby sitter and unwashed dinner dishes that I had recently seen the Museum of Modern Art's exhibit of photographs, "Pleasures and Terrors of Domestic Comfort" (through Dec. 31).
Their collective reaction was a wry question, "What's domestic comfort?"


Logging Regulation Bill Vetoed in California
In a move that could signal the renewal of a bitter conservation battle, Gov.
Pete Wilson vetoed a logging-regulation bill on Friday that was meant as a compromise between enviromentalists and lumber companies.
Governor Wilson said the bill was too inflexible and would have imposed "unnecessary economic hardship on companies." But the Republican Governor immediately pledged to propose new legislation and asked the State Board of Forestry to begin implementing changes on its own.


POSTINGS: Eddie Bauer on Madison; The Twain Meeting A 2d Time
It took Eddie Bauer, the outdoor apparel and gear supplier from the state of Washington, more than 70 years to open its first shop in Manhattan.
But it will have taken only six months to open the second.
The first store, at Third Avenue and 45th Street, opened in late May.
The second is now under construction at 600 Madison Avenue, at 58th Street.
It is expected to open in November, said Davia Kimmey, vice president for advertising and marketing at Eddie Bauer headquarters in Redmond, Wash.
The Madison Avenue store will occupy approximately 9,000 square feet, she said.


Managing; The Parables of Corporate Culture
STEWART J. LEONARD JR., president of Stew Leonard's, the Norwalk, Conn., food store known for its customer service, loves to tell employees the tuna fish story.
It goes something like this:
"I unwrap one of our tuna sandwiches, and this package of mayonnaise rolls out. I figure, the sandwich has enough mayo already.  So I call Bill Hollis, my deli manager, and tell him, get rid of the extra mayo, it's expensive.


Diane M. Kiely Weds
Diane Marie Kiely, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Kiely of Parsippany, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Thomas Romo 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Romo Jr. of San Antonio.
The Rev.
Gary P. Fertig, an Episocopal priest, officiated at the Burden Mansion in New York.
Mrs.
Romo, 32 years old, graduated from the County College of Morris in Randolph, N.J.
The bridegroom, 39, graduated from Trinity University in San Antonio and received a medical degree from Baylor University.
He is the director of facial plastic and reconstructive surgery at the New York Eye and Ear infirmary.


These Days, 4 Quarters Seem to Add Up to Less
Last year, the National Football League instituted measures to insure that its games would be played at a three-hour pace, mainly as a way to please television programmers who were growing tired of Sunday afternoon games running into prime time.
Last week, league officials and television programmers saw the impact of those rules when both New York teams played games in under 2 hours 45 minutes on Sunday, and the game between Kansas City and Buffalo on Monday night was played in 2:48.


Spectacle of Degradation
The language that Anita F. Hill attributed to Judge Clarence Thomas, which he denied using, was "absolutely gross," Senator Orrin G. Hatch said this morning.
Nobody challenged him.
But the thing that turned people's stomachs, the thing that made them wince and turn away from their television sets, no matter how electric the drama, was the degradation imparted by the whole spectacle, not just a few dirty words.


AS YOGI SAYS . . .
'As Yogi Says . . .
" reminded me of my favorite Berraism, one not from Yogi but from his son, Dale. When asked how he would explain affinities between himself and his father, the younger Berra responded: "The similarities between me and my father are different." LARRY HOWE
Pasadena, Calif.


Burning Garbage For a Profit
The article "Hempstead Burner Relies on Others' Garbage"  [ Sept. 22 ]  accurately reported my quotes regarding the need for American Ref-Fuel to import solid waste from New York City and other municipalities.
The vastly oversize incinerator that was built in Hempstead requires more food than the town can provide if a greedy American Ref-Fuel is to achieve maximum profit.
However, we are opposed to the practice of garbage importation because it completely destroys any successful recycling efforts.


A Tour of the Wonder Years: It's a Small, Small World
Most new parents feel, in their hearts, that theirs is the first baby ever born.
In a way, this absurd gut reaction is
true.
Parenthood is a private experience, one that can render a mature adult incapable of focusing on anything other than baby.
The object of this obsession -- a squalling bundle about as big as a family-size package of hamburger -- is also superbly videogenic.
In this home-video culture, parents now make their own comprehensive baby-video histories, complete with first words, first steps and first potty sessions.


Senator Biden: 'Nobody's Reputation Is a Snapshot'
Following are excerpts from the statement by Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, at the end of today's Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.


Shrubs That Add to Autumn's Glory
THE Northeast is famous for its fall foliage.
Anything from brilliant red to orange to soft yellow to bronze can be seen in the trees now.
But what about shrubs?
Gardeners in the Northeast are lucky; if theydon't have room to add a tree of brilliant color, they might have space for a shrub, maybe even two.
Selection should be made of a cultivar that is the most colorful now.
It is important to see the shrub before purchase; sometimes the foliage color is not what is expected.
The leaf color of a particular shrub is not going to get any better with the years after planting.
If the nursery does not have a particular shrub available, perhaps it can be ordered.
Planting can go on to the end of the month, as long as the ground is open and can be dug easily.
Root development will continue until early December in the top few inches of the soil.


CONFLICT EMERGES OVER CUSTER PARK
Supporters of a proposed memorial to the American Indians who died at the battle commonly known as "Custer's Last Stand" have suggested its slogan be "peace through unity." But a proposal to change the name of the site honoring the Battle of the Little Bighorn has led to anything but unity.
The bill authorizing construction of the Indian memorial at what is now the Custer Battlefield National Monument in southeastern Montana would change the name to Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument to reflect the geographic site of the battle rather than its most famous casualty.


Schubert Survey


Aline L. MacMahon, 92, Actress Over 50 Years and in 43 Movies
Aline Laveen MacMahon, an actress whose career on the stage, screen, radio and television lasted more than 50 years, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 92 years old.
She apparently died from pneumonia, friends said.


Sabrina Allan, Lawyer, Weds
Sabrina Eve Allan, an associate at Kalkines, Arky, Zall &amp; Bernstein, and Douglas Samuel Ellenoff, an associate at Brandeis, Bernstein &amp; Wasserman, both New York law firms, were married last evening.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botantic Garden.
The bride, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Wesleyan University, she received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is the daughter of Richard and Lee Allan of New York.
Her father is a law professor at Brooklyn Law School.


London Opera's Late Buffet
London's Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, is serving a post-performance buffet supper for members of the audience this season.
The buffet will be available on selected nights, starting Oct. 23, in the Crush Bar in the opera house.
The buffet will be ready immediately after the last curtain, an official said, the idea being to make a light meal available after a long performance when it can be too late or too tiring to go on to a restaurant.
Initially, buffet dinners will be served on Oct. 23 and 29; Nov. 19; Dec. 19 and 23; and Jan. 6, 23 and 29.
If the plan proves popular it will continue more regularly.
The buffet will consist of two cold and two hot dishes, such as beef stroganoff and Turkish pilaf with roasted almonds and pistachios, or smoked salmon, smoked turkey and chicken and a choice of salads.
Dessert will include fresh fruit salad, profiteroles and apple flan.
The price will be about $38 (calculating $1.70 to $:1), including tax.
Wine is extra.


Elderhostel
To the Editor: I attended an Elderhostel trip in April 1991 in Flagstaff, Ariz., mainly to visit the Grand Canyon.
Since I was traveling alone, I was to share a room with a stranger.
Upon arriving at the room I discovered it had only one bed.
I ran to the front desk, where they seemed to take the attitude: what's your problem?
They reluctantly gave me a single room.
Next we had a meeting in a room that was so small and poorly ventilated that one man fainted and an ambulance was called.


Ms. Gardiner Has Wedding
Susan Niven Gardiner, a daughter of Robert M. Gardiner of Far Hills, N.J., and Mrs.
Paul W. Glover Jr. of Hanover, N.H., was married in Bernardsville, N.J., yesterday to Rene Raul Trespalacios, the son of Mrs.
Rene Trespalacios of Miami and the late Mr.
Trespalacios.
The Rev.
Frederick S. Baldwin performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Bernard's Church.
Mrs.
Trespalacios, 35 years old and a graduate of Smith College, is the director of promotional purchasing in the New York office of Lancome, the French cosmetics company.
Her father retired as chairman and chief executive of Dean Witter Reynolds in New York.


The Nation's Polluters - Who Emits What, and Where
Since 1987, large manufacturing corporations have been required to report to the Federal Environmental Protection Agency the amount of toxic chemicals they emit into the environment annually.
Already, the collected data and its analysis by environmental and research groups have had a powerful impact on corporate behavior.
Some of the nation's largest companies have undertaken campaigns to reduce emissions that they once defended as being within regulatory limits.
And regulators are using the data to persuade companies to participate in voluntary efforts to reduce pollution.


The Many Pros and Cons of the 55-M.P.H. Speed Limit
In a Forum page article on Sept. 29, Donald L. Pevsner proposed raising the 55 mile-an-hour national speed limit on Interstate highways.
He argued that the limit, set during the oil crisis of the early 1970's, is retained because it is a source of income for states, insurance companies and makers of radar-detection equipment.
He suggested raising the Interstate speed limit to 70 m.p.h. except in congested urban areas and in unsafe terrain.
Some of the letters received in response follow.
Those Useless Speed Traps


Barry Manilow: Yes, He Still Writes the Songs
Barry Manilow is a divided soul.
Part of him wants to be the hit machine that cranked out 25 Top-40 hits between 1974 and 1984.
The other part yearns to transcend the formula.
"It had gotten to the point where it wasn't art, and it wasn't music -- it was business," Mr.
Manilow said recently.
"I had made it so big and so fast that I lost my balance, and a lot of artists to whom that happens never find their way back home. Unless you're somebody like Sting, the art takes a beating. I think I became a rat. I lost a lot of friends. I was very scared and very unsure of everything."


Tampa Financial Woes
Serious questions regarding the proposed expansion franchise in Tampa, Fla., could be answered this week as a special committee of National Hockey League executives examines the group's financial status.
In a meeting last month in Toronto with the N.H.L. board of governors, the Tampa group said that it expected to have its first payment of $22.5 million in order by Oct. 15.


Climbing Back; New York City's First Hurdle: Defeatism
New Yorkers are losing heart.
And it is no wonder that many fear their city is disintegrating.
A huge budget deficit probably means dirtier streets, unkempt parks and shorter library hours.
Almost a million New Yorkers are on welfare, supported by an ever-thinner base of taxpayers.
Homeless mental cases huddle in corners everywhere, or beg aggressively.
Drugs so ravage neighborhoods that desperate parents in the Bronx are driven to chain their daughter to a bed to save her from the streets.
And every macho teen-ager seems to be packing a gun.
Who can feel safe in an era of random shootings?
Who does not fear the flare-up of race hatred when vicious whites from Queens club a black athlete senseless in Atlantic Beach and vicious blacks stab a young Jew to death in Crown Heights?


Europe's Hopes for Political Pact Shaken by Dispute on Sovereignty
The European Community's hopes of defining its much-vaunted "political union" before a crucial meeting in early December have been thrown into doubt by sharp new disagreements over how much sovereignty different countries are willing to surrender.
The latest evidence of deep divisions among community members came Friday, when the Foreign Ministers of France, Germany and Spain met in Paris to challenge an initiative on future foreign and defense policy begun by Britain and Italy one week earlier.


Bee-Line Wins Award As Nation's Best System
A WOMAN needing to pick up her car at a repair shop decided recently to try the Westchester bus system, which passes through her village.
Arriving at the bus stop, she was surprised to see the bright blue and white bus pull up exactly on time.
Hopping aboard, she discovered the bus was nearly full.
Although still a mystery to many Westchester residents wedded to their cars, the county's Bee-Line system received national recognition last week when it was named the top transit system in North America.


Claire Mathews, A Teacher, Wed
Claire Regester Mathews, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
Brent Mathews of Baltimore, was married yesterday to Colin Patrick McGinnis, a son of Barbara McGinnis of Morris, Minn., and the late Patrick McGinnis.
The Rev.
Michael Gosselin, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the alumni memorial chapel at Loyola College in Baltimore.
Mrs.
Mathews McGinnis, 32 years old, is an assistant professor of theology at Loyola.
A magna cum laude graduate of Swarthmore College, she received a master of divinity degree from Yale University, as did her husband.
The bridegroom, 30, is a senior policy adviser to Senator Paul D. Wellstone, Democrat of Minnesota.
He graduated magna cum laude from Carleton College.


Miami and Mistakes Prove To Be Penn State's Undoing
On the University of Miami sideline this afternoon, Lamar Thomas pleaded his case wherever he could.
Thomas approached Gino Torretta, his quarterback.
He sought out Dennis Erickson, his coach.
He looked for anyone who would listen to his attempt at persuasion -- well, it was really more like begging.
The Nittany Lions had created problems for Miami's passing game throughout the first half, but Thomas, a junior wide receiver, remained unconvinced.
"I told them, 'We can run right by these guys; they're not that fast,' " Thomas remembered.


Saints' Heyward Accused of Assault by 2 Fans
Fullback Craig Heyward will miss Sunday's game in Philadelphia and return as soon as possible to New Orleans to face a complaint by two women alleging that he assaulted them at a send-off rally, the Saints said tonight.
The women said Heyward assaulted them Friday night at a rally in the parking lot of Lakeside Shopping Center in Metairie, Jefferson Parish authorities said.


A Dead Man at Delhi
INDIA GATE
By Lacey Fosburgh. 564 pp. New York: Crown Publishers. $23.


Mets No Inspiration
To the Sports Editor:
I have worked as a registered nurse for 15 years.
I have seen patients hold onto their lives for things like tight pennant races, the Super Bowl, the Stanley Cup.
Sports, for them, creates order in the world, gives them small triumphs, brings joy.
Personally, when my brother was dying, and in our recovery as a family, baseball was a single happiness, a healer.


Wall Street; Is Forschner Losing Its Edge?
For years, everyone from Presidents to astronauts has gushed about the virtues of the humble Swiss Army knife, a versatile tool kit that fits in a pocket.
As for the Forschner Group Inc., the company that sells more of the knives in this country than anyone else, investors love the stock too.
The shares have nearly doubled this year from $6 to $11.625 in over-the-counter trading.
Edward C. Johnson 3d, chairman of the FMR Corporation, which owns the Fidelity mutual funds, is a stockholder, as is O. J. Simpson, who recently joined the Forschner board.
Still, as any disciplined investor should know, you can love the product, but that does not mean you should love the stock.


From Quirky Little Gallery to Behemoth
To the art world, the name Getty usually means the acquisitive J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., whose high-profile purchases -- from ancient Greek sculptures to Van Gogh's "Irises" -- have made front-page headlines.
But the museum is only one component -- albeit the most important one -- of the mighty J. Paul Getty Trust.
Last year this $3.5 billion private foundation spent $149 million -- almost the entire budget of the National Endowment for the Arts -- on the museum and seven other programs, some of them hotly debated in their fields.


The Screening Room
Imagine buying a car piecemeal: the engine from one place, the wheels from another -- then matching up a suitable transmission and topping it all off with a nice, comfortable body.
Absurd?
Well, maybe.
But that's exactly how most home theaters are put together.
In fact, the home entertainment system is just about the only household appliance whose parts can be selected and combined at the owner's discretion.


Style Makers; Carey Adina Karmel, Handbag Designer
When a woman fills her purse, it becomes a Proustian microcosm of her world, says Carey Adina Karmel, a handbag designer who started her company, Carey Adina, in 1986.
"I think women love handbags and shoes more than anything else they wear," said Ms.
Karmel, whose bags are sold at Bergdorf Goodman, Sak's Fifth Avenue and Martha International.
An English literature major at Harvard, Ms.
Karmel planned to be a journalist.
But her first job, as a clerk for the business section of The New York Times taught her that business could be exciting.
And as a reporter at American Lawyer, her second job, she discovered it was almost impossible to find a handbag that was both attractive and practical.
"I didn't want my pumps mixing with my lunch," she said.


Eagles Get First Victory By Stopping Louisville
Dwight Shirley ran for 110 yards and 2 touchdowns and Glenn Foley passed for 2 more today as Boston College whipped Louisville, 33-3, for its first victory of the season and Tom Coughlin's first as coach of the Eagles (1-4).
Boston College (1-4) used a tough defense in a romp over Louisville (2-4).


Doing What Comes Naturally
Human beings improvise because they have to cope with disaster, fight off an aggressor or face some other threat to their survival.
And when the danger passes, they improvise just for the fun of it, because they know that they can.
Finding new ways of doing things and learning from one surprise to create another seem to be as characteristic of humans as flying is of birds.
Yet, fundamental as the improvisatory impulse seems, there are times when the cultural climate makes it difficult to let the imagination and the intellect soar.
During the last couple of decades, we've been grounded and ruminative.
Like oxen or moose, we keep chewing over the old, seeking nourishment from meals long past.
Years before the 1980's were over, people were consigning the decade to the flea market of history, perhaps only to speed the cycles of irony and appropriation that make the superficialities of the past available to the culture once more.


Rutgers Routs Maine as Secondary Excels
When a Division I-A team is playing against a Division I-AA team, there is always the possibility of a letdown and an upset.
Two senior cornerbacks for Rutgers, Ron Allen and Marshall Roberts, fended off that possibility today by making two touchdowns for the Scarlet Knights within a 17-second span.
The plays sparked a 40-17 rout of Maine today before a Homecoming Day crowd of 27,221 at Rutgers Stadium.
"We sat and watched a lot of film of Maine all week simply because they are a Division I-AA team and we didn't want to look past them," said Allen, the left cornerback, who had two of the three Rutgers interceptions and saw them result in Scarlet Knights touchdowns in the first and third quarters.


This Week: Water New Perennials
Continue to rake leaves and add to the compost pile.
Use some leaves as a mulch in perennial beds.
If grass is still growing, keep lawn mowed to two inches.
If there is no rain, water newly planted perennials, evergreens and trees.


Trial to Begin in Subway Killing of Utah Tourist
A case that became a national symbol of the sometimes cold-blooded violence of New York City comes to trial on Tuesday, when jury selection is to begin for four defendants charged in the killing of a young Utah tourist in a midtown subway station last year.
The victim, Brian Watkins, 22 years old, was stabbed to death on the platform of the IND Seventh Avenue subway station at 53d Street when he tried to defend his mother against robbers, the police say.


Speakers' Corner Debate on Thomas Nomination
They gathered in Union Square in Manhattan yesterday, as people had earlier in the century when the nation debated labor unions and isolationism and Socialism, and tried to come to grips with the issues of a new age: sexual harassment, the treatment of women in the workplace, the struggle between Judge Clarence Thomas and Prof.
Anita F. Hill.
Microphones and loudspeakers had replaced the soap boxes of old, the crowds were sparse and most of the speakers were women.
But the passionate arguments and serious discussions that spilled through the park were a microcosm of America's pain over the wrenching fight on Capitol Hill.


Assets of a Three-Way Switch
IN OLDER and remodeled houses, ceiling lights above staircases or in rooms with two doors are sometimes controlled by just one wall switch.
That means having to negotiate a dark stairway or walk through a dark room to turn on the light.
The problem can be solved by adding a second switch at the head or foot of the stairs or at the entrance to the second doorway, and by making each switch a three-way switch.


A Voracious Traveler Takes Time to Digest
AT the edge of the Bohemian town of Melnik, north of Prague, you come to a church known for its collection of thousands of human skulls -- don't worry, this story is not about that -- and then a restaurant with an eagle's view of the silver fork in the earth where the Elbe River picks up the Vltava on its way to Germany.
On this October afternoon, though, you might as well be flying a dirigible lost in the clouds: hardly a thing can be seen from the lodgy old dining room except a blinding haze, the effect of sunlight beating on the hellish chemical fog of northern Czechoslovakia.
If the old woman at the window table is disappointed by this prospect, there's no sign of it.
Frail-looking and practically translucent against the glare, she is putting away an astonishing midday meal.
A plate of appetizers, a huge serving of the special veal schnitzel, two local wines, cheese, some fruit and coffee.
And between bites she talks sweetly about food, food and nothing else, reviewing not only the courses set before her but also many other meals in other places, until her companion, a hefty younger woman, filled with tales of Viennese tortes and Hungarian stews, blurts out the German equivalent of "Yummy!" and can scarcely feed herself fast enough.


Not Me
In an article about personal bankruptcy, a New York Times business writer quoted F. Scott Fitzgerald as having remarked to Ernest Hemingway, "the rich are different than you and I."
"You have people to look this up," writes Miriam Hurewitz of Westport, Conn.
"Did Fitzgerald really say it that way? Different than you and
I
? My students of copy editing at N.Y.U. would be interested in your reply."


J. D. Fotta Weds Erica Wilhelm
Erica Chase Wilhelm, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gayle Brian Wilhelm of Old Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Dean Fotta, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank G. Fotta of Amherst, N.H.
The Rev.
Thomas Stiers officiated at the First Congregational Church in Old Greenwich.
Mrs.
Fotta, 25 years old, graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She is a business analyst at Fidelity Investments in Boston.
Her father is the head of trusts and estates at the law firm of Cummings &amp; Lockwood in Stamford, Conn.


Kecia Boufides and Darren Muller Are Married
Kecia Ann Boufides, a national advertising manager for the Pepsi-Cola Company in Somers, N.Y., was married yesterday to Darren Michael Muller, a foreign currency trader at Lehman Brothers in New York.
The Rev.
John Kiramarios officiated at the Annunciation Greek Orthodox Church in Brockton, Mass.
Mrs.
Muller, 25 years old, graduated from Brown University, as did her husband.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Boufides of Canton, Mass.
The bridegroom, 27, is a son of Charles Muller of North Bellmore, L.I., and the late Carol Muller.


The Many Pros and Cons of the 55-M.P.H. Speed Limit
In a Forum page article on Sept. 29, Donald L. Pevsner proposed raising the 55 mile-an-hour national speed limit on Interstate highways.
He argued that the limit, set during the oil crisis of the early 1970's, is retained because it is a source of income for states, insurance companies and makers of radar-detection equipment.
He suggested raising the Interstate speed limit to 70 m.p.h. except in congested urban areas and in unsafe terrain.
Some of the letters received in response follow.
What About the Future?


STRANGERS AT THE GATE
The plight of countless human beings seeking haven in Western Europe seems like a replay of what happened there in the 1920's and 30's ("Strangers at the Gate" by Judith Miller, Sept. 15).
Hannah Arendt wrote compellingly of these years, noting that after the devastation of World War I, millions of displaced people were set loose in every direction.
And whatever their reasons for fleeing their homelands, they suffered much because of the hostility of their hosts, who felt threatened by the influx of so many outsiders.
Today's refugees and immigrants are no different.
Their presence puts similar pressures on political boundaries.
Like their predecessors, they reflect the failed economies and failed politics of their time, and like their predecessors, they will never stop searching for a better life.


Agency in Decline
The chairman of the United States Commission on Civil Rights is understandably frustrated.
In the last decade, the agency's staffing and budget have been slashed, but that was only a taste of what may be to come.
Congress is now considering ending all financing in two years.
In the 34 years since the agency was created, the civil rights commission has gone from being the centerpiece of the Government's efforts to ferret out and end discrimination to a panel that, its critics say, offers little more than a display of internal squabbling between conservatives and liberals.
The chairman, Arthur A. Fletcher, is pleading for a three-year reprieve; during that time he wants full staffing restored to his agency and the budget brought back to the level of about $11 million.
"There is no way we are going to monitor agency after agency with a Mickey Mouse organization like we have now," Mr.
Fletcher said recently.


Santa Fe
To the Editor: Your "What's Doing in Santa Fe" (Aug. 4) failed to warn travelers without cars that transportation is scarce and unreliable.
This is especially important to single women and men as well as to older couples.
I recently returned from a week of music events in Santa Fe, frustrated to find no evening transportation from the Plaza to my hotel, not to mention to more remote areas during daytime.
The cabs I called never arrived; streets are dimly lighted and there is no public transportation.
My hotel offered no evening transportation or escort service, and the private limo service failed to return my messages.
The only transportation that seems to function reasonably well is the opera limo and shuttle, but even reserving these options takes effort.


B. C. Lynch Wed To Miss Diano
Valerie Anne Diano, a daughter of Vincent J. Diano Jr. and Martha A. Diano, both of Philadelphia, was married yesterday in New Hope, Pa., to Brian Christopher Lynch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Lynch of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
John P. Schmeer performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Martin of Tours Church.
Mrs.
Lynch, 29 years old, is a fund-raising consultant in New York.
She graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
Her father is the technical services director at the Hygrade Food Products Company in Philadelphia.


Birth Pangs


The Soviet Market Makeover Will Mean Erasing 70 Years
After years of vacillating about economic reforms under President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet Union and its republics have stated their commitment to begin major changes toward a market economy and leave Lenin's economic legacy behind them.
But the problems they face are enormous.
With lines to buy food growing and industrial output plunging, economic officials here say that for the first time since the Russian Revolution they are ready for broad reforms to lead them toward the free market.
In the central Government and in individual republics from Kazakhstan to the Ukraine, they are preparing plans for the crucial first steps of transforming the economy by privatizing industry and bringing the nation's 100 percent-plus inflation rate under control.


Penguins Meet Devils and Live to Regret It
The Pittsburgh Penguins, the defending Stanley Cup champions, this afternoon visited the Devils for the first time since they eliminated New Jersey in the playoffs last spring, and left with their first loss after four games this season.
The Devils inflicted a 4-1 setback on the Penguins at Byrne Meadowlands Arena for their fourth triumph in as many games this season, giving them the best start in the franchise's history.


Baylor Is Surprised by Rice; E. Carolina Stuns Syracuse
Darrell Richardson kicked a 31-yard field goal with 2 minutes 39 seconds left, and Baylor's Jeff Ireland missed three second-half field goals as Rice, a 20 1/2-point underdog, upset the highly ranked Bears, 20-17, today in a Southwest Conference game.
"This is definitely the biggest win in our program since the early 1960s," Rice Coach Fred Goldsmith said.
"It was a total win -- offensive, defensive, the kicking game."


Abner Burst Into Flames
THE WIVES' TALE
By Alix Wilber. 351 pp. New York: W.W. Norton. $19.95.


New Yorkers Take Regatta
The New York Athletic Club's men's heavyweight crew won the featured championship eight-oared event yesterday at the second annual Challenge of the Hudson Regatta.
Rowing under ideal racing conditions, the New Yorkers covered the three-mile distance in 14 minutes, 14.80 seconds, followed closely by second-place Boston University, 3.31 seconds behind.
Temple University finished third, with Keio University of Tokyo in fourth position.
This race is modeled after the Head style races of England, where the crews are timed over a set distance, rather than in side-by-side racing.


For Jews on West Bank, The Motive Is Economic
It was hardly religious fervor that sent Erez Peer apartment-buying this week at a real-estate office here.
Nor was it an ideological imperative to expand Jewish settlement on largely Arab land in this part of the West Bank, which Israelis refer to by the biblical name Samaria, although he does not disagree that Israel has a right to populate territories captured in the 1967 Middle East War.


Night Train, Musings And Miles
For the last two weeks, the air waves have been filled with tributes to Miles Davis, the legendary trumpet player who died last month at the age of 65.
As one tribute followed the other, I continued to be amazed, not only by the length of Miles's career, which spanned more than five decades, but by the reach of his influence.
From fashion to fine art to music, Miles carved his signature very deeply into the psyche of American culture.


Seeking Peace in a German Hostel Faced by Hate
In a quiet section of this town, on a pleasant tree-shaded street, stands a low apartment building that is a symbol of the racial crisis now shaking Germany.
The building is a hostel for 160 foreigners from Romania, Yugoslavia, Turkey, Afghanistan, India and Vietnam.
They are refugees from war, repression or poverty, and they have come to Germany hoping for a chance to live and work in peace.


Technology; When Analog Meets Digital on a Single Chip
Computers are digital; the world is analog.
But increasingly, the twain do meet, and more and more they meet on a single chip.
The 1's and 0's of digital computing are fine for crunching numbers, but they fall down when the machine must cope with real-world data like sound, light, temperature and pressure, in which values can fall anywhere on a continuum.
Representing the highs, lows and in-betweens of such elements requires the continuous fluctuation of an analog device rather than a digital switch.


In Time of Despair Ever-Hopeful 'Mancha'
BUDGET cuts, censorship, shrinking box-office income and geometrical increases in expenses are only a handful of the problems facing American theaters.
Tales of woe and cries of agony are reverberating across the stages of the nonprofit theaters.
On the other side are those who believe that art of any kind has to take its place at the bottom of a rapidly growing priority list.


At the S.E.C., Another Move For Secrecy
Globalization is the new Holy Grail at the Securities and Exchange Commission.
As a result, 58 years after the Securities Act of 1933 made disclosure the cornerstone of American securities regulation, it is gradually being undone by the body charged with enforcing it.
The latest assault on the public's right to know what is happening in the securities markets came last week as the commission made it possible to trade stocks on Nasdaq from 3:30 A.M. to 9 A.M., New York time.
That is prime trading time in Europe.


Review/Philharmonic; A Russian Program With French Dressing
Anyone who is in the business of listening dares not forget that the concert experience is part expectation and part coercion from other senses.
The sensuous impact of the moment is the thickest of these layers, but it is still one of many.
So one listened to the New York Philharmonic on Thursday evening hoping for signs of its newly born enthusiasm, expecting a regenerative and civilizing warmth of sound and noting unfamiliar postures among the musicians, all radiant with alertness and involvement.
Do such byways of perception cloud the ear?
Possibly.
A collective impression lingers, however, and that must be counted as real.


Making a Difference; Putting the Best Face on Nordstrom's Problems
Nordstrom Inc., the fast-growing retailer best known for its high standards of customer service, pushes its sales force always to be bright and cheery.
So it was not surprising when James Nordstrom, one of the four co-chairmen of the Seattle-based company, was upbeat last week even after the chain shocked Wall Street with the news that it expects flat profits and a decline in sales for the quarter ending Oct. 31.
"I feel we are running our company today as well as we ever have," Mr.
Nordstrom told an industry conference in Vancouver.
"We are still making money. But our customers don't feel good right now and it's having an effect on our business. It's just something we will have to work our way through."


Taboo Issues of Sex and Race Explode in Glare of Hearing
Once again today, the Senators seemed stunned, almost mute, at the ferocity of Judge Clarence Thomas's language and the way his and Anita F. Hill's words keep sinking, like some kind of psychic dentist's drill, into the most sensitive, least explored parts of the national consciousness.
When he was questioned this morning by Senator Orrin G. Hatch, one of his most vociferous Republican supporters, Judge Thomas denied that he had ever talked to Professor Hill about pornographic movies involving women and animals and a black pornography performer called Long Dong Silver, or that he had ever bragged about his own sexual prowess.


POSTINGS: For First-Time Buyers; Low Prices in Spring Valley
First-time buyers are already sending in their names to the Cross Creek Town Houses project in Spring Valley, Rockland County, even though the Wilder Property Company of Elmsford, N.Y., the builder, will not start putting nail to lumber until later this month.
The reason for the enthusiasm for this new housing in a saggy market, said Robert Wilder, the builder, was the $25,000 state housing grant for first-time buyers that will bring the price to buyers of the 47 homes in the first phase down to $93,000 for the two-bedroom model and $100,000 for the town houses with three bedrooms.


Elderhostel
To the Editor: Mr.
Farber's article presented a detailed and fair picture of the Elderhostel program.
I have been an enthusiastic participant for more than 10 years.
Probably because he was half of a couple, he overlooked one aspect that makes this especially welcome to women.
The locations are varied, courses to please everyone and the price is right, but, for me, the opportunity to travel and learn without self-consciousness as a single woman was important.
It is especially rewarding for the recent widow only just emerging from grief.
She will find an undemanding kind of social interaction.
Usually the groups are warm and friendly and, of course, represent diverse backgrounds.
MARCIA PRISCU Edison, N.J.


The Best Room in the House
About six years ago, my wife and I decided to abandon our shrinking apartment in Manhattan.
We looked around for a couple of weeks, then found a 200-year-old house in a small Connecticut town about two hours north of the city.
The house had been a farmhouse, a storekeeper's house, a social club and a boarding-school dormitory, among other things, and it had been moved half a mile down a hill on the back of a truck.
The paint was peeling, the roof was leaking, the kitchen counter was rotting and the walls had been buried under many square miles of bird- and flower-printed wallpaper.
But it had a lot more room than our apartment did, so we bought it.
Paying for the house used up more than all our money, so we had to renovate a little at a time.
The glacial pace of our home-improvement campaign discouraged me at first.
Gradually, though, I became convinced that our poverty was serendipitous and that all such projects should be incremental.
People with lots of money sometimes remodel a house from top to bottom before they've even spent a night there.
The house, in such a situation, never knows what hit it, and the owners lose the benefit of its accumulated wisdom.


Miss Alling Wed To G. W. Sewall
Elizabeth Scott Sykes Alling, the associate director of development at Lawrence Academy in Groton, Mass., was married yesterday to Gordon Ware Sewall, the school's director of development.
The Rev.
Bruce Webber officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Sewall graduated cum laude from Yale University.
She and her husband, a graduate of Bowdoin College, received master's degrees in education from Harvard University.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Duncan Wells Alling of Princeton.
Her father is the headmaster of the Princeton Day School.


Wetlands Plea Viewed As Anti-Development
In your recent account of the possible effect on Westchester County of the national debate as to what is defined as a "wetland"  [ "Westchester Wetlands at Stake in Debate," Sept. 15 ] , Laura Tessier, program administrator for the Soil and Water Conservation District in Westchester, was quoted as saying, "Freshwater wetlands are threaded throughout Westchester, and most of the county's undeveloped land serves important wetlands functions."
Clearer than anything ever said before, the last half of this statement highlights the extent to which "environmentalism" is being used to stop development of all land that is still vacant throughout the county.


Gustave Dammin, Pathologist, 80; Authority on Organ Transplants
Gustave J. Dammin, a pathologist who helped in the first successful human kidney transplant and also did important research on Lyme disease and babesiosis, died Friday in Boston.
Dr.
Dammin, a resident of Weston, Mass., was 80 years old.
His death, at Brigham and Women's Hospital, was caused by complications of prostate cancer, his family said.


Corrections
The Talking column on Sept. 29, about buyers' deposits in home sales, misidentified an escrow company in Rockville Centre, L.I.
It is Escrow Services of New York.


Teacher Centers Trying to Stay Afloat
Although severely crippled by total loss of state funds this year, local teacher centers are open an dplanning next years strategies for a line in the legislative budget.
Some of the county's 12 teacher centers are treading water, keeping their operations to a minimum as they hope for a restoration of $21.5 million to 111 centers statewide, which was eliminated during last spring's budget negotiations.
Other local centers are continuing some programs with staff reductions and with none of the innovative services that many teachers say have revitalized their profession during the last decade.
Teacher Resource and Computer Training Centers were created in 1984 by an amendment to the State Education Law.
The legislation, which extends through next June, enabled new and existing teacher-training programs to apply yearly for state funds, which were awarded to centers submitting proposals judged to be the best.
Other Sources of Funds
The centers are also financed by school districts, teachers, unions and community groups seeking to keep teachers abreast of their field with workshops, seminars, and courses and consultant programs.
Many of the courses are led by teachers themselves in an atmosphere they describe as convivial.
The programs are voluntary but enable teachers to earn inservice credits from their school districts as well as to fulfill the demands of new technologies and curriculums.
Courses, which range from new approaches in reading and writing to desktop publishing, may be held in the centers or in an instructor's regular school classroom.
If the class is for inservice or college credit - many courses meet the requirements of local colleges - teachers may have homework in the form of special projects or papers.
Called Education's R and D
Each center has its own policy board, which sets fee schedules and creates programs.
There have also been programs for school administrators.
Dr.
Anthony L. Mazzullo, Superintendent of the Greenburgh 7 School District, described teacher centers as the "research and development arm" of the educational network and added, "No corporation or organization can function without research and development."
Dr.
Christine Casey, the administrator for special education in Greenburgh 7, said professional teacher centers were vital, because college and university teacher-training programs "do less and less in specifics and more and more in philosophy and theory."
She added that Greenburgh 7 would use its own grant aid to assist the Westchester Teacher Center, based in the Woodlands High School complex here and serving the Ardsley, Elmsford, Hastings-on-Hudson, Dobbs Ferry, Irvington, and Greenburgh 7 school districts.
In particular, Dr.
Casey said, Greenburgh 7 would pay for training new special-education teachers in curriculum management and training inexperienced teachers in working with special-education students.
Center Is Limping but Still Going
Judith Schwartz, director of the Scarsdale Teachers Institute, said teacher centers provided a systematic approach to development.
Otherwise, she said, 'It's catch as catch can for teachers, who may find no support for their efforts."
Ms.
Schwartz described her own center as limping but still offering courses after having lost $114,000 in state aid.
She said that "less than one-half of 1 percent is spent on professional growth in education, while R and D in corporations can be more than 10 percent."
Many have wondered how "A New Compact for Learning," the state's latest educational plan - which was recently signed in White Plains by Dr.
Thomas Sobol, the Commissioner of Education, Gov.
Mario Cuomo and others - can succeed without financial support for teacher development.
Some legislators are said to be upset by the cut in funds and have earmarked their own special project funds for teacher centers in their districts.
Yet even lawmakers with a strong interest in education, like State Senator Suzi Oppenheimer of Mamaroneck, seemed resigned to the teacher-center cutbacks. 'I fought for the funds, but these are lean fiscal times," Mrs Oppenheimer said. "I hope they can continue with less resources."
State Senator Nicholas A. Spano of Yonkers said: "It was all we could do to preserve the basic funding for our schools. We couldn't restore school aid for the basic district needs and still preserve the teacher centers." Choosing Teachers or Centers
What it came down to, Mr.
Spano added, was a "choice between teachers and teacher centers."
Dr.
Mazzullo of Greenburgh said, however, that teacher centers invigorate the whole process of education.
"There is a direct correlation between staff development and student performance, although I'm not sure it's measurable," Dr.
Mazzulllo said.
"Teachers who feel productive and part of a team communicate that feeling to the students in the classroom."
Janice Ruotolo, an Ardsley teacher who heads the Westchester Teacher Center policy board, called the state's teacher-center program "the most important thing" that has happened to education.
"We don't want to see it die," she added.
Examples of Cuts
The 12-year-old Westchester Teacher Center lost $189,750 in state funds, but its director, Edith Winthrop, continues in her job with one full-time and two part-time assistants.
Mrs.
Winthrop said a full-time position in science and technology programming had been eliminated, as had an incentives and awards program, teacher-initiated project grants, training for increased teacher responsibility as called for in "A New Compact For Learning," a computer program for science teachers and consultants' fees.
Most important, she said, is that "we don't have funding to go into the schools and do hands-on demonstrations in classrooms."
"That's how the students will lose," Mrs.
Winthrop said, adding that teachers who believed that new strategies would "never work in my classroom' benefited the most from consultants' visits to the schools. Ms. Winthrop said she wouldn't know the full extent of the center's loss until "teachers start requesting things and I have to say, 'I can't help you."'
The Westchester Teacher Center also receives funds from the teachers' union, which doubled its contributions this year to $20 a teacher, and from member school districts, which pay $9 a pupil.
Mrs.
Winthrop described corporate support as "helpful but very competitive" and hard to count on.
The center has raised the fees for its after-school courses, which teachers pay for themselves.
Mrs.
Winthrop said that any profits made from the courses, which are offered by the center's self-sustaining Teacher Institute, would go toward running the center.
Grants Still Available
Grants of up to $500 for special projects are still available to teachers in Westchester and Putnam Counties through the Westchester Education Coalition, in the second year of a three-year grant totaling $150,000 from the Reader's Digest Foundation.
Shirley Mow, exectuve director of the White Plains-based coalition, said the Westchester Teacher Center had been asked to run workshops to help teachers in writing proposals.
Dr.
Helen Hartle, who directs staff development in the teaching office of the State Department of Education, called on communities to keep teacher centers "visible and viable" and to "work through the political structure" for a restoration of funds.
Calling the cuts "tragic," she said school baords, parent associations and administrative groups should join with teachers in any future lobbying effort.
Laurel Woolf, an Ardsley teachers and former head of the Westchester Teacher Center policy board, agreed that legislators "don't hear us" when teachers alone seek support.
She praised teacher centers for nurturing a decision-making power in teachers that had long lain dormant.
"The really wonderful thing about our center is that the superintendent helped us develop our power and leadership," Mrs.
Woolf said.
"He let us know there were certain things we could do that we weren't even aware of."
"There was a system that encouraged collegiality and gave us the opportunity to meet and share," she added.
"The superintendents became the mentors. They really stepped back and gave us the ball."


In the Nation; An Alienated Public
Rubber checks written by members of the House, unpaid bills at the Congressional dining room, Capitol Hill parking tickets "fixed," the mess the Senate made of the Clarence Thomas nomination -- all have fed public disquiet and contributed to the growing movement for term limitation.
That disquiet, however, is neither recent nor momentary, and even some of the most discontented citizens do not consider term limitation the best answer to their concerns.


Corrections
A report and a picture caption on Sept. 29 about the wedding of Amanda Berson misidentified the bridegroom.
He is Stephen Thorp; Richard Thorp is his father.


3 Black Church Groups to House AIDS Patients
Three black church groups representing 150 congregations in Brooklyn, Queens and Manhattan will provide housing for people with AIDS under New York City contracts in the first organized effort by black churches to deliver AIDS-related services, officials announced on Friday.
The involvement of black churches in the fight against AIDS has been gradual and hampered by theological difficulties in addressing an epidemic that affects mostly homosexuals and intravenous drug users.
But black ministers say more and more churches are being moved to action by the pervasiveness of AIDS in the black community.
The three groups -- Southeast Queens Clergy for Community Empowerment, Harlem Churches for Community Improvement and the Association of Brooklyn Clergy for Community Development -- will each provide 20 apartments and support services like substance abuse counseling for homeless families and single people infected with the AIDS virus.
The 22-month contracts, each for $847,000, were announced at a news conference by Mayor David N. Dinkins at City Hall.
The 60 units, which are expected to be opened within six months, will join 430 already provided by other social service groups at sites scattered around the city.
Blacks account for 35 percent of the 33,580 AIDS cases reported in New York City through June, even though they make up only 25 percent of the population.  'Devastated by This Disease'
"AIDS is a medical problem that needs to be treated with compassion," said the Rev.
Preston R. Washington, president of the Harlem group.
"We have counseled so many families in our communities that have been devastated by this disease that we feel it's our responsibility to reach out and support these families."


Good News for Thomas
Exploratory surgery found no damage to the right shoulder of Chicago White Sox first baseman FRANK THOMAS.
Dr.
FRANK JOBE, who performed arthroscopic surgery on Thomas's shoulder Friday morning in Los Angeles, found some looseness in the joint, but no tears or other evidence of damage.
Thomas will start an off-season strengthening program for the shoulder and should be fine by spring training, the White Sox trainer, HERM SCHNEIDER, said. (AP)


The Many Pros and Cons of the 55-M.P.H. Speed Limit
In a Forum page article on Sept. 29, Donald L. Pevsner proposed raising the 55 mile-an-hour national speed limit on Interstate highways.
He argued that the limit, set during the oil crisis of the early 1970's, is retained because it is a source of income for states, insurance companies and makers of radar-detection equipment.
He suggested raising the Interstate speed limit to 70 m.p.h. except in congested urban areas and in unsafe terrain.
Some of the letters received in response follow.
Think Global


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Brookside 450,000
4 Michael Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; professionally decorated, oak paneling, formal dining room; taxes $7,406.
Edison 210,000
16 Oak Hills Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; new roof, carpeting and kitchen, cedar closets; taxes $4,198.
Hopatcong 144,000
19 Holiday Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old split level; newly painted, new spectic, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,137.
Ramsey 225,000
2 Hillview Terrace
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 33-year-old ranch; full finished basement, 1-year warranty, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,237.
Spotswood 121,000
22 Morton Avenue
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old newly remodeled ranch; full basement, 2 kitchens; taxes $1,443.
Wyckoff 420,000
389 Brownstone Court
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; fireplace, enclosed porch, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $7,868.
OTHER AREAS Rye, N.Y. 328,500
44 Oakwood Avenue
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 66-year-old colonial; enclosed front porch, stone fireplace, breakfast room, den; taxes $4,984.
Darien, Conn. 1,050,000
8 Stonewall Lane  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 140-year-old colonial; 2 terraces, fireplace in master suite, 2.1 acres; taxes $7,291.
East Norwich, L.I. 204,000
963 Route 106  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, den, family room, deck; taxes $3,400.


Sports of The Times; The Braves' Tomahawk Phenomenon
HALF an hour before game time, to the beat of tom-tom drums and to the eerie "oooohh-oooh, oooh-oooh-oooh, ooooh-ooh-ooh" chant of some 50,000 voices, some 50,000 tomahawks began waving.
Up and down, up and down, as if chopping a huge stalk of celery.
"Welcome," intoned the voice on the public-address system, "to Tomahawk Country."


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Soviet nuclear arms reductions referred incorrectly in some editions to the date Presidents Bush and Gorbachev signed the treaty reducing strategic arms.
It was July 31, not in June.


The Double Standard
To the Editor:
"In Cable's World of Boutiques, a Generalist Thrives" (Sept. 15), describes Kay Koplovitz as one of the industry's highest-paid women.
Why are women still only compared to other women?
If this article had profiled Ted Turner I doubt it would have read "Ted Turner is one of the highest-paid white male executives in the industry." It is the old "well for a girl, I guess she is O.K." standard.
CATHERINE O. CORNWALL  Seattle, Sept. 16


Karin Hasbrouck, Ad Director, Weds
Karin Nightingale Hasbrouck, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Wilson Hasbrouck Jr. of New Providence, N.J., was married yesterday in Point Washington, Fla., to Bruce Wiley Watkins, the son of Col. and Mrs.
Franklin Wiley Watkins of Fort Walton Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Harry Houseman performed the Methodist ceremony at the Eden State Gardens.
Mrs.
Watkins, 28 years old, is the advertising director for Cruise Industry News, a New York trade magazine.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is a financial consultant in New York with UBS Asset Management.
Her mother, Astrid Hasbrouck, teaches German at the Deutschesprachschule in New York.


A Young Pianist's Efforts Earn Him a Concert Date
THREE years ago, when Andrew Armstrong was a freshman at New Canaan High School, he was faced with a tough dilemma: to play soccer or Saint-Saens?
He opted for the piano and has emerged victorious at numerous competitions around the country in the last three years.
One of those, the Ruth Carlson Horn-William and Frances Carlson competition for young instrumentalists, sponsored by the Greater Bridgeport Symphony, earned him not only first place and $500 but also an audition to perform with the orchestra.


Zeitgeist Isn't a Snap To Capture
"The Rapture" seems to ask: How can you love a God who allows evil in the world?
But "The Rapture" really asks: What does a saved woman wear to the Apocalypse?
The film is the story of a woman who trades in sex for God and is certain that His warning trumpets will sound the end of the world at any minute.
It was taken seriously enough to have been shown at the recent New York Film Festival, and most reviewers have praised its daring even when they think it ultimately fails.
But the lessons it teaches are about movies, not morality.
"The Rapture" tries very hard to be a Zeitgeist movie for the 90's, yet it ignores a cardinal rule.
Movies that capture the spirit of the time are born, not made.


TOPSMEAD STATE FOREST; A Cottage Transports Visitors to the 19th-Century Cotswolds
EDITH CHASE bequeathed Topsmead, her 511-acre estate in Litchfield, to Connecticut's park system for "passive recreation." Miss Chase died in 1973, and the public has been welcome since 1986, but visitors still find no swimming, camping, fishing, boating or horseback riding at Topsmead State Forest.
They do get the chance to step back in time to the English Cotswolds of the 19th century and discover an elegantly simple, genteel way of life in a bucolic setting.
"The experience here is different from the experience in a lot of other state parks," said Michael Gundersen, the supervisor at Topsmead (the name means "top of the meadow") since it opened to the public.
Miss Chase "wanted people to enjoy it much the same way she did," he said.
"People can come up here, spread a blanket, have privacy and feel like the place is theirs."
The first clue to Topsmead's special quality is the crest on its entrance sign.
"One of the things I think the State of Connecticut Parks System is very good about is recognizing the individuality of the different facilities," Mr.
Gundersen said.
"They don't come out and say, This is our standard park sign."
Visitors can see how Miss Chase and her two companions, Lucy and Mary Burrell, lived.
On the second and fourth weekends of each month from June through October the house is open for tours from noon to 5 P.M.
No more than 10 people are allowed in the house at once.
The grounds are open daily from 8 A.M. to sunset.
The cottage, a version of an English Tudor-style house typical of the Cotswolds, was built in 1925 on a 16-acre tract originally given to Miss Chase by her father, who was president of Chase Brass Company in Waterbury, where Miss Chase grew up and later spent her winters.
Over the years her investments and shrewd business sense enabled her to acquire surrounding farms and six houses.
Crops for Wild Turkeys
"Four acres around the house are maintained as a formal area," said Mr.
Gundersen, seated in Topsmead's living room.
"Quite a large number of fields are leased to local farmers. The rest -- about 20 percent to 30 percent -- are fields that are cut for hay. The farmers in exchange also plant some areas of wildlife plots -- crops planted for wild turkeys, a lot of grouse, deer, partridges. We also have some coyotes, fox and snowshoe hare. It's mostly woodland and fields here."
In 1917 Miss Chase built a rustic cabin on her first 16 acres.
The current house grew around the cabin, Mr.
Gundersen explained.
"She was adamant about keeping the fireplace and cabin intact," he said, so her architect, Richard Henry Dana Jr., incorporated the first building into the plan for the Cotswold cottage.
"The exterior is stucco and brick, and the wood is cypress," Mr.
Gundersen said.
"They used it because it's extremely rot-resistant. It's not painted and is naturally weathered. The glass is all leaded, the roof is local slate, and the beams are oak."
The furnishings are simple but tasteful, he said, purchased on Miss Chase's trips to England and New York.
"Her goal was to put as many pieces of antique furniture in the house as possible," he said.
"Most of it is 17th-, 18th- and some 19th-century English furniture, made of oak, apple-grain oak, elm and holly."
Pointing to a corner of the living room, Mr.
Gundersen said: "The oldest piece of furniture is that bench over there, dating to 1419, carved with church figures. And over here we have a couple of 17th-century church seats, heavily carved. This table is early 18th century, a gateleg, drop leaf table with a stretcher base. She also had the guest beds and other furniture made to match the house."
Bookshelves in the chintz-decorated living room hold 1,500 volumes reflecting their owner's frequent travels to Europe, the Far East, Egypt and Russia.
Mr.
Gundersen said he planned to catalogue the books this winter.
In the dining room the tour guides are often asked where the fine china is, Mr.
Gundersen said.
"Even though it's a simple mustard yellow, this china is Wedgwood," he said, turning a plate over.
Simple, antique hand-hooked rugs are scattered throughout the house.
Through the dining-room window one can see the dovecote, detached from the main house and added several years later, a two-story, pencil-thin building that served as a gardening shed and guest room.
Mr.
Gundersen said Miss Chase's married guests and male relatives stayed there.
In the last few months Topsmead has been busier than usual.
"We've had to close the gates because the parking lot is at its capacity of 40 cars," he said.
"I don't like to have to do that, but a lot of parks do the same thing. On open weekends lately it averages 80 to 100 people per day. That's comfortable.
"One of the things about Topsmead is that Miss Chase wanted things to be simple: the gardens, the orchard, the furniture, the china. But when you put the whole thing together, it's outstanding."


Corrections
An article last Sunday about miners in Romania misstated the dollar equivalents of amounts given in Romanian lei.
The average monthly wage of the miners is about $53, not $600; the increase pledged to the miners is about $31, not $350, and the pension of the unidentified woman quoted is about $17, not $190.


Kristen Mayer Weds in Darien
Kristen Elizabeth Mayer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Mayer of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to Peter Andrew Otridge, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Brian W. Otridge of Dublin.
The Rev.
Walter Taylor, an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
Luke's Parish.
Mrs.
Otridge, 23 years old, graduated from Tulane University.
She is a bank examiner at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Her father, a former chairman and chief executive of CS First Boston in New York, is the dean of the William E. Simon Graduate School of Business Administration at the University of Rochester.


After 5 Years of Delays, a Dream School Opens in Harlem
When Bertrand Brown, Central Harlem's schools superintendent, set out to open a new school, he also plotted a small revolution in inner-city education.
Dr.
Brown had a vision for a strictly run combination junior and senior high school that would turn New York City teen-agers into candidates for the Ivy League.
Standards would be high, and prospective students and their parents would be interviewed together.
The program would be rich, including a film studio, dance studio and summer leadership camp.


Melville Wakeman Hall; Executive, 87
Melville Wakeman Hall, a fourth-generation member of a New York City real-estate family who had homes in Manhattan and Palm Beach, Fla., died on Friday in Manhattan.
Mr. Hall, 87 years old, died of cancer, his family said.


Review/Television; Many Faces and Crises of Childhood
As a new grandfather (Andrew Louis, age 6 weeks, known to intimates as Utz), I watched the first episodes of "Childhood," expecting that I would pick up enough wisdom to rush over and tell my daughter-in-law all the things she is doing wrong.
She will be disappointed to learn that the much-repeated messages on the seven-hour series that begins tonight at 8 on Channel 13 and at 10 on Channel 49, are that a child's development depends on what he or she is born with and what he or she is born into and that the specifics of what parents do are less important than the spirit in which they do it.
The series undertakes to show how these facts of life are lived out from birth to adolescence in a dozen families in five countries.
The examples it provides of the way universal feelings of parents for their children are expressed in profoundly different settings are by turns illuminating, amusing, moving and tedious, like most baby stories.


Total War Almost Over for Arkansas Papers
With a combination of business acumen, ruthlessness, deep pockets and near obsession with winning, Walter E. Hussman Jr. has made his Arkansas Democrat the dominant paper in Little Rock and seems poised to run the long-dominant Arkansas Gazette out of business.
Since 1974, when his family-run communications company acquired The Democrat, Mr.
Hussman has twice beaten The Gazette in a bitter war for advertising and circulation.


Review/Rock; Getting Some Pop In the Gum
Jesus Jones adds the latest trappings to the basic three-minute pop song.
On Friday night at the Academy, where their music was bolstered by canned instruments and backup vocals, band members jumped around as if the stage was red-hot; Mike Edwards, the band's singer and songwriter, kept teasing the crowd into screaming louder, while Iain Baker spent as much time pushing his keyboard around as he did playing it.
With skillful music and marketing, Jesus Jones has found a place somewhere between hip, obscure collegiate rock and MTV-ready pop-rock.
In the music, hip-hop drumbeats, fat-bottomed bass lines, noisy, echoey guitars and earnest but deniable vocals are new options for pop-song structures that go back at least to the 1960's British Invasion.
Mr.
Edwards's melodies often leap upward, making his voice sound both hopeful and slightly vulnerable.
The most earnest of Jesus Jones's songs, "Right Here, Right Now," about "watching the world wake up from history" in 1990, recently became a No. 1 single.


Developer Seeks Chapter 11
The Landmark Land Company filed for bankruptcy protection on Friday for most of the units it indirectly owns.
The companies placed in bankruptcy, which develop golf-oriented residential and resort communities, are owned by the Oak Tree Savings Bank, a New Orleans-based savings institution that Landmark owns.
The filing, which affects such assets as the Palm Beach Polo and Country Club in Florida, PGA West in California and Kiawah Island off South Carolina, comes after nearly two years of efforts to sell some of the primary real estate assets of Landmark, based in Carmel, Calif., to raise cash for the company's undercapitalized savings and loan unit.


Pump Up Volume, Scoreboard Yells
The Jets' scoreboard operator today may have violated a National Football League rule that forbids egging on fans to make noise when the visitors are about to snap the ball.
In the final quarter of Houston's 23-20 victory, when the Oilers were driving near the Jets' goal, the words "LOUDER" and "I CAN'T HEAR" flashed on the board.


HILL SAID TO PASS A POLYGRAPH TEST
Anita F. Hill's representatives announced today that she had passed a lie detector test intended to bolster the credibility of her allegations of sexual harassment by Judge Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court nominee.
The examination, which took a little more than two hours, was administered today by Paul K. Minor, president of the American International Security Corporation.
Mr.
Minor has worked with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and trained its agents in the use of polygraph tests.


Banks Face Criticism Over Mortgage Loans
The Federal Reserve is expected to show that blacks and other minorities are denied mortgages far more frequently than whites with comparable incomes, in a study to be released next week.
Bankers have been warned to prepare to defend their lending policies.
Business Day, page D1.


Equity Offerings This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
American Adjustable Rate Term Trust (1997), two million shares.
Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood Inc.


Blacks Say the Blood Spilled In the Thomas Case Stains All
Wherever black Americans gathered this past week -- in churches and hair salons, in offices and on college campuses -- they talked of little else but the sexual harassment accusations against Judge Clarence Thomas.
Some said they believed him.
Some said they believed his accuser, Prof.
Anita F. Hill.
But regardless, what stood out was dismay: a sickening feeling that the episode had damaged lives and tarnished reputations far beyond those of the two principals.


Undefeated Saints Toy With Bumbling Eagles
Before the first handoff was made or the first pass was tossed this afternoon, the defensive players for the New Orleans Saints and the Philadelphia Eagles had decided that this encounter would be a pure and personal battle.
The New Orleans unit won the challenge and the Saints won the game, 13-6, then flew home with a 6-0 record and their chests puffing out a little wider.


Junk Bonds Crucial in Executive Life Bids
The selection of a winner in the bidding for the Executive Life Insurance Company will largely ride on whether California regulators feel the sale of the failed insurer should be structured to sever the company from its huge portfolio of high-risk junk bonds, analysts said today.
The eight bids submitted for Executive Life on Friday are complex and will require analysis by the staff of California's Insurance Commissioner, John Garamendi, who seized the Los Angeles-based company in April and is managing its sale.


Rangers Send 3 to Minors
Concerned that ever-changing lineups were leading to erratic performances, Rangers General Manager Neil Smith, demoted defenseman Per Djoos, and forwards Jody Hull and Corey Millen to the club's minor league Binghamton, N.Y., team yesterday.
After the Rangers' second-straight defeat, 5-2, at Hartford on Saturday night, Coach Roger Neilson said the Rangers were carrying too many players on their roster.
The next reassignment could be goaltender Greg Millen.


Julie Silverstein, A Student, Wed
Julie Marice Silverstein, a graduate of the University of Wisconsin who is studying for a master's degree in social work at the University of Michigan, was married yesterday to Dr.
Daniel Stuart Groisser, a resident in dermatology at the University of Michigan Medical Center in Ann Arbor.
Rabbi Hayim Herring performed the ceremony at Beth El Synagogue in St.
Louis Park, Minn.
Mrs.
Groisser, 23 years old, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Silverstein of Minneapolis.
Her father, a neurologist, is the medical director of the Parkinson's Clinic at Methodist Hospital in St.
Louis Park.
Her mother, Sybil Silverstein, is a medical social worker.


States, More Than Ever, Need Federal Help
To the Editor:
I am gratified that New York State government is maintaining a competitive position on state taxes in the region, as you report Sept. 22.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7
A request by the Soviet Union for help in creating an economic reform program was accepted by the leading industrial democracies, the Group of Seven.
The group's deputy finance ministers will visit Moscow in the next few weeks to study Soviet financial difficulties.
Page A1


Miss Urick Wed To Eric Dinallo
Cynthia Anne Urick, a candidate for a master's degree in public administration at New York University, was married yesterday to Eric Robert Dinallo, an associate at the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
The Rev.
John T. Morrow performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Gladstone, N.J.
Mrs.
Dinallo, 24 years old, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony C. Urick of Medfield, Mass.
Her father is a senior investment officer at John Hancock Mutual Life in Boston.


The Rookie Felt Fine Until Pirate Connected
For Mark Wohlers, the ascent -- from the minors to the majors, from baseball adolescence to manhood, from last place to first place along with the rest of the Braves -- had been so rapid for so long that the step onto the mound tonight in the 10th inning didn't take his breath away.
He had no trouble finding oxygen or breathing confidence.
"I felt fine," said the 21-year-old right-handed reliever.
"I felt sure; I felt aggressive."


Dance in Review
Regional Dances of Tibet  Lhamo Folk Opera of Tibet Symphony Space


Elisa N. Harris Has a Wedding
Elisa Nadine Harris, an associate at the law firm of Shea &amp; Gould, and Steven Howard Klein, a vice president at S. L. Green Real Estate, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Cantor David Benedict officiated at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph L. Harris of New York.
Her father is the chief financial officer of the Zeckendorf Company, real-estate developers in New York.
Her mother, Sherry Harris, is a guidance counselor at Massapequa (L.I.) High School.


Arlene West Weds Burt Alimansky
Arlene Patricia West, a psychotherapist and public relations consultant, and Burt Alimansky, the managing director of the Alimansky Capital Group, investment bankers, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Joel S. Goor officiated at the Conservatory Garden in Central Park.
The bride is 39 years old and a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour R. Weisberg of Huntington, L.I.
She changed her name legally and is keeping it.
She graduated from Queens College and the School of Contextual Psychotherapy in San Francisco.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of Peggy's Fabric Outlet Stores, a retail chain on Long Island.


World Economies


Dr. Graciela Finkelstein Is Married
Dr.
Graciela Finkelstein, a resident in pediatrics, and Dr.
Scott Wetzler, an associate professor of psychiatry, both at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, were married yesterday at the Westbury Hotel in New York.
Rabbi Rolando Matalon officiated.
Mrs.
Wetzler, 31 years old, received her undergraduate training and her M.D. from the University of Buenos Aires.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Isaias Finkelstein and Dr.
Romelia Dobryn, both of Buenos Aires, where her father is a psychoanalyst and her mother a dermatologist.


7 Rich Nations To Help Soviets Plan Economy
The leading industrial democracies took a major step today toward helping in the reconstruction of the Soviet economic system and its integration with the West, announcing that they had accepted a plea from Soviet officials to help devise a reform program.
"They have asked us to come be a part of a process that sets up a new system in the Soviet Union," the United States Treasury Secretary, Nicholas F. Brady, said at a press conference after a series of meetings he and other top officials had with senior Soviet financial officials.
"That's a very important statement in my view."


Far Rockaway Journal; Weeds Hide a Precious Patch of Past
Alberto Garcia has been living on New Haven Avenue in Far Rockaway, Queens, for 10 years, but it was news to him that across the street from his apartment building, behind a row of small houses, was an official New York City landmark.
"I don't know anything about it," Mr.
Garcia, a hotel worker, said of the Richard Cornell Graveyard, a cemetery dating from the 17th century.


Abroad at Home; Time of the Assassins
The Republicans on the Senate Judiciary Committee keep asking, skeptically, how Anita Hill could have suffered what she says she did and not filed a complaint of sexual harassment.
Their own behavior is an answer to the question.
The committee hearings show what can happen to a woman who does speak out.
Men will question her motives, her honor, her sanity.
The Republicans have done all that to Professor Hill.


Psychologists Try to Explain Why Thomas and Hill Offer Opposing Views
While the members of the Senate Judiciary Committee and millions of television viewers try to decipher what happenned when Clarence Thomas and Anita F. Hill worked together a decade ago, specialists in psychology are posing a different question in their discussions of the national drama, pitting memory against memory and strong character against strong character.
What, many are asking, do the protagonists believe really happened?
This issue came into sharp focus at today's hearings, with Republicans suggesting that Professor Hill was delusionary and with Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, saying that nobody the committee had heard was qualified to "psychoanalyze" the professor.


Why Getting Tough With China Won't Work; Other Slave Labor
To the Editor:
I agree thoroughly with "Why Reward China's Slave Labor?" (editorial, Sept. 30), which decries import of goods made by prison or slave labor.


CHRONICLE
There were no aliens, swashbucklers or killer sharks at the latest production of the director STEVEN SPIELBERG.
Instead, it was quiet and private on the set.
Mr.
Spielberg married the actress KATE CAPSHAW Saturday night in a ceremony at his Long Island estate.


CHRONICLE
CAROLE NAGENGAST, a research anthropologist at the University of California, Riverside, was named to head the United States unit of Amnesty International.
Ms.
Nagengast, who was praised by the organization for her "expertise and sensitivity," will serve a year as chairwoman of the 400,000-member Amnesty International U.S.A.
She told The Associated Press that as chairwoman of the American unit, she hoped to promote women's rights and the adoption of a single human-rights standard throughout the world.


Alcoa Earnings Drop by 39%
Alcoa, the world's largest aluminum producer, said Friday that its third-quarter earnings dropped 39 percent, in part because of worldwide currency exchange rates and weak demand for fabricated aluminum.
Net income for the Aluminum Company of America totaled $75.9 million, or 88 cents a share, on revenue of $2.5 billion.
That compared with net earnings of $125.1 million, or $1.46 a share, on revenue of $2.69 billion for the third quarter of 1990.


Witnesses for Thomas: Devoted Defense of Judge
The Conspiracy Theory
SENATOR LEAHY: Now, Professor Hill, I think by the feelings of most people here, was a quite believable witness, so now we hear a lot of Judge Thomas's supporters saying that, well, that it must be the press or it's some kind of outside groups who are really the villains in this process.
At least I have telephone calls to my office that seem to be this, and I hear a number of his supporters speaking virtually from the same choir book in that regard.
We even had a suggestion that her testimony was lifted from "The Exorcist." I guess this was the sort of devil-made-me-do-it kind of defense here.


Jill D. Salamon Is Wed to Gregory A. Antonioli
Jill Deborah Salamon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan R. Salamon of Roslyn Heights, L.I., was married yesterday to Gregory Andrew Antonioli, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Antonioli of Los Altos Hills, Calif.
Cantor David Benedict officiated at the North Shore Country Club in Glen Head, L.I., with the Rev.
James Hagan, a Roman Catholic priest, attending.
The bride, 25 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from New York University and received a master's degree in public health from Columbia University.
She is the health education coordinator at Salud para la Gente, a medical clinic in Watsonville, Calif.


A 180 Turn of the Wheel of Fortune Befalls NBC
Only three years ago, NBC was the top, the tower of ratings.
It had won 69 straight weeks in the Nielsen race; it was making $500 million a year in profits.
The fall from those heights has been steep and dizzying.
NBC has not won anything lately.
Its mountain of profits has been swept away.
NBC executives are predicting the network will make no profit at all this television season, completing what amounts to an astonishing magic act: making $500 million disappear.


Mortgage Race Data Show Gap
The Federal Reserve is expected to report that blacks and other minorities are denied mortgages far more frequently than whites with comparable incomes when it releases a study next week.
While the Federal Reserve has not yet made the data public, one of its officials warned a meeting of the American Bankers Association last week that the study would show "dramatic disparities in loan-rejection rates."


Quotation of the Day
"Bankers just don't seem to understand that there are poor people who pay their bills better and faster than some wealthy people. They are still uncomfortable with poor people and people of color." -- Representative Joseph P. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts.  [ D2:2. ]


Jane S. Catler, Lawyer, Weds
Jane Starr Catler and Roger Paul Nober, graduates of Harvard Law School, were married yesterday at Congregation Beth Israel in West Hartford, Conn.
Rabbi Simeon Glaser performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Nober, 27 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton.
A graduate of Harvard University, she is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Catler of West Hartford.
Her father is a sales manager in Hartford for Heat Inc., a heating and air-conditioning company.


John H. Hubbard, Neurosurgeon, 56
Dr.
John H. Hubbard, a neurosurgeon and professor from Ridgewood, N.J., died on Thursday in Cooper Hospital-University Medical Center in Camden, N.J.
He was 56 years old.
Dr.
Hubbard died of head injuries after he fell while vacationing at the New Jersey shore, his family said.


Dorian Brown, Executive, Wed
Dorian Suzanne Brown, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin D. Brown of Reading, Pa., was married yesterday to Dr.
Steven Bernard Haas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Curt J. Haas of Scranton, Pa.
Rabbi Joel Weintraub officiated at the Berkleigh Country Club in Kutztown, Pa.
The bride, 32 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from George Washington University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is a certified public accountant and the vice president of programming and business operations for Showtime Satellite Networks in New York.
Her father, who is retired, owned the National Window Cleaning Company in Reading.
Her mother, also retired, was a reading teacher in the Reading school district.


Dance in Review
'Mozartissimo'  'Suites et Passions' Choreographic Theater of Rennes:The National Center of Brittany Gould Hall


Blue Jays Replay Canadian Sunset
They did it again.
Call it choking, call it gagging or call it the inability to achieve a victory in crucial contests.
No matter how bluntly or softly the description is phrased, it fits the Blue Jays like a worn batting glove.
With their collapse against the Minnesota Twins in the American League Championship Series, the Blue Jays may have cost Manager Cito Gaston his job.
Pat Gillick, the executive vice president, who cobbled together a club with fresh faces to make a dash at the World Series this season, said he was upset that Gaston was ejected from the game after the second inning.


Samayla Deutch Marries R. L. Sigal
Samayla Dodek Deutch and Richard Land Sigal were married yesterday at the Stephen Wise Free Synagogue in New York by Rabbi Balfour Brickner.
The bride, 51 years old, is on leave as a partner in the Boston law firm of Sherburne, Powers &amp; Needham and is serving on the legal staff of the division of liquidation of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in Franklin, Mass.
A graduate of Wellesley College with a law degree from the University of Chicago, she is a daughter of Dr.
Samuel M. Dodek of Washington, an obstetrician and gynecologist, and the late Miriam S. Dodek.


Football's Rating Still Tops on TV
The American pastime it may be, but baseball still fails to outdo the Super Bowl in television ratings.
Football was the champion of Nielsen's 1990-91 ratings season in sports, holding the top six spots.
Game 2 of last year's Oakland-Cincinnati World Series was No. 7.
Small wonder that football -- professional and college -- makes up the single greatest percentage of network sports programming: 22 percent. . . .
Once again, there will be a "morning minyan" for Jewish runners who wish to pray before the New York City Marathon.
PETER BERKOWSKY, a lawyer, started the minyan -- a group of at least 10 Jewish males over the age of 13 that conducts certain prayers -- nine years ago.
"One day a priest came over to me and said, 'How do I get this thing started for a Mass?' " Berkowsky recalled.
"Now, about 1,000 Catholics hold a mass and we've got 100 for a minyan." The 1991 marathon will be run on Nov. 3.


No Headline
The Economy
The Fed is expected to report that blacks and other minorities are denied mortgages far more frequently than whites with comparable income.


Insurance's Grass-Roots Messenger
He talks of "carpet bombing" and "Vietcong" attacks.
But Paul Equale's troops are not soldiers.
They are more than 220,000 insurance agents willing to approach Congress when Mr.
Equale gives the signal.
As chief lobbyist for one of the most powerful and richest interest groups here, Mr.
Equale has been at the center of a number of important issues.
And, so far, he is winning.
Mr.
Equale can strike fear in members of Congress, who remember how several years ago nearly 800 agents -- including at least one for every Congressional district -- swarmed on Congress in a two-day period to prevent banks from entering the insurance business.
Just a reminder of that episode is enough to make many legislators toe Mr.
Equale's line as that same issue receives consideration in the current session. 'They Are The Message'
"My group is well informed and well disciplined," said Mr.
Equale (pronounced ee-KWAL-ee), senior vice president for government affairs of the Independent Insurance Agents of America, in an interview at his Capitol Hill office.
"I'm here to be their messenger. They are the message. And their message is from the grass roots."


QuestionBox
The Browns as Victims
Q.
A listing this summer of the late Paul Brown's coaching record in Cleveland showed that the Browns were 47-4-3 in four years of All-American Conference play before they joined the National Football League in 1950.
Which four teams beat them?


A Nemesis Of Bradley Eyes Florio
Christine Todd Whitman has the best of all political worlds: She is able to campaign for governor as an unannounced candidate, keep her name before the voters, build a statewide organization, oil a fund-raising machine and cloak herself with party loyalty among Republicans officeholders from courthouse to State House -- all without having to take a stand on the issues or criticism from opponents.
She does three to five appearances a week across the state, talking to civic clubs, college classes and political gatherings; writes a newspaper column; acts as host of a radio talk show and runs a political action committee that has raised more than $200,000.


Market Place; The Setback at Convex: Challenge or Catastrophe?
The Convex Computer Corporation will report a big quarterly loss in a few days, and analysts say the company will probably complete 1991 with its first yearly loss since it became profitable in 1983, a year after it was organized.
Convex, which makes high-performance computers priced mostly between $300,000 and $2 million, was hit during the summer with numerous problems: delays in fine-tuning important new products, the slumping market for high-performance computers and its first head-on confrontation with the colossus of supercomputing, Cray Research Inc.


Devils' First Loss Was Deserved
Coach Tom McVie of the Devils was aware that the Philadelphia Flyers, for the first time in their history, had no victories in their first four games.
He warned his players that the Flyers would play his Devils in tonight's game like "a wounded animal."
Instead of motivating themselves from Philadelphia's anger, the Devils were easy prey for the Flyers, losing a 4-2 decision at the Spectrum for their first setback after four victories in the young season.


Florida Trooper Arrests Camacho
Hector Camacho, the three-time world champion boxer, was arrested on a charge of driving with a suspended license after being stopped for driving too slowly on an interstate highway, police officers here said today.


Bond Market Closed Today
The nation's bond market is closed today, as well as all banks, in observance of the Columbus Day holiday.
The stock markets are open.


Training Ship Takes On Visitors


Total War Almost Over for Arkansas Papers
With a combination of business acumen, ruthlessness, deep pockets and near obsession with winning, Walter E. Hussman Jr. has made his Arkansas Democrat the dominant paper in Little Rock and seems poised to run the long-dominant Arkansas Gazette out of business.
Since 1974, when his family-run communications company acquired The Democrat, Mr.
Hussman has twice beaten The Gazette in a bitter war for advertising and circulation.


Columbus Day
NEW YORK Parade: Begins today at 11:30 at 46th Street and Fifth Avenue, going north on Fifth Avenue to 86th Street.
Government offices: Federal, state and municipal are closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed.
Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.
Sanitation: No collections or street cleanings.
Schools: Closed.
Financial markets: Open.
Transportation: Regular schedules.
NEW JERSEY Government offices: Federal and state closed; municipal option to close.
Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Banks: Closed.
Schools: Local option.
Transportation: Regular schedules.
CONNECTICUT Government offices: Federal, state and municipal closed.
Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Banks: Closed.
Schools: Closed.
Transportation: Regular schedules.


Treasury to Auction Three Issues of Bills
A total of $21.6 billion of three- and six-month Treasury bills are scheduled to be auctioned tomorrow.
The auctions, usually held on Mondays, were rescheduled this week because of the Columbus Day holiday today.
On Thursday, the Treasury will offer $12.5 billion of one-year bills.
By late in the day on Friday, the outstanding three-month bills were being bid at 4.94 percent, and six-month bills at 4.99 percent.


Robbers Rape 3 Girls in Inwood Home
Three young girls were raped by two armed men who pushed their way into an upper Manhattan apartment, tied up the five children and one man who were there and ransacked the home, the police said yesterday.
The oldest of the girls -- a 17-year-old, who was in the apartment with her sister, 12, and another girl, 14 -- was led at gunpoint through the apartment Saturday night as the robbers demanded that she point out her family's valuables, her father said yesterday.


Simpson Refuses to Make Public Letters He Says Criticize Hill
Senator Alan K. Simpson declined today to make public any of the derogatory correspondence he said he had received about Anita F. Hill.
He also declined to be more specific about what the material included.
A lawyer from Tulsa, Okla., whose letter was the only one Mr.
Simpson specifically cited, said in an interview today that the Senator seemed to have mischaracterized her letter.


PARADE OF WITNESSES SUPPORT HILL'S STORY, THOMAS'S INTEGRITY
The Senate Judiciary Committee wrestled until early today with the veracity of the sexual harassment accusation against Judge Clarence Thomas, as friends of his accuser, Anita F. Hill, swore that she complained as long as 10 years ago that he had made unwanted advances.
Four friends of Professor Hill, who teaches at the University of Oklahoma law school, swore that she had told them long before Judge Thomas was nominated to the Supreme Court that he had pressed her for dates and made suggestive remarks with such intensity that she resigned as his assistant at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 1983.
Corroboration for Hill
After the four witnesses for Professor Hill testified, four women who had worked for Judge Thomas when he was director of the E.E.O.C. appeared before the committee to defend him.
Their testimony, as well as that of additional witnesses for both Judge Thomas and Professor Hill lasted into the early morning hours today.  [ Excerpts from the hearing appear on pages A12-15. ]


Bronx Man Admits 30 Robberies
A 27-year-old Bronx man confessed to more than 30 robberies in the subways, trains and streets of Manhattan and the Bronx after being arrested yesterday by the Metro North police, a police spokesman said.
He was charged last evening with three of the robberies.
Curtis Clark, of 3438 Fenton Avenue, in the Williamsbridge section, has been "the biggest one-man crime wave we have had in a while," said Sgt.
Kevin McConville, a spokesman for the Metro North Commuter Railroad police.
Most, if not all, of his victims were women, he said.


With Cadigan Injured, Jets Running Game Stalls
It would have been immodest for Dave Cadigan to say that when he went out of the game, the Jets' rushing game went with him, so he didn't say it.
"I have no idea what happened after I got hurt because I was inside taking care of my injury," said the left guard, who severely injured his left ankle blocking for the game's first score, a 3-yard run by Brad Baxter that put the Jets up 7-0 in the first period.
"But I don't know if that's what hurt our running game because we have so many guys who can play there. All I know is I was driving my guy and somebody fell onto the side of it. I was down on the field for a long time. It was kind of scary."


Seeking Electoral Edge, Parties Court the Young
Chris Gabriel, a 20-year-old college student who likes to vote and likes to work for political candidates, is much in demand as the 1992 campaign begins.
Democrats and Republicans, eager to build or solidify a firm place among what could be a crucial new bloc of potential voters, are busy romancing young people, a historically fickle group that has drifted into the Republican ranks in recent years.


Nancy J. Rosenfeld, Lawyer, Marries
Nancy Jean Rosenfeld, a lawyer, and Dr.
Adam Gaston Tattelbaum, a resident in surgery at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, were married yesterday.
The bridegroom's father, Rabbi Harvey M. Tattelbaum, officiated at the Codman House in Lincoln, Mass.
The bride, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Rosenfeld of Westwood, Mass.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is to join the New York law firm of Coudert Brothers later this month.
Her father retired as president of Dan Wesson Arms, a handgun manufacturer in Monson, Mass.


A 180 Turn of the Wheel of Fortune Befalls NBC
Only three years ago, NBC was the top, the tower of ratings.
It had won 69 straight weeks in the Nielsen race; it was making $500 million a year in profits.
The fall from those heights has been steep and dizzying.
NBC has not won anything lately.
Its mountain of profits has been swept away.
NBC executives are predicting the network will make no profit at all this television season, completing what amounts to an astonishing magic act: making $500 million disappear.


One of Television's Shapers Is Distressed by the Outcome
A white-coated waiter served diet drinks last week in Aaron Spelling's office, which seemed as big as a basketball court.
Puffing on his pipe, the multimillionaire producer glided across the thick beige carpet, sat down and said the television he helped create was now leaving him distressed, even angry.
"I watch CNN a lot," said Mr.
Spelling, immaculate in a herring-bone jacket and a striped shirt without a tie.
"I watch local news. I love 'Cheers.' But I miss so many of the old shows, the 'Barney Millers.'


4 Killed and 2 Are Wounded in Queens Rampage
A 47-year-old neighborhood eccentric went on a rampage with a rifle at his Queens home early yesterday and, leaving his father and three other men dead and two neighbors critically wounded, broke into a Nassau County home nearby, took a retired couple hostage and held off a cordon of police firepower all day.
In a drama that the police said began with killings and a manhunt and brought terror to a quiet neighborhood of elegant homes and leafy streets, the rifleman, Andrew T. Brooks Jr., holed up at a home in Lake Success, L.I., fired on a gardener, punctuated the afternoon with gunshots at the police and talked sporadically by telephone with hostage negotiators.


5,000 at Rally Join to Protest Anti-Semitism
In the first large demonstration in Manhattan by mainstream Jewish groups since the racial disturbances in Crown Heights last summer, about 5,000 people attended a rally in Madison Square Park yesterday to protest anti-Semitism.
But a small group of extremist demonstrators, yelling through bullhorns to make themselves heard over the crowd, tried to shout down speakers at the rally, asking, "Where were you during Crown Heights?"


Citibank to Cut Its NOW Rates
Citibank, the nation's biggest bank, said Friday that it would halve the interest rate it pays on its NOW checking accounts in response to lower money-market interest rates.
At the same time, the bank said it was increasing the monthly service charge on regular checking accounts to recoup the rising costs of providing services.


Bias Testing Teams Should Have Rewards
To the Editor:
Re "U.S. Is Asked to Expand Undercover Bias Testing" (news article, Sept. 26): Greater use of undercover testers to check for racial bias (for example, using paired black and white applicants) would largely eliminate the need to base discrimination suits solely on a business's failure to meet statistical goals (which some call quotas), but a call for the Government to finance the testing overlooks other choices.


Dinkins Vows Study Of Hospitals
Mayor David N. Dinkins intends to order a "head-to-toe" review of the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation by a panel of outside experts in the wake of recent incidents involving questionable treatment of patients, Mr.
Dinkins's press secretary, Leland T. Jones, said last night.
In the most recent incident, a 73-year-old Harlem Hospital patient who was reported missing from his room for a week was found dead early Saturday in a hospital steam closet.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising/ADDENDA; Molson U.S.A. Switches To Angotti, Thomas
Molson Breweries U.S.A., Reston, Va., has assigned a $5 million account withdrawn from AC&amp;R Advertising, New York, to Angotti, Thomas, Hedge Inc., New York.
Among the imported beer brands moving to Angotti are Foster's, John Courage, Kronenbourg and Kirin.
The latter returns to Angotti after leaving in February, when Molson consolidated its agency roster.


Accuser of Accuser Is Accused
Accusations within accusations erupted early today in a heated exchange at the Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on the Supreme Court nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas.
John D. Doggett 3d, who was a special assistant to Mr.
Thomas at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, testified that Anita F. Hill, who accused Judge Thomas of sexual harassment, had fantasized Mr.
Doggett's interest in her.


The Task Gets Tougher
The Clarence Thomas hearings have unleashed such emotion, such primal and political forces, that senators and the public have had some trouble concentrating on the subject: Who's telling the truth about sexual harassment, the Supreme Court nominee or Anita Hill?
That issue has become harder to determine, not easier, with every witness before the Senate Judiciary Committee.
If only some witness could produce the clinching evidence, the ultimate corroboration, the missing fingerprint for one side or the other.
But what three days of intense national drama have done instead is to enhance the credibility of both accuser and accused.


Total War Almost Over for Arkansas Papers
With a combination of business acumen, ruthlessness, deep pockets and near obsession with winning, Walter E. Hussman Jr. has made his Arkansas Democrat the dominant paper in Little Rock and seems poised to run the long-dominant Arkansas Gazette out of business.
Since 1974, when his family-run communications company acquired The Democrat, Mr.
Hussman has twice beaten The Gazette in a bitter war for advertising and circulation.


Caryn R. Tager, A Lawyer, Wed
Caryn Renee Tager, an associate at Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, and David Brian Stafford, an associate at Battle Fowler, both New York law firms, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Nachum Muschel officiated at Temple Beth El in Stamford, Conn.
Mrs.
Stafford, 26 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Tager of Suffern, N.Y.
Her father is the president of Forward Industries, an advertising company in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Helen Tager, is a medical records consultant.


Man Thrown to Death in Subway
A Manhattan man was pushed to death on a subway platform yesterday in a struggle with a mugger, the transit police said.
A suspect was arrested hours later on the street just above the station.
The victim, Leandro Roseboro, 59 years old, of 206 West 114th Street, was in the station at 116th Street and Eighth Avenue about 6:30 A.M., when he was approached by a man who tried to rob him, the police said.
When he resisted, the mugger shoved Mr.
Roseboro into the path of a northbound C train entering the station.
He died instantly.


Pirates Draw Even Thanks to LaValliere
Overcoming their inability to hit with runners in scoring position and Barry Bonds's inability to hit in any situation, the Pittsburgh Pirates eked out a 10-inning 3-2 victory over the Atlanta Braves tonight and tied the National League Championship Series at two games each.
Mike LaValliere, whose playing time has been limited by Atlanta's parade of left-handed pitchers, lined a pinch-hit single to right-center field off rookie Mark Wohlers with two out in the 10th, climaxing a comeback made necessary by a 2-0 lead the Braves grabbed in the first inning.


M.J. Hutchinson Weds D.F. Sand
Mary Jocelyn Hutchinson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul K. Hutchinson of Tampa, Fla., was married yesterday in Pound Ridge, N.Y., to David Franklin Sand, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Leonard B. Sand of New York.
Rabbi Mordecai Genn performed the ceremony at Conant Hall with the Rev.
Gary Seibert, a Roman Catholic priest, attending.
Mrs.
Sand, who is 26 years old and is known as Jocelyn, is a researcher at World Monitor Television in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of Sun Trust Banks in Tampa.
Her mother, Jacqueline Sirot Hutchinson, is a real-estate broker with the Smith &amp; Associates Investment Company in Tampa.


Washington Voters Weigh Aid of Doctors in Suicide
Early next month voters in this state will decide an issue that has never appeared on a ballot in the United States: Should doctors be allowed to kill terminally ill patients who have asked to die?
The ballot measure, Initiative 119, would make Washington State the first jurisdiction in the Western World to legalize euthanasia.
And it raises the possibility of overturning a 2,000-year-old tenet of medical tradition.


Dance in Review
Dana Reitz  Movement Research Judson Memorial Church 55 Washington Square South Manhattan


CHRONICLE
CARMEL QUINN, who sings Irish songs, is philosophical about performing at benefits.
"If it's a good dinner, the guests get logy and the act suffers," she said.
"If it's a bad dinner, they get cranky and the act suffers. So I just put my faith in God, say a couple of prayers and do my best."
That approach will come in handy on Wednesday, when she is to sing for six cardinals: JOHN CARDINAL O'CONNOR of New York; ANTHONY CARDINAL BEVILACQUA of Philadelphia; JAMES CARDINAL HICKEY of Washington; BERNARD CARDINAL LAW of Boston; G. EMMETT CARDINAL CARTER of Toronto, and MIGUEL CARDINAL OBANDO y BRAVO of Nicaragua.


Amy B. Spector and Steven A. Adler Are Wed
Amy Beth Spector, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Spector of Hollis Hills, Queens, was married yesterday to Steven A. Adler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Isaac Adler of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Stanley Platek and Rabbi Abraham Kelman, the bride's uncle, officiated at the Hewlett-East Rockaway Jewish Center in East Rockaway, L.I.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Stony Brook and received a master's degree in social work from Hunter College.
She is a claims supervisor for the Commercial Union Insurance Company in Jericho, L.I.


Robert Bishop Memorial
A memorial service for Robert Bishop, the former director of the Museum of American Folk Art, is to take place on Thursday at 9:30 A.M. at Alice Tully Hall, Broadway at 65th Street.
The program and the reception following it at the museum's Eva and Morris Feld Gallery, Columbus Avenue between 65th and 66th Streets, are open to the public.
Mr.
Bishop died on Sept. 22 St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan of AIDS-related lymphoma.
He was was 53 years old.


In Kuwait, No Human-Rights Progress
To the Editor:
"Bush Gives Praise to Kuwait After Meeting With the Emir" (news item, Oct. 2) quotes President Bush as applauding "Kuwait's great progress in reconstruction, physical and political" in the aftermath of the war against Iraq.
This praise, unaccompanied by any acknowledgment of human-rights abuses in Kuwait, must ring hollow to the 250,000 Bedoons, or stateless Arabs, who face the threat of deportation when their residency permits expire Nov. 15.
Although most Bedoon families have lived in Kuwait for generations, the Kuwaiti Government has never recognized them as citizens.


Mental Hospital Expects to Fail Review
Any day now, a team of inspectors will arrive at the Pilgrim Psychiatric Center here to decide whether the center meets Federal standards and continues to qualify for Federal funds.
Administrators and staff members fully expect it to fail and they blame New York State, which has drastically cut the budget for mental health care in the last year.
The Pilgrim Psychiatric Center, say those who work here, is not giving patients acceptable care.


Twins Are In Jays Fall On Heroics By Puckett
In a game that continues to produce miracles and surprises big and small, the Minnesota Twins continue to add their own chapter to baseball history.
Continuing to defy all the prognosticators as well as the history of the game, the Twins, spurred on by their catalyst and inspirational leader, Kirby Puckett, won a pennant today by upending the shellshocked Toronto Blue Jays in an 8-5 comeback victory in the fifth game of the American League Championship Series.


There's Money In Masochism
Whatever happened to mall-walking?
Just when joggers discovered that it's O.K. to walk instead, the fitness world unleashed the triathlon: you swim, then you bike, then you run.


P. Rothenberg Weds
Pamela V. Rothenberg, an associate in the Washington law firm of David &amp; Hagner, and Mark T. Ottinger, an associate at Davidson &amp; Associates, an architectural and construction analysis firm in Bethesda, Md., were married yesterday in a civil ceremony at the Tournament Players Club at Avenel in Potomac, Md.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts


Metro Matters; An Eloquent Man And His Musings On the Presidency
For a man of his words, Mario M. Cuomo spends a lot of time explaining why he has been misunderstood.
The Governor's musings evoke a political version of "Rashomon," leaving some listeners hearing only what they want to believe.
On Friday, his wife, Matilda, left a breakfast for potential campaign contributors with the distinct impression that Mr.
Cuomo had said he intended to run for Governor again.


Showing AIDS Film Can Help Save Lives
To the Editor:
In 1986, as New York's City's first assistant comissioner for AIDS, I was technical advisor for an AIDS film specifically aimed at teen-agers.
This film was frank and honest.
It was also internationally acclaimed, award winning and blocked from viewing in the city school system.


A 180   Turn of the Wheel of Fortune Befalls NBC
Only three years ago, NBC was the top, the tower of ratings.
It had won 69 straight weeks in the Nielsen race; it was making $500 million a year in profits.
The fall from those heights has been steep and dizzying.
NBC has not won anything lately.
Its mountain of profits has been swept away.
NBC executives are predicting the network will make no profit at all this television season, completing what amounts to an astonishing magic act: making $500 million disappear.
Behind NBC's fall are a range of misfortunes: bad programming decisions that left the network relying on old hits too long; an upheaval in the network television system that diminished NBC more than any competitor could have, and unfavorable regulatory decisions that kept NBC from maximizing the profits it was once making.
As network television saw cable and other forces erode its power in the last five years, NBC suffered most.
It had the most to lose.
NBC was victimized partly by its own success.
As it sought to retain its hit shows, it was forced into deals with producers that limited many of its options.
Commitments were made to buy other shows from successful producers and studios, and deals were made that gave producers authority to say where their shows could be placed on the schedule.
With all those hits and deals in place, NBC lost opportunities both to add some shows and to put new shows from other producers in the most advantageous places on its schedule.
Senior NBC executives have said over the last two years that the network had "lost control" of its prime-time schedule.
Some of the reversal was cyclical: the Fox Broadcasting Company came along, and CBS came up.
But NBC's precipitous decline in the prime-time ratings has continued unchecked this fall.
While CBS and Fox have gained viewers this season, NBC is down 8 percent from a year ago.
Although not yet relegated to the lowest rung on the three-step network ladder, thanks to an equally sluggish start by ABC, signs are overwhelmingly negative for NBC.
Its highest-rated programs are mostly old and fading.
From the early ratings returns for its new series this fall, NBC seems to have failed to find the hits it needed to arrest the decline.
Indeed, several of the new shows, including four on Sunday night, have been unusually loud flops.
Compounding the grim picture, "The Cosby Show," one of the network's dwindling store of dependable hits, will disappear next season.
If anything, the news is worse on other fronts.
NBC is a poor third in daytime ratings; this fall the network had to give an hour of time in the daytime schedule back to its stations because it simply could not program it successfully.
A new daytime series, called "Cover to Cover," was canceled last week.
Saturday morning is another story of retreat.
NBC is a poor third again, prompting the network to consider another drastic step: taking cartoons off Saturday morning.
It may replace some or all the children's shows, traditionally the staple of Saturday mornings, with a block of news programming.
Such a move would also cover some of the overhead costs for NBC News, which continues to lose money.
Another failure was the two NBC News shows in prime time, "Real Life With Jane Pauley" and "Expose." Last week, NBC said the two series would be removed from the air until March, when they would be combined into a more conventional hourlong news-magazine program.
NBC's evening newscast has been reasonably competitive with CBS's for second place behind ABC's big lead in the evening news, although CBS has edged back ahead of NBC in the newscast ratings lately.
But CBS has two successful shows in prime time, "60 Minutes" and "48 Hours." ABC also has two, "20/20," and "Prime Time Live." With no success in prime time, NBC must be ranked third in news as well.
And while late-night programming is still an NBC strength, there are potential gremlins lurking there, too.
Johnny Carson will leave the "Tonight" show in May; no one is certain how the audience will respond in the long run to his successor, Jay Leno.
And NBC's other late-night king, David Letterman, is known to be unhappy with the network over not getting the job to replace Mr.
Carson.
ABC last week freed up its late-night slot until sometime next year, when Mr.
Letterman's contract conveniently runs out.
It could dangle a midnight spot (instead of 12:30 A.M. on NBC) or a Hollywood studio could propose a lucrative deal for a syndicated show.
Either could be a way for Mr.
Letterman to redress any lingering grievances with NBC.
Inside NBC, the accumulation of bad news has had a predictable effect.
Morale, many staff members said last week, is abysmal.
The network has already been through several rounds of layoffs, and more may be instituted as the effects of this year's losing performances sink in.
Las week, Robert C. Wright, the president of NBC, sent a memo to employees indicating that a department - prodcution operations - would be eliminated, with its function folded into three other NBC division.
The decision to decentralize NBC's production operations is expected to result in about 100 layoffs.
Mr.
Wright's memo offended some staff members by referring to the fact that the network's "best" employees would be retained.
One NBC staff member, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said, "It feels like I'm taking part in the death of a network."
Joseph Rutledge, the NBC vice president for corporate affairs, said the blame for the network's recent problems had to be spread around to all the many factors - recession, changing network environment, plain bad luck - and could not simply be laid at the feet of the current management.
He added that Mr.
Wright had stated firmly that the General Electric Company, which owns NBC, had no intention of selling it.
One executive, who has worked at two networks, said last week that the television business had changed drastically but one thing remained the same: "The ratings are a scale. As one goes up, somebody has to go down."
Right now, that somebody is NBC.


Rain Forest Project in Africa Stirs Debate at World Bank
The World Bank is financing a forestry project in West Africa that could lead to the eviction of several hundred thousand people from their homes in a tropical rain forest, a memorandum from the bank's environmental policy section says.
The memorandum, obtained from a person critical of the institution's environmental record, has caused a ruckus within the international lending institution and brought angry denials from its Africa lending division.
The dispute coincides with the bank's release of a report praising its environmental record, which has come under heavy attack in recent years from environmental groups.


Excerpts From Judiciary Committee's Interview of Angela Wright
Following are excerpts from an interview conducted by staff members of the Senate Judiciary Committee with
Angela Wright that was provided tonight by the
committee:
Q. I would also like to ask you to state where you are currently employed. . . .


Columbus on a Pedestal
Whether Christopher Columbus is viewed as a hero or a scoundrel, he can also be viewed on more New York City pedestals than anyone else who never even paid a visit.
Only George Washington, who lived in the city as President, is exalted by more statuary.
Best known of the six New York Columbuses is the one in Columbus Circle.
But there are two more in Manhattan, one each in Brooklyn and Queens, and a Depression-era bust in the Bronx, sculpted as a W.P.A.
Art Project.


Kay Gardiner, Federal Prosecutor, Marries Peter Bergmann, a Lawyer
Kay Kirstine Gardiner, an assistant United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York in Manhattan, and Peter George Bergmann, a partner at the New York law firm of Cadwalader Wickersham &amp; Taft, were married yesterday at the Whitehall Club in New York.
Judge Roger J. Miner of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Gardiner graduated from the University of Nebraska and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank C. Gardiner of Omaha.
Her father is a sales representative for Ancona Brothers, an Omaha wholesale food distributor.


After Braves Get Lead, Pirate Pitchers Recover
When the Braves scored two quick runs in the first inning tonight, the Pirates were wondering if another 10-3 loss might develop.
But over the last nine innings of the Pirates' 3-2 victory in 10 innings, Randy Tomlin, Bob Walk and Stan Belinda combined for a three-hit shutout that helped square the National League Championship Series at 2-2.
"I just told myself, 'Calm down, keep the ball down,' " Tomlin was saying now.
"The pitches they hit in the first inning were up."


Right-Wing Attacks Worry Prague
Czechoslovaks who pride themselves on their non-violent passage from Communism to democracy are facing an unsettling wave of brutality by right-wing gangs against gypsies and foreigners living in Czechoslovakia.
The attacks, mostly by gangs of local skinheads, come as waves of attacks against foreigners continue in neighboring Germany.
As in formerly Communist eastern Germany, the authorities here say, the Czechoslovak attackers are mainly disaffected youths in their late teens and early 20's trapped by the high unemployment and social dislocation gripping the country since the collapse of Communism nearly two years ago.


Ms. Hadley Marries
Elizabeth Grace Hadley, an investment consultant at Citibank, and George R. Boltres, a general partner and portfolio manager at the investment firm of Tiedemann, Karlen &amp; Boltres, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Jean Dix, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Brick Church in Remsenberg, L.I.
The bride, 34 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Wellesley College, she is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
G.
Edwin Hadley of Boxford, Mass.
Mr.
Boltres, 49, graduated from Williams College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
He is the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
George R. Boltres.
The bridegroom's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Staten Island Man Arrested in Apparent Bias Hoax
A Staten Island man was arrested last night and charged with spraying racist slurs on his home, setting it on fire and falsing claiming to be the victim of a bias attack, the police said.
The man, Richard Savino, who is white, told the police the house was burned because he had shown it to potential buyers who were black, the police said.
The police initially classified the incident as bias related, because when officers and firefighters entered the trailer after the blaze was extinguished they found the words "NOW sell to niggers," spray-painted in two places on a wall.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None Tuesday
Business Inventories .......... Aug.  10-Day Auto Sales .......... Early Oct. Wednesday
None Thursday
Merchandise Trade ..........
Aug.
Consumer Price Index ..........
Sept.
Industrial Production ..........
Sept.
Capacity Utilization ..........
Sept.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  Housing Starts ..........
Sept.


Ms. Klem Weds Thomas Dubin
Pamela Douglas Klem was married yesterday to Thomas Israel Harry Dubin at the Golf Club of Avon in Avon, Conn.
Rabbi Douglas Krantz officiated.
The bride, 27 years old, is a manager of Middle East sales at A.T.&amp;T.
Network Sales in Berkeley Heights, N.J.
She graduated from Amherst College, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in public administration from Princeton University.
Her father is the chief financial officer of Simscroft-Echo Farms, a construction company in West Simsbury, Conn.
Her mother, Sheila Klem, is a language consultant.


Deere Pact Is Approved
Deere &amp; Company factory workers at plants in six states overwhelmingly approved a three-year contract, an official of the United Auto Workers said yesterday.
In voting this weekend, 87.5 percent of the union members favored ratification, said Bill Casstevens, the U.A.W.'s secretary-treasurer.
He would not provide the vote totals on the pact, which covers about 13,800 factory workers in Illinois, Iowa, Colorado, Georgia, Kansas and Minnesota.
Deere is based in Moline, Ill.


Giants May Have Edge, but Steelers Could Strike at a Moment's Notice
The Giants seem to have an edge on the Pittsburgh Steelers, but not that much.
The Steelers' offense is decent, the Giants' offense more dynamic.
The Steelers' defense is quick, active and struggling a bit, the Giants' defense bigger and more efficient.


Perfect Matchup, Unlikely Setting
The college football season reaches the halfway milestone this week, and in Division I-A there are only five unbeaten and untied teams remaining.
Two of them, California and Washington, will meet Saturday, and the circumstances are unusual for the site: the 68-year-old Memorial Stadium in Berkeley, Calif., where nothing so significant has happened in decades.


Nairobi Journal; In Nairobi Slums, Soccer Gives Poor Youths Hope
The red-dirt field conceals shards of glass and most of the young players are barefoot.
But the lack of green silken grass and fancy sports shoes doesn't deter serious Sunday morning soccer training in the sprawling Mathare Valley slum.
"Look up! You're not looking up at all!" yelled Peggy Ottienoe, the coach of the Little Gor juniors, as two boys tussled for a ball.
"You have to know who you are passing to!" And then, in a more approving tone, she told her star defender, "Well done, No. 6!"


INSIDE
Iraq Said to Hide Atomic Data
Iraq managed to spirit away the bulk of its secret nuclear records only hours before a United Nations team arrived for a raid, officials involved in the inspection say.
Page A6.
Hospital Waits to Fail
When Federal inspectors come to Pilgrim Psychiatric Center on Long Island, the country's largest psychiatric hospital, the staff expects them to call the care inadequate.
Page B1.
Hoping for a Winner
Lottery frenzy is nothing new these days, but the stakes this time are: 40,000 slots for legal permanent residency in the United States.
Page A9.
Twins Win Pennant
Minnesota beat Toronto 8-5, to win the American League playoff.
The Braves and Pirates are at two games apiece.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Executives Ponder Urban Problems
Corporate America must broaden its horizons to include an attack on drugs, crime, welfare dependency and poverty, a panel of specialists on problems of inner-city areas told the nation's most elite business club.
Business has "gotten the message," the panel said, about the need to help improve education.
Businesses "need to be part of the solution" because they cannot escape being hurt financially by unaddressed urban pathologies, Jerry E. Abramson, the Mayor of Louisville, Ky., told reporters after addressing a closed-door session of the Business Council, whose fall meeting here at the Homestead Resort ended today.
"And once you hit them in the bottom line, their hearts and minds and pocketbooks and wallets will follow," he added.


Rally Against Anti-Semitism Is Held in Manhattan


With Each Round of Testimony, The Mood at the Hearing Sways
Like a tree in a storm, the mood in the Senate Judiciary hearing room has bowed in one direction or another, pressed by the force of testimony, first by Anita Hill, then by Clarence Thomas, and again today, by witnesses who backed up her story and then by witnesses who praised his character.
After a day in which Judge Thomas succeeded in cowing the skeptical Democrats on the panel, blasting them with a gale of words about a bruising process and racial discrimination, the four impressive witnesses who backed up Professor Hill succeeded in refocusing the issue: It is her word versus his.
Did he, as her superior and as the nation's top enforcer of employment discrimination laws, sexually harass her or not?


Yields Are Expected to Cool Down
Credit market analysts said the rise in long-term interest rates last week was merely a temporary correction to the strong summer rally, not the start of a significant reversal in the direction of bond yields.
Long-term rates will probably fall a bit further, and the Federal Reserve Board will almost certainly ease monetary policy at least once more before the year is out, the analysts said.


Denver Journal; As Discoverer Is Hailed, The Discovered Protest
Will Rogers, who was part American Indian, once remarked that while his ancestors did not come over on the Mayflower, "they were there to greet the boat."
The comedian used humor to state the obvious: that civilization on this continent hardly began with the arrival of Europeans.
But if it is so obvious, many American Indians ask, what is all this hoopla surrounding Christopher Columbus?


Critic's Notebook; Was It Camelot or Peyton Place?
Traditionally considered a healer, time is proving a scourge to a distressing number of the Kennedys of Massachusetts.
As monumental tragedy continues to collide with shabby scandal, once shining Camelot looks more and more like dingy old Peyton Place.
The Kennedys are returning to prime time this week in still another mini-series putting them under a microscope searching for truth, presumably, and entertainment values.
The new vehicle, running for six hours over three consecutive nights through tomorrow, is "A Woman Named Jackie," on NBC.
That woman is, of course, Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy Onassis, who over time has gradually emerged from the Kennedy "myth" as probably the most astute and certainly one of the more dignified of the Camelot survivors.


BASEBALL: Sports of The Times; Kirby Puckett Is a Rich Man
If ever a man deserves a trophy, it is Kirby Puckett, the center fielder of the Minnesota Twins, who is built like a keg of dynamite and periodically explodes like one.
He got his trophy yesterday as the most valuable player in the American League Championship Series.
He hit a home run in the first inning, went 3 for 5 and drove in the lead runs twice in his team's 8-5 victory over the Toronto Blue Jays in the fifth and deciding game of the playoff.
The victory sent the Twins into the World Series.
But that is the least of it, the least of why Kirby Puckett, who stands 5 feet 8 inches and weighs 216 pounds, deserves a trophy.
He got the trophy officially yesterday because he wound up hitting .429 for the series, hit an important home run in Game 4, and drove in six runs in the five games.


Gregory Vlastos, 84, Philosopher Who Analyzed Classical Works
Gregory Vlastos, a preeminent scholar on Socrates who transformed the analysis of classical philosophy, died Saturday at Alta Bates-Herrick Hospital in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 84 years old and lived in Berkeley.
Dr. Vlastos died of cancer, his family said.


Books of The Times; Novelist Continues A Philosophical Voyage
Lila By Robert M. Pirsig 409 pages. Bantam Books. $22.50.


This Lottery's Jackpot Is Green, but It's Not Money
They were not huddled masses exactly: a Swiss investor, a Polish carpenter, a ski instructor from Ireland.
But they came by plane, train and automobile, slept in cheap hotels and parking lots, and fought long, jostling lines outside a post office to fill mail bins with the pristine white envelopes that might prove to be their passage to America.
If there was one thing they all agreed on, it's that this was no way to run an immigration program.


Martha Graham and Baryshnikov: Dynamics of a Simple Relationship
Martha Graham came into the life of Mikhail Baryshnikov in the late 1970's, a glamorous mirage who materialized in his dressing room occasionally, following his performances at the New York City Ballet and at American Ballet Theater, for what the ballet star describes as "little chats."
"She didn't say much," Mr.
Ba ryshnikov said of Graham, who died on April 1, in a recent interview.
"It was really strange and wonderful."


The One Thing Moon Won't Do Is Pass Out
The uniform covered most of Warren Moon and his injuries.
"Warren," said Haywood Jeffires, "is always bleeding."


Aline MacMahon Is Dead at 92; On Stage and Screen for 50 Years
Aline MacMahon, an actress whose stage, screen, radio and television career lasted more than 50 years, died on Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 92 years old.
She apparently died from pneumonia, friends said.


Pope Urges Brazilians to Resist Mirages of Evangelists
In a land where the Roman Catholic Church is losing its once-pervasive influence and where the priesthood is spread thin, Pope John Paul II exhorted his followers today to crusade against fundamentalist religious sects that offer what the Pontiff called "false mirages" to growing numbers of Brazilians "hungry for bread and justice."
On the second day of a 10-day visit to Brazil, which has the world's largest Roman Catholic community, the Pope addressed priests and bishops in this northern city of 600,000 people on the Atlantic seaboard and celebrated an open-air Mass with guitars strumming a counterpoint to traditional liturgy.


Miss Goldman Has a Wedding
Pamela Goldman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Goldman of Rochester, was married last evening to John A. MacAffer, a son of Duncan MacAffer of Menands, N.Y., and Kimmey Decker of Middleburgh, N.Y.
Rabbi Bruce Freyer officiated, assisted by the father of the bridegroom, at the Beach Point Club in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Mrs.
MacAffer, 26 years old, is a public-affairs coordinator at Sawchuk, Brown Associates, a public-relations concern in Albany.
A graduate of Hamilton College, as is her husband, she received an M.B.A. from Boston University.
Her father is the president of Hickey Freeman Company, the clothing manufacturer in Rochester.


Foreign Press Shrugs at Latest U.S. Morality Play
Ignoring the broader question of sexual harassment, many foreign commentators are viewing the storm threatening Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court as part of a peculiarly American ritual of savaging public figures for their private behavior.
"America has flung itself again into one of those spasms of passionate moral debate that nations more tolerant of human frailty find so hard to understand," the Sunday Times of London said today in a report that carried the headline "Talking Dirty."


A Stubborn Species
Sometimes even brisk October seems taken up with memories.
A migrant bird breaks into song.
A June field rose opens a few petals and a midsummer sun warms the northwest wind.
But there is no mistaking that this is really October because the wild asters are all out, filling any overlooked spot -- an unmowed meadow, an unkempt roadside, the uncut edge of a lawn.
They have been blooming for a while but with everything else all but gone, they -- along with their botanical cousins, the goldenrods -- seem to have the season to themselves.
"A large and difficult genus," the wildflower guide calls the asters, complaining about the problem of telling which of the five dozen varieties is which.
The clusters of small daisy-like flowers present every fussy color variation between pure white and dark blue, plus lavenders, violets, purples and a few pinks.
To confuse things further, the Bristly aster grows lavender, pink and white flowers on the same plant and the Calico aster sometimes has yellow centers, sometimes rosy red.


Editorial Notebook; Unrelieved Sadness
One woman, who was at home, realized at 4 o'clock Friday afternoon that she was still wearing her nightgown.
Another woman tells of standing on a New York street corner Saturday listening to snatches of conversations.
"Then Howard Metzenbaum spoke up . . . ," she heard, and "I was glad that Biden reread the transcript." Late Saturday night, a friend called to say, "Don't forget. It starts tomorrow at noon."
There has been nothing quite like this immersion in the contest between Judge Clarence Thomas and Prof.
Anita Hill since the weekend 28 years ago when America buried John F. Kennedy.
Then, however, a country's pain was treated with the opiate of ceremony.
There is no opiate for this pain.
True, Judge Thomas and Professor Hill conduct themselves with dignity.
But any consolation to be derived from their comportment is diminished by our knowledge that one of them is lying.


A Troubled Neighborhood Eccentric
Even before yesterday's gunfire, everybody on 254th Street knew who Andrew Brooks was.
At virtually any time of the day or night, neighbors say, they would not be surprised to see his slouched, shabby figure lurching along the curving streets of the Little Neck section of Queens.
He would snoop through his neighbors' backyards, swinging the golf club he never seemed to let go of, or stop to stare intently at anyone who came under his piercing, troubled gaze.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising/ADDENDA; McCann Wins Work For Big Merged Bank
The retail advertising account for the bank to be created by the merger of the Chemical Banking Corporation and the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation has, as expected, been awarded to McCann-Erickson New York, the Manufacturers agency, rather than to Della Femina, McNamee Inc., the Chemical agency.
When the banks proposed the merger in July, advertising executives had predicted that McCann would win because, they noted, advertising decisions were being made by managers from Manufacturers.
The merged bank, which will retain the Chemical name, is expected to be formed on Dec. 31.
As the combined banks seek to establish a unified image with customers, annual ad spending is likely to increase from the estimated $20 million the two now spend separately.


Did He Point? It's Your Move.
Hercules cleaned out the Augean stables only in myth.
Paul Bunyan probably never chopped down a Douglas fir with a swoop of his ax.
But Babe Ruth really may have called his home run in the 1932 World Series.
GARY KREISSMAN says he has acquired a recording of the game from across the airways of time.
Or thinks he has.


As Thomas Vote Approaches, Senators Say It Will Be Close
Republican and Democratic senators said today that Judge Clarence Thomas, who only a week ago was on the verge of winning confirmation to the Supreme Court, now faced a struggle to hold a majority when the Senate votes on his nomination on Tuesday.
Over the last three days Judge Thomas's prospects have seemed to ebb and flow almost by the hour as witnesses on both sides have testified, leaving senators as torn as the American public over who is telling the truth: the nominee or his chief accuser, Prof.
Anita F. Hill.


THE THOMAS NOMINATION: Review/Television; Next Act in Drama Fails to Disappoint
Act 3 promised to be anti-climactic, yet yesterday's Senate Judiciary Committee hearing probably did not disappoint followers of the engrossing miniseries about sex, race and power.
It began Friday with the stunning "Ordeal of Anita Hill" and returned even more powerfully on Friday evening and continued all day Saturday with "Martyrdom of Clarence Thomas."
The stars were off.
In their places were performers at the witness table who, in violation of the rules of courtroom drama, could not be expected to supply a climactic, absolutely definitive revelation of who was telling the truth and who was lying.
But it was a surprisingly good try.


China Rejects U.S. Inquiry
China on Friday rejected a United States investigation of trade barriers that Washington has accused it of maintaining, saying the United States has ignored efforts it has already made to open its markets.
The investigation, which was announced in Washington Thursday and could put billions of dollars in Chinese exports at risk, is a further sign that once healthy Chinese-United States relations are getting worse, analysts and business executives said.


Review/Theater; Putting Shakespeare, Sort of, Aboard a Spaceship
Eons ago, before "Star Trek" and "Star Wars," there was "Forbidden Planet," an ingeniously high-tech science-fiction movie that drew its basic story line from "The Tempest." "Return to the Forbidden Planet," Bob Carlton's musical version, which incorporates rock and rhythm-and-blues of the 1950's and 1960's, is a case of Shakespeare rattled and rolled.
The show won an Olivier award as best musical in London, in a backlash beating out "Miss Saigon." The American production, directed by Mr.
Carlton, opened Off Broadway last night at the newly refurbished Variety Arts Theater.
It is a febrile, hectic attempt at blending diverse modes.
On stage the worlds of Shakespeare, science fiction and classic rock collide.


Miss Silverman Wed
Jennifer Amy Silverman, an editorial assistant at Henry Holt &amp; Company, the publishing house, and Stephen Russell Lapidus, a senior accountant at KPMG Peat Marwick, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Jacob S. Friedman officiated at Temple Beth Torah in Wanamassa, N.J.
A cum laude graduate of Smith College, Mrs.
Lapidus, 25, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Silverman of West Long Branch, N.J.
Mr.
Lapidus, 26, graduated from the University of Virginia.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Lapidus of Clark, N.J.


Gail Elizabeth Silagy Weds C. Cavanaugh
Gail Elizabeth Silagy, an accounts supervisor for Burma Bibas, a clothing manufacturer, and Christopher Cavanaugh, the assistant managing editor of Family Circle magazine, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Steven J. Yagerman officiated at All Saints Episcopal Church in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
Mrs.
Cavanaugh, 27 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Oswego.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Z.
Stephen Silagy and Carolyn Silagy of Briarcliff Manor.
Her father is an optometrist.


Miss Neuborne, Reporter, Weds
Ellen Neuborne, a reporter, and David Landis, a columnist, both for USA Today in Washington, were married yesterday in Brooklyn.
Rabbi Gerald Weider officiated at Congregation Beth Elohim.
The bride, 24 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Brown University, she is a daughter of Burt and Helen Neuborne of Brooklyn.
Her father, a former legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union, is a professor of law at New York University.
Her mother is the executive director of the NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund in New York.


Bridge
The results of the NEC World Team Championships last week in Yokohama, Japan, suggest that American fortunes are declining at the open level, but in the ascendant in women's competition.
Neither of the two American teams was able to advance beyond the quarterfinal of the Bermuda Bowl, which the United States won uninterruptedly between 1976 and 1987.
But both American women's teams reached the semifinal of the Venice Cup, and one of them took the title, repeating successes in 1987 and 1989.


It All Goes the Chiefs' Way, As Dolphins Are Routed Chiefs 42, Dolphins 7    KANSAS CITY, Mo., Oct. 13 (AP) -- Their last game was so close; this one was no contest.


Review/Music; Elliott Carter Quartets Celebrate Juilliard's 45th
The Juilliard String Quartet might have chosen to celebrate its 45th anniversary in any number of traditional ways -- offering a concert series encompassing the quartet repertory, perhaps, or even presenting a sampling of the more than 60 works first performed by the quartet during its distinguished career.
But instead it chose to play all four of Elliott Carter's quartets at the Juilliard Theater on Friday night.
This seemed foolhardy.
Even one of these works requires extraordinary concentration by players and listeners.
If played in succession, no sooner would a listener become accustomed to the shifting tempos and thematic dialogue in the String Quartet No. 1 (1951), than there would come the dramatic intersection of diverse voices in the String Quartet No. 2 (1959), the conflicting duos of String Quartet No. 3 (1971), and the singular explorations of communal consciousness in String Quartet No. 4 (1986).
Each quartet is a more difficult listening experience than the one before and for many listeners, they all lie beyond the pale of public music, speaking mainly to professionals.


A Patented Berry Has Sellers Licking Their Lips
Four centuries ago an English doctor, William Butler, tasted a strawberry and said: "Doubtless God could have made a better berry, but doubtless God never did." Here in the strawberry capital of the world they still like to quote that line, but it is not always clear whether they mean it as a tribute to strawberries' flavor or as a critique of God's indolence.
They never stop working to make a better berry here in the Pajaro Valley, 100 miles south of San Francisco.
Each year researchers test 50,000 new cross-breeds of strawberries, and this year their work has resulted in what some observers, although perhaps not God, consider the most improved creation yet: a new brand-name product in the supermarket.


Walton Reveals a Mission Of Returning to Top Brass
The voice on the phone had a smile in it.
Joe Walton sounded so positive that anyone who knew him in his final days as head coach of the Jets, in December 1989, would have thought an imposter had gotten on.


Ann Ryan Donahue Weds Jeffrey C. Newman
Anne Ryan Donahue, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David W. Donahue of Winchester, Mass., was married there yesterday to Jeffrey Crowell Newman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Merrill E. Newman of Palo Alto, Calif.
The Rev.
Thomas J. Reddy officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Newman, 27 years old, graduated from Smith College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and her husband, 31, a graduate of Lehigh University, received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is an associate at Bankers Trust in Los Angeles.
Her father is a senior vice president of the investment bank Tucker, Anthony &amp; R.&amp;L.
Day in Boston.
Mr.
Newman's father is a management consultant in Palo Alto.


Cubbage May Stay Put
Mike Cubbage, who took over for Manager Bud Harrelson but never believed he had a serious shot at the job beyond the 1991 season, said yesterday that he would likely agree to remain with the Mets as third-base coach if an offer is forthcoming.
"I'd seriously consider it," said Cubbage.


Puzzled and Disgusted, But Fixated on Hearings
Piles of freshly raked maple leaves, a couple of daring boys on skateboards and the lazy amble of an old mutt lend a contented, reassuring feel to this middle-class neighborhood in suburban Denver.
But behind the doors along Washington Street, television dials have been fixed on the jolting, almost surreal Senate hearings on sexual harassment allegations against the Supreme Court nominee, Judge Clarence Thomas.
And there, the proceedings have evoked a sense of anger, puzzlement and, perhaps most of all, disgust.


Moon and Jeffires Shoot Past Jets
Hoping to get a better grip on their playoff hopes, the Jets slipped a rung this afternoon with a 23-20 loss to Houston at Giants Stadium.
For the third time this season, the Jets (3-4) played well against a superior opponent, but couldn't come away with the victory.
To pull this game out, the Jets needed to stop Warren Moon, keep the Oilers' run-and-shoot offense off the field by playing a ball-control offense, execute their offense to near perfection, create turnovers and score as many points as possible.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Common Stock  *
Thorn Apple Valley Inc., Southfield, Mich., a meat products company, has filed for 875,000 shares to be offered through Lehman Brothers.


Statements by Character Witnesses in Defense of Judge Thomas
Statement By J. C. Alvarez
My name is J. C. Alvarez.
I'm a businesswoman from Chicago. . . .
I spent nine years in Washington, D.C.: a year with Senator Danforth, two years with the Secretary of Education, a short stint at the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and four years as special assistant to Clarence Thomas at the E.E.O.C.


Viewers Tune In
The Senate hearings Saturday on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court continued to attract much higher than normal daytime television ratings for the major networks.
From 10 A.M. to 1 P.M. on Saturday when three major networks carried the hearings, they had a combined rating of 15.6 in the 25 largest television markets that are measured by the A. C. Nielsen Company.
The three networks had been averaging only a 9.4 rating for those hours on previous Saturdays when normal programming was broadcast in those cities.


Ron Silver Hits The Ground Running At Actors' Equity
Ron Silver received rave reviews as Alan M. Dershowitz in "Reversal of Fortune" but he won't rest until he knocks 'em dead as Eugene V. Debs.
Mr.
Silver is the newly elected president of the Actors' Equity Association, perhaps the only union in the country with a 90 percent unemployment rate.
For a man whose idea of a great time is to invite 10 people to dinner who won't get along, it's a perfect fit.
At his desk in the Equity offices in mid-Manhattan the other morning, Mr.
Silver was jazzed and ready to go.
He was meeting with union officials about his pet cause: establishing a national health care system by organizing a coalition of labor organizations and public interest groups to lobby it through Congress.
He had researched the health bill exhaustively and when he discussed it, his sentences were crammed with legal jargon.
You could hear the results of the semester he spent at Yale Law School last spring studying the First Amendment.


Knicks Are 2-0. Let's Stop Right There.
The Knicks played tonight as if they are eager to begin the regular season.
For the second consecutive game, New York manhandled its opponent, blistering the Washington Bullets, 112-91, in an exhibition contest.
The 11,424 fans at the Nassau Coliseum were treated to what amounted to a Knicks highlight film.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Edberg Wins 3d in Row


WHITE HOUSE ROLE IN THOMAS DEFENSE
The fierce Republican counterattack on Anita F. Hill's testimony sprang from high-level White House consultations among dispirited officials who concluded as the new hearings unfolded that the only way to save Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination was to cast doubt on Professor Hill's character and motivations.
When the hearings began Friday, the White House avoided urging the Republicans on the Senate Judiciary Committee to attack because President Bush's aides were split.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A Change in Administration At a Cable TV Trade Group
The Cabletelevision Advertising Bureau, in the first change in its top administrative job since its founding a decade ago, has named a president and chief executive with extensive experience in broadcast television and radio as well as in cable.
Thomas E. McKinney, 49 years old, who has been executive vice president since July of last year, is succeeding Robert H. Alter, 62, who becomes a vice chairman of what is the cable industry's national advertising trade association.


Why Getting Tough With China Won't Work
To the Editor:
There are those in this country who favor a get-tough approach to the Chinese Government as a way to compel the old men who run China to admit the jig is up and peacefully fade away.
This emotional approach is dangerous, founded on a fundamental misreading of the situation in China and its alleged similarity to the Soviet case.
The democratic revolution is not on the verge of victory in China, contrary to popular impressions, and our publicly threatening the Chinese leadership with severe sanctions won't bring it closer.


Iraq Is Said to Have Hidden Nuclear Records From U.N.
Although the United Nations seized conclusive evidence of President Saddam Hussein's clandestine nuclear weapons program during a raid in Baghdad last month, Iraq managed to spirit away the bulk of its secret nuclear records only hours before inspectors arrived, according to officials involved in the case.
The officials said that the unnamed intelligence agency that located Iraq's top secret nuclear design center -- presumably the Central Intelligence Agency -- pressed the United Nations to make the raid "a matter of the highest urgency," apparently because it knew Iraq would soon try to move the incriminating material elsewhere.


A Tadzhik Teahouse Comes to Colorado
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 28 report datelined Dushanbe, U.S.S.R., was of particular interest to citizens of Boulder, Colo., because of a sister-city affiliation we have had with that central Asian city since May 1987, when Mayor Makhsud M. Ikramov of Dushanbe visited Boulder.
Many friendships have developed between us as a result of student and physician exchanges, tours, ham radio communication and pen pals.
We are watching events in Dushanbe with deep concern and admiration for the people's nonviolent response to the Tadzhik Parliament's orders not to disband the republic's Communist Party.


A Page From Fast Food's Menu
Inspiration recently struck George Loesch during breakfast at Denny's.
In scouting the competition, Mr.
Loesch frequently holds breakfast meetings at fast-food restaurants, where he picks apart the sausage biscuits and eagerly devours new menu items.
Mr.
Loesch works not for a rival restaurant chain, as his fast-food fieldwork might imply, but for the Campbell Soup Company, best known for its home heat-and-serve offerings.
Inspired by the popularity of a large-portion breakfast on the Denny's menu, Mr.
Loesch recently shepherded to market a line of "Big Start" home breakfasts.
The meals, which offer such entrees as pancakes with scrambled eggs and bacon, are the newest addition to the Great Start brand sold by Swanson's, a division of Campbell Soup.
Boasting About Borrowing
Mr.
Loesch freely acknowledges that he got the idea from Denny's, a restaurant chain owned by TW Services Inc.
He even boasts of it in a sales brochure for grocers that invites them to "take a bite out of the restaurant business" by stocking the new Swanson product line, which was introduced in July.


Walton's Got Quarterback Knack
Say what you will about JOE WALTON as a head coach. The man improves quarterbacks.
If NEIL O'DONNELL -- the Steelers' other quarterback -- gets into tonight's game against the Giants, substituting for BUBBY BRISTER, who was injured last week -- he will present another challenge for the former Jets coach.


Essay; The Plot To Savage Thomas
The full story of the conspiracy to blackmail Clarence Thomas into withdrawing will not be told until after the Senate votes on his confirmation Tuesday.
But the outlines of the plot to use Anita Hill to bring him down are clear.
Ricki Seidman, aide to that defender of womanhood, Senator Ted Kennedy, and James Brudney, aide to Senator Howard Metzenbaum, were tipped off by the legion of liberal activists digging for dirt that Professor Hill harbored a secret grudge against Judge Thomas.


A Star Quits 'Princesses,' CBS Series
The CBS prime-time schedule received another blow this weekend when it was announced that Julie Hagerty, one of the stars of the new comedy "Princesses" has left the series.
A statement from the production company yesterday described the decision as mutual.
CBS is already facing the necessity to find a replacement series for the comedy "Royal Family" because of the sudden death on Friday of its star Redd Foxx.


Janice Hartoch Wed in Teaneck
Janice Lynn Hartoch, the daughter of Kenneth and Helen Hartoch of Teaneck, N.J., was married yesterday to Lawrence David Gross, the son of Irving and Sylvia Gross of Marina del Rey, Calif.
Rabbi David Feldman officiated, assisted by Cantor Hans Cohn, at the Teaneck Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Gross, 31 years old, graduated from Brandeis University.
A former associate director of development at the Central Park Conservancy in New York, she is a development officer at the University of California at Santa Barbara.
Her father is the executive vice president of J. Gerber &amp; Company, an international trading concern in New York.
Her mother is a special-education teacher in the Teaneck public schools.


Brooklyn Teen-Ager Injured In Bias Attack in Gravesend
A Brooklyn teen-ager was struck in the head with a stick or baseball bat on a street in Gravesend during a fight last night that the police said was bias related.
The injured 17-year-old, who was not identified, was among a group of black youths who became involved in a dispute with a group of white youths at the corner of Ocean Avenue and Kings Highway, said Sgt.
Edward Burns, a police spokesman.


Yankee Strategist Plans Campaign To Put a Virginian in White House
History will credit Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder with causing a major revolution in racial politics in America by becoming the first black ever to be elected chief executive of any state, and then going on to run for President.
But no history of that revolution will be complete unless it includes a substantial footnote about Paul Goldman.
Mr.
Goldman is Mr.
Wilder's political alter ego, his master schemer and impresario, his Machiavelli, point man, coach and ghost writer.


The Downfall of C
To the Editor:
"American Education Gets a C" (editorial, Oct. 4) made me think how we all equate a C these days with poor performance.
Decades ago, a C was average.
Over the years, grade inflation has built the average mark into something approaching a B, while the performance of our students is the same as ever, and in some areas a lot worse.
Clearly, our educators have learned from our politicians: if you can't improve a situation, relabel it.
In my book, such thinking rates a failing grade.
DAVID GALEF Asst.
Prof., English, U. of Mississippi University, Miss., Oct. 4, 1991


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Victory for Whalers  Pat Verbeek scored in his first game back from a holdout and Kay Whitmore made 35 saves as the Hartford Whalers defeated the Canadiens, 4-3, last night in Montreal.
Verbeek converted a pass from John Cullen, who was also back from a holdout after signing a new contract over the weekend, for Hartford's first goal at 2 minutes 37 seconds of the second period.
Adam Burt, Mikhail Andersson and Geoff Sanderson also scored for the Whalers (2-1-1).
Stephan Lebeau, Matt Schneider and Kirk Muller scored for Montreal (3-2-1). (AP) HORSE RACING  Star of Cozzene Wins  Star of Cozzene raced within striking distance of the leaders to the stretch, then rallied strongly to register a one-length victory over Known Ranger in the $116,200 Kelso Handicap at Belmont Park yesterday.
Ridden by Jose Santos and carrying 113 pounds, Star of Cozzene earned his third straight victory and sixth of the year in 12 starts.
Known Ranger was three-quarters of a length in front of Fourstardave for second in the field of six older horses.
Star of Cozzene covered one mile on the firm Widener Turf Course in 1:331/5 to earn $69,720 for Clover Racing Stable.
He returned $6.40 for $2 to win. (AP)


Careers; Some Advice To Managers Seeking Jobs
IT used to be that many middle managers laid off by large companies could land jobs with smaller ones, often with more responsibility and a higher salary.
But as heavy layoffs buffet managerial ranks, some will have to settle for less, says James Challenger, who heads an outplacement firm in Chicago.
The topic came to the fore yet again after Allied-Signal announced last week that it was laying off 5,000 managers, or 14 percent of its managerial ranks.


Review/Concert; 2 World Premieres Of American Works Of the New Hedonism
It's a buyer's market in the orchestra world.
The first two pieces on Sunday afternoon's American Composers Orchestra concert at Carnegie Hall made no mistake about it.
Daniel Asia's "Black Light" and Leslie Bassett's "From a Source Evolving" purveyed the new hedonism -- a sensuous approach to sound and a generous exploitation of instruments -- that makes orchestras want to schedule such music and listeners pay to hear it.
The differences were largely in degree and perhaps self-confidence.
Mr.
Bassett's music pleads for attention, wringing from its moment in the spotlight every bit of breathless mystery and white-knuckle drama it can.
Timpani and brass make sure we stay awake.
Moods change quickly, from stabs of pain to sighs of regret to Technicolored instrumentation.
Mr.
Bassett is a hard-sell purveyor.
Indeed, his spiel seems more substantial than the goods we end up paying for.


Baker, in Jordan, Finds The Wrong Palestinians
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, engaged today in a long-distance tug-of-war over the formation of a Palestinian delegation to take part in the projected Middle East peace conference.
While Mr.
Baker pressed non-P.L.O.
Palestinians from the occupied territories to come to Amman immediately and form a joint delegation with Jordan to represent them at the peace talks, the P.L.O. leader in Tunis sent his own high-level delegation to Amman to negotiate with the Jordanians as well.


THE THOMAS NOMINATION: In Hometowns, Adamant Support for Thomas and Outrage Over the Senate; In Morris, the Process Is the Target
When the regulars at Len's cafe on Ozark Street in Anita F. Hill's hometown gathered for morning coffee today, they were seething about what happened in Washington over the weekend.
Their rage was not directed at either Professor Hill or at Judge Clarence Thomas, whose nomination to the Supreme Court she imperiled with accusations of sexual harassment.


Brown Backs Ban on Assault Guns


NCNB Posts A Sharp Gain
The NCNB Corporation yesterday reported sharply higher third-quarter earnings despite rising costs related to real estate problems and expenses associated with its planned merger with the C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation, which would create the nation's fourth-largest bank.
NCNB, based in Charlotte, N.C., said its third-quarter profit more than doubled to $131.1 million, or $1.09 a share, from $57 million, or 51 cents a share, in the 1990 quarter.


Lasting Tragedy and Trauma for the Country; Lowest Kind of Politics
To the Editor:
While it may be true that Judge Clarence Thomas acted improperly and that Prof.
Anita F. Hill was truly offended by any sexist comments on the part of Judge Thomas, the context, timing and volume of the accusations are nothing short of the lowest political campaign this country has ever seen.
This is the real issue.


Out of New Jersey, No Less, Comes a Steeler Quarterback
Neil O'Donnell had been around the Giants for years, from the time they started practicing in his hometown of Madison, N.J.
Tonight, though, he became more than an anonymous kid in a college jacket they barely knew.
Tonight, he frightened them in nearly leading the Steelers to the kind of upset good little football players dream about.


Plan Is Designed to Bring CART and Indy Together
The sport of Indy-car racing, which has struggled for more than a decade with a split between its major race and its major sanctioning body, heard details this week of a proposal that could close that gulf.
Tony George, the president of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, site of the Indianapolis 500, described in an interview with The Associated Press a plan to restructure the administration of Indy-car racing, which is now presided over by Championship Auto Racing Teams.


On Bates Road, Tension Slakes After Nightmare
They stood quietly on Bates Road yesterday in the warm October sun, looking at a pristine colonial house that a deranged man had entered, taken an elderly couple hostage and then, more than 24 hours later, killed himself.
But what they saw was their own vulnerability.
"The fact that he randomly picked a home, that to me was more frightening than anything else," said Jeffrey Yeres, a 41-year-old dentist who lives two doors from the house that had been under siege since early Sunday.
Mr.
Yeres and his two young children and a neighbor had stayed in their house during the siege.


Dow Up 35.77, to 3,019.45, on Light Volume
Stocks notched substantial gains yesterday in light holiday trading, with analysts saying investors were buoyed by several better-than-expected corporate earnings reports and by heightened enthusiasm about the economy.
The Dow Jones industrial average leaped 35.77 points, or 1.2 percent, to 3,019.45, propped up by gains in a number of groups, including technology, oil, chemicals and airlines.


CHRONICLE
When he agreed to visit the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale months ago, Senator EDWARD M. KENNEDY thought Columbus Day would be the best time.
Not much would be doing in Washington.
"I didn't think I'd be very busy over the holiday," he said yesterday, nine hours after the Senate Judiciary Committee ended its hearings on charges of sexual harassment made by Prof.
ANITA F. HILL against Judge CLARENCE THOMAS, the Supreme Court nominee.
Mr.
Kennedy was in New York to dedicate the Elma and Milton A. Gilbert Pavilion at the home, a new center for patients with Alzheimer's disease.


Just Write Something, Add Pictures and Mix
COMPUTER programs, like children, have a way of growing up.
First there was the Children's Writing and Publishing Center, a simple word-processing and desktop-publishing program for Apple II and I.B.M.-compatible computers.
Now there is the Writing Center, a surprisingly versatile but still easy-to-use program for Macintosh computers that no member of the family should scorn.
The Writing Center, from the Learning Company of Fremont, Calif., is slanted toward pupils 7 years old and up.
Templates are provided for reports or letters and for a two-column newsletter.
But custom formats are easily created, and there is no reason why a parent couldn't use the program to write letters, club newsletters or just about anything else.
As it is a Macintosh program, the struggle quotient is very low.


Eger Gets U.S.G.A. Post
The United States Golf Association yesterday announced that DAVID B. EGER has been appointed Senior Director of Rules and Competitions.
Eger, a former PGA Tour professional and now a top amateur, will assume many of the duties of the former Executive Director of Rules and Competitions, P.J.
Boatwright, who died in April.
Eger, 39, is currently the executive director of tournament administration for the PGA Tour.


Corrections
A theater review on Friday about the comedy "Beau Jest" at the Lamb's Theater misidentified the actor who plays the father.
He is Bernie Landis; Larry Fleischman plays Joel.


Cabdriver Killed By a Gunman
A livery-cab driver was shot to death in Queens early yesterday by a man who had robbed him a short time earlier, the police said.
The driver, Antonio Albar, 32 years old, of Queens, was shot in the head at 1:30 A.M. as he was getting out of his cab in front of 37-27 108th Street in Corona, a police spokesman, Sgt.
Peter Sweeney, said.


Researchers Share Biochemistry Prize
Two Swiss scientists, Dr.
Richard Ernst and Dr.
Kurt Wuthrich, will share the 1991 Louisa Gross Horwitz Prize for research in biochemistry, Columbia University announced yesterday.
The two scientists, both professors at the Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule in Zurich, were awarded the $20,000 prize for their achievements in adapting an analytical technique called nuclear magnetic resonance (N.M.R.) to the study of giant biological molecules.


Lasting Tragedy and Trauma for the Country; Dilemma for Women
To the Editor:
I can easily sympathize with Prof.
Anita F. Hill, the woman who has accused Judge Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment.
I was subject to many varieties of it myself during my career on Wall Street, which I began after receiving my M.B.A. in the late 1970's.


Review/Dance; Neumeier Choreographs 'Age of Anxiety'
Walter Terry described Jerome Robbins's ballet "Age of Anxiety," created in 1949 for the New York City Ballet, as being an experience rather than a story.
It is hard to imagine anyone successfully telling the story of the Auden poem in dance.
It is even harder to imagine why, in 1991, anyone would want to create a ballet drawn from that wordy philosophical poem and set to a relatively minor score by Leonard Bernstein.
John Neumeier has taken that challenge, however, in a work presented by Ballet West on Wednesday night at the Kennedy Center.


Lasting Tragedy and Trauma for the Country
To the Editor:
The Judiciary Committee hearings this week are a tragedy for Judge Clarence Thomas and Prof.
Anita F. Hill, and a trauma for the country.
But the real issue is not whom to believe, or even whether the Thomas nomination should be confirmed.
In this country people are presumed innocent until proved guilty.
Yet sexual harassment is a crime in which guilt cannot be proved.
This is everyone's crisis; either women continue to be powerless victims, or men become vulnerable to accusations against which they have no recourse.
This choice is the real tragedy; it will be with us long after the Supreme Court slot is filled and Anita Hill is back in Oklahoma.


Burmese Opposition Leader Wins the Nobel Peace Prize
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, who became the leader of the opposition to the Burmese military Government after returning to her homeland three years ago, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize today "for her nonviolent struggle for democracy and human rights."
Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi, the daughter of U Aung San, the assassinated founder of modern Burma, has been under strict house arrest in the capital since July 1989.


Nancy Proskauer Dryfoos Dies; Prize-Winning Sculptor Was 73
Nancy Proskauer Dryfoos, a sculptor in stone and terra cotta whose work is in the permanent collections of many museums and universities, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 73 years old.
She died of a heart attack after a long illness with lung cancer, said her husband, Donald.


Sports of The Times; No Justice For Braves At Third
IN the Braves' clubhouse, there was no sound.
Just as, for the last 18 innings, there had been no runs.
At a picnic table, David Justice, the Braves' cleanup hitter who thought he had scored a run in the fourth inning of yesterday's 1-0 loss to the Pittsburgh Pirates, finished a paper plate of chicken and baked beans, then walked to his locker and turned.


Normandy for Condors
Two California condors were moved from a zoo to a holding pen in their native habitat last week, four years after the last members of the endangered species were taken from the wild for captive breeding.
"We've been waiting for this day for a long time," said Dave Klinger, a spokesman for the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
"This is sort of like how Eisenhower must have felt when he sent his ships off to the Normandy invasion. They're off and we're hoping for the best."


Archer-Daniels Has Rise in Net
The Archer-Daniels-Midland Company's profit grew 18 percent in the latest quarter, lifted by acquisitions and improved oilseed results, the company reported today.
The food-processing company reported fiscal-first-quarter earnings of $126.5 million, or 41 cents a share, up from $107.7 million, or 34 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
On the New York Stock Exchange, the shares rose by $1, to $25.75.


Review/Fashion; In London, Calm And an Emphasis On Lasting Quality
Since the days of the mods and the rockers, fashion here has been a walk on the wild side.
Cozy staples like cashmere sweaters and country suits have been tucked under the bed.
New ideas swept swiftly across the fashion stage and into oblivion.
Today, a new sense of restraint is in the air.
The street scene, which inspired designers for years, is quieter.
Money is tighter.
There is more interest in clothes that will last.


Saints Are Marching, Redskins Are Racing
Washington and New Orleans are on a course to collide in the National Football Conference championship game.
Through seven weeks of the season, the Redskins have exhibited a stiff defense and the Saints a stifling one.
The Redskins' offense, however, has been potent while the Saints have patched together a hit-and-miss attack.
That makes the Redskins the tougher team to topple.


Happy or Sad, a Mood Can Prove Contagious
"EMOTIONS are contagious," wrote the Swiss psychoanalyst Carl Jung.
His observation is now being borne out and given precision by scientific studies of the subtle interplay of moods as they are passed from person to person.
The new data depict moods as akin to social viruses, with some people having a natural ability to transmit them while others are more susceptible to contagion.
And moods seem to perpetuate themselves by leading a person to do things that reinforce the feeling, no matter how unpleasant it may be.


Review/Theater; The 'Falsetto' Musicals United at Hartford Stage
It is not news that the history of American musicals in the 1980's begins and ends Off Broadway at Playwrights Horizons, with a pair of startling one-act musicals by William Finn that bracketed the decade, "March of the Falsettos" (1981) and "Falsettoland" (1990).
But it was a secret, until now, that the two "Falsetto" shows, fused together on a single bill, form a whole that is not only larger than the sum of its parts but is also more powerful than any other American musical of its day.
For this discovery, audiences owe a huge thanks to the Hartford Stage.
Under the artistic direction of Mark Lamos, it has the guts to produce these thorny musicals together at a time when few nonprofit theaters are willing to risk aggravating dwindling recession audiences by offering works that put homosexual passions (among many other passions in the "Falsetto" musicals' case) at center stage.


Poor Youths Swarming to Las Vegas Are Blamed for Rise in Gang Violence
Two months ago, at the age of 16, Cesar Lara decided a change of scene would be good for him.
He had been arrested and put on probation in Southern California for carrying a dagger and rifle and wanted to get away from his gang, the El Centro Dude Boys, whose main activities, he says, were "getting drunk and looking for trouble."
So he came to this sprawling casino city to stay with his uncle and look for a job.
He has ended up jobless, watching the gang violence on 28th Street, a dusty road of rundown homes and frequent shootings just a few miles from the city's glittering Strip.


Excerpts From an Interview With Another Thomas Accuser
Angela Wright, the only person other than Anita F. Hill to make public allegations that Judge Clarence Thomas made unsolicited sexual advances, was subpoenaed but did not appear before the Senate Judiciary Committee, by agreement with the committee.
Instead, a transcript of a telephone interview by committee staff members with Ms.
Wright and with a corroborating witness, Rose Jordain, was placed in the record.
Judge Thomas has denied Ms.
Wright's accusation.
Ms. Wright's statement was not sworn, because the committee's
practice is not to swear witnesses whom it expects to have testify under oath later.
Ms.
Jordain was sworn because the committee staff believed that because of ill health she would be unable to testify in person.


Classical Music in Review
Misha and Cipa Dicter  Pianists 92d Street Y
Two-piano concerts like Misha and Cipa Dichter's on Saturday night make us happy that important rarities survive, but also make us wonder whether they have not outlived their medium.
Schubert's Grand Duo in C for piano, four hands, is great music written for an audience of two.
Piano duets were the compact disks and music videos of the early 19th century, though ones that required action, not just apprehending.
The thick textures and restricted dimensions make audiences like Saturday's almost eavesdroppers, but for those who are doing the playing Schubert's immense, allusive but -- in this case -- private world rises up under the fingertips.


Brady Says Soviet Pact on Union Is the Key to Aid
The Treasury Secretary, Nicholas F. Brady, said today that an agreement on the relationship between the Soviet republics and the central Government would be a breakthrough toward financial aid from the West.
"That's the key that will unlock the door toward assistance," Mr.
Brady said in an interview after three days of intensive talks in Bangkok between a delegation of Soviet economic officials and the financial leaders of the seven largest industrial democracies.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


THE THOMAS NOMINATION: Confirmation Battle; Seemingly Endless Struggle Is Rooted In the Way the Government Operates
The savage battle over the confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas for a seat on the Supreme Court has its roots, in part, in the much-lamented breakdown of Senate operating procedures and standards and in the increasingly assertive role of interest groups.
Less widely discussed has been another factor that helped cause the fight: The choice by President Bush of a nominee whose qualifications for the job seemed marginal to significant segments of the political, judicial and legal communities, if not to majorities in any of the three.


In Wetlands Debate, Acres and Dollars Hinge on Definitions
IF you poke a stick into the ground and it comes out dripping wet, are you in a wetland?
Maybe.
When ducks come each year to nest in the reeds of a marshy pond, are they nesting in a marshland?
Perhaps.


Ann Taylor Officer Quits
Thomas H. K. Brooks, president and chief operating officer of the Ann Taylor Stores Corporation, a chain of specialty apparel stores that caters to working women, announced yesterday that he was leaving the company on Nov. 15 "in order to pursue other interests."
Mr.
Brooks joined the company in April 1989, two months after his father, Joseph E. Brooks, led a leveraged buyout of the store chain from the Allied Stores Corporation, a unit of the Campeau Corporation.
Mr.
Brooks was named to his current position in March 1990.


Hearings End as They Began: On a Note of Confrontation
At 2:02 this morning, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, banged his gavel to close the emotion-charged, 14-hour final day of hearings into accusations of sexual harassment against Clarence Thomas, President Bush's embattled nominee to the Supreme Court.
Senators today studied the transcripts, preparing for the all-day debate on Tuesday that will end with a 6 P.M. confirmation vote.


Reviews/Dance; The Emotional Essence of Graham
The misleading idea that Martha Graham was a so-called literary choreographer gained currency when she turned to literature and myth, deconstructing the Brontes and the Greeks alike.
Yet the point was in the retelling, and Graham did not so much retell as barely tell a story at all.
Gut emotions were her prime interest, and the proof was expressed in dazzling relief again this weekend in her treatment of the classic Greek drama of Jocasta and Oedipus in her 1947 dance masterpiece, "Night Journey."


Treasury Prices Inch Up Overseas
Prices of Treasury securities inched higher in thin overseas trading yesterday.
With banks and other major institutions closed in observance of Columbus Day, the cash market for Government bills, notes and bonds was closed in the United States.


BIG CREDIT BUREAU TO LET CONSUMERS SEE REPORTS FREE
Bowing to critics who say computerized credit records are littered with inaccuracies, TRW Inc., a leading compiler of personal financial data, said yesterday that it would allow consumers to obtain free copies of their credit histories.
The move appeared to be a significant turnabout for TRW, one of three large companies that compile financial information on more than 170 million Americans, or most adults.


Where Columbus's Arrival Still Incites Resentment
For the hundreds of Indians living in this forested corner of southeastern Connecticut, Columbus Day is traditionally a time of mourning.
It is a day to wear black arm bands and to voice pain and resentment over the devastation of a culture that began with Columbus's arrival.
But as the yearlong observance of the 500th anniversary of Columbus's "discovery" of America begins, hope seems to be overtaking despair among many Indians as their version of history gains acceptance as the correct one in forums, speeches and debates nationwide.
There is a sense, too, that their way of life has not only survived, but also flourished, despite the best efforts of settlers to wipe it out.


Q&amp;A
Fat Cells
Q. When you lose weight, do you lose fat cells?


Freshman Is in Hospital
Freshman running back MARSHALL FAULK of San Diego State, the nation's leading scorer and No. 2 rusher, has been hospitalized with a collapsed lung sustained in Saturday night's victory against New Mexico.
Faulk, who also injured two ribs, will remain hospitalized for observation at least until today, team doctor ROBERT STRAUMFJORD said.
The Aztecs don't know whether Faulk will play again this season.


Market Place; Some Warnings About Big Stocks
THE small stocks have been the stars of 1991, but by some measures the most overvalued stocks are still some of the largest.
In one review of the 392 industrial stocks in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500, the 50 largest stocks in that group had an average multiple of 4.6 times book value, and 14.4 times cash flow, said Chuck Clough, the chief market strategist for Merrill Lynch, which computed the figures.


Chess
Tigran Petrosian, the world champion from 1963 to 1969, used to say: "There is nothing special about winning with White. The trick is to win with Black." The contrary point of view has always been most evident in the play of another former titleholder from the Soviet Union, Anatoly Karpov, who concentrates all his winning efforts on White and generously grants draws -- even to players of much lesser stature -- when he has Black and the slight disadvantage of being second to move.
Petrosian's most recent disciple is the new world junior champion, grandmaster Vladimir Akopyan, also of the Soviet Union.
In the championship candidates' tournament in Mamaia, Romania, Aug. 20 to Sept. 2, both he and the Soviet international master Mikhail Ulibin achieved a very high 10 1/2-2 1/2 score, which required that they win heavily with Black as well as White.
Akopyan got the title for having faced a minutely stronger set of opponents than Ulibin in the 51-player Swiss-system competition, which was for players who have not reached their 20th birthday.


Off and Running! Time Trial for PS/1's
THE International Business Machines Corporation introduced two updated and more powerful versions of its PS/1 personal computer last week.
Unlike the original PS/1's, which were almost outdated even before they were introduced last year, the two new PS/1 models appear designed to meet a broad range of computing needs now and in the future.
"They're pretty darned attractive for home offices, and for small businesses, for that matter," said Raymond L. Boggs, director of small business and home office research for BIS Strategic Decisions of Norwell, Mass.


Powell Is a Nominee
MIKE POWELL, who broke the world long-jump record that had stood since 1968, was among six nominees announced yesterday for the Jesse Owens Award, given to the nation's top track and field performer in 1991.
The winner will be announced on Dec. 6.


Giants Receive 'Incomplete' On Handley's Report Card
It wasn't perfect. So Coach Ray Handley still is looking for the perfect Giants game.
"I'm not disappointed in a win," he explained tonight after his team staggered to a 23-20 decision after surrendering a 20-0 edge.


Vanilla Announcers, No Nuts, No Sprinkles
Oratorical drama was a five-game no-show.
By calling the Toronto Blue Jays-Minnesota Twins series with so much meat and so little relish, Dick Stockton and Jim Kaat produced a lot of knowledge but little delight.
Take the fifth game of the American League playoff series on Sunday.
Once the Saints-Eagles game ended (and 12 commercials rolled by), an introduction from Stockton to evoke the Blue Jays' problem, being down three games to one, was called for.
But all we got was a generic set-up:


A Yale College Dean Is Named
Donald M. Engelman, chairman of the molecular biophysics and biochemistry department at Yale University, has been nominated to serve as the acting dean of Yale College beginning July 1.
Mr.
Engelman will replace Donald Kagan, who plans to take a one-year leave to write a book on the origins of war.
The nomination to head the college, which has 5,100 undergraduates, was made by Benno C. Schmidt Jr., the university's president.
It requires approval by the Yale Corporation, the university's governing body.


A Warning On Hospitals Led Dinkins To an Inquiry
Mayor David N. Dinkins's decision to order a blue-ribbon investigation of New York City's hospitals was driven in part by a private warning that there were "systemic problems" in the municipal hospitals, mayoral aides said yesterday.
The warning came from Stanley Lowell, a lawyer the Mayor asked to look into conditions at Kings County Hospital, where a Hasidic student, Yankel Rosenbaum, died in August after receiving what state officials described as inadequate care in the emergency room.


Executive Salaries Static at Hughes
The Hughes Aircraft Company, the military and electronics contractor that is a subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, said today that senior management executives would receive no increase in total compensation next year as part of a new cost-cutting effort.
Annual salary reviews for all other salaried employees will be delayed from March until July.


Lasting Tragedy and Trauma for the Country; A Mostly Male Senate
To the Editor:
So the 98 male members of the Senate, under siege from wives, daughters, staffers and outraged women voters, have noticed that there is something a little unseemly, maybe even undemocratic, about having only two women colleagues.


An Old Irish Tale of Leaving Echoes Bittersweetly Today
With more than 100,000 Irish citizens estimated to have mailed their entries for Washington's immigration lottery that in the next year will provide 16,000 of them with the green card needed to work legally in the United States, the subject of departure from Ireland was once again on the minds of those who wanted to go and those who were staying behind.
As she left Saturday on a 10-day unofficial visit to the United States, President Mary Robinson touched on the issue, saying emigration was one of her principal concerns.
Mrs.
Robinson, whose post is largely ceremonial, noted that she was from Mayo, in the west of Ireland, where the the famines of the 19th century were particularly hard and where emigration is a tradition.
"One of the criticisms was that once you left Ireland somehow all links were cut, and I think that most of all I'll probably be trying to say all links are not cut," she said of her trip.


THE THOMAS NOMINATION: In Hometowns, Adamant Support for Thomas and Outrage Over the Senate; Prayers in Pin Point for a Native Son Who's Gone Far
On a sunny day near Moon River, with reggae music percolating from a car's tape deck and the aromas of a crab boil blowing in the wind, everything, even the wrenching drama in Washington, can seem pretty simple in the tiny community where Clarence Thomas was born.
"When she started talking, I said, 'No way,' " said Harry M. Geohaghan, as she paused from stuffing raffle tickets into envelopes to discuss Prof.
Anita F. Hill's accusations of sexual harassment against Judge Thomas.


EXECUTIVES
*
Argosy Group L.P., New York, an investment banking firm, named Steven Winograd managing director.
Mr.
Winograd, who had been a managing director in the mergers and acquisition department at Drexel Burnham Lambert, New York, was working as president at Mercury Financial Group, New York, a private investment banking firm that he established last year. *
Eastern Associated Coal Corp., Charleston, W. Va., a Hanson P.L.C. subsidiary, named Peter B. Lilly president.


Quotation of the Day
"After watching our Senate in action it's clear to me no decent or sane person will ever want a Supreme Court nomination ever again." -- Mac McChesney, a petroleum engineer in Morris, Okla.  [ A19:5. ]


Burmese Whose Silenced Voice Echoes: Aung San Suu Kyi
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the daughter of the founder of modern Burma, always understood that she had a special obligation to her father, U Aung San, martyred by an assassin's bullet in 1947 when she was only 2 years old, and to her country.
But for many years the nature of that responsibility was unclear to her.
In 1988, however, after nearly 30 years of isolationist, autocratic rule under U Ne Win, a revolution swept her up and pushed her forward, until she became its leader and most potent symbol.
Paradoxically, she is even more powerful today, after more than two years of forced silence and isolation under a repressive military regime.


Don't Eat Fish of New York City Waters
To the Editor:
It was heartening to note in your Sept. 21 article about New York City residents who ply the East River and other of our waters for seafood that the severely polluted waters around the city are recovering to the extent that blue crabs and other marine life are reappearing in places where they would not have been found a decade ago.
But it was disheartening to read that anglers and crabbers are eating or selling their catches in quantity.


Critic's Notebook; TV Skewers Sexual Harassers But Stereotypes Still Flourish
Television entertainment is constantly emitting messages, some more subtle than others, about the way we live.
Even the dizziest sitcom tries to reflect prevailing social values and attitudes.
Viewers absorb information about everything from wardrobe choices to bringing up children.
What, then, does prime time insinuate about the currently blazing issue of sexual harassment?
Finding an answer depends on whether you're looking in front of or behind the camera.
The scripts of most television shows tend to be, if you will, politically correct.
From ABC's "Roseanne" to CBS's "Murphy Brown," the network schedules are notable for the invigorating presence of strong women who are not likely to put up with unacceptable male shenanigans.
The adoring, subservient wife of "Father Knows Best" is a relic of the past.
And, in male territory, the most conspicuous sexual harassers -- Kirk on NBC's "Dear John" or, on Fox, Al Bundy of "Married . . . With Children" and the title character of "Drexell's Class" -- are obviously outrageous sleazeballs.
The scripts usually leave them unmistakably skewered.


President of Zaire Agrees to a Cabinet Led by Opposition
President Mobutu Sese Seko today accepted Zaire's first opposition-led Cabinet, the state radio and television said, three weeks after riots devastated the vast Central African country.
"Finally the new Government is here," the opposition leader, Prime Minister Etienne Tshisekedi, said as he announced the list of ministers, ending a two-week deadlock.


N.F.L. Is Reported To Control Patriots
The National Football League has assumed control of the New England Patriots for 30 days, allowing their owner, VICTOR KIAM, time to come up with a $38 million payment to buy out the team's minority owner, a lawyer said yesterday.
The extremely unusual move gives the league full control over the operation of the team, said R. ROBERT POPEO, lawyer for FRAN MURRAY, the minority owner.
Murray holds 49 percent of the team, and Kiam 51 percent.


Oil Is Up Sharply on Buying Linked to Supply Concerns
Crude oil climbed to its highest price in nearly nine months yesterday, as worries about supplies in the Soviet Union and Iraq lifted the market enough to prompt aggressive buying by speculative funds.
Oil for November delivery rose 37 cents on the New York Mercantile Exchange to settle at $23.46 a barrel, the highest settlement of a near-term crude contract since Jan. 22.


Cadigan Among Injured, Sending Jets Into a Spin
The Jets left Sunday's game against Houston with more than just a loss and a bruised ego.
The Oilers exacted a heavy toll on the Jets' offense, crippling three players with leg injuries that will force the team to shuffle players to compensate for the voids in preparation for a game with the Indianapolis Colts on Sunday.


Officials Say B.C.C.I. Owners Left a California Bank Reeling
In 1985, the Independence Bank was a solid little community bank, catering mainly to homeowners and small businesses, and rarely attracting any notice outside the San Fernando Valley.
Today after years of heedless growth, reportedly under the stewardship of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the California bank is reeling from losses.
The Federal Reserve Board is seeking $20 million in penalties from its former chairman.
The Justice Department, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other Government agencies are sifting through the bank's records to investigate suspicious transactions.
Other B.C.C.I.
Acquisitions
"This bank was destroyed by a management that simply ran it into the ground," said Fulvio Dobrich, the current chairman of Independence Bank, which is based here.


On Eve of Vote on Thomas, a Senator Grapples for Answers
Senator Richard C. Shelby of Alabama, one of a handful of uncommitted Democrats who will decide if Judge Clarence Thomas will serve on the Supreme Court, says he is not sure whether the judge or his accuser, Prof.
Anita F. Hill, is lying.
"I thought she made a strong impression," the Senator said in a telephone interview from Atlanta.
"She was articulate and she seemed to be in command of the situation. But I also think he made a powerful impression. I haven't decided what I'm going to do."


Pope Challenges Brazil Leaders on Behalf of Poor
Pope John Paul turned a pastoral mission to Brazil into a direct challenge to the authorities today, denouncing political practices that favor big landowners over impoverished peasants and urging President Fernando Collor de Mello to act without delay to solve "enormous social and economic problems."
The Pope's words at an open-air Mass here and at a meeting later with the President in Brasilia represented his most forthright and direct criticism of the authorities since he arrived in Brazil on Saturday.


TOP NORTH KOREAN ENDS BEIJING VISIT
President Kim Il Sung of North Korea has completed a meeting with Chinese leaders, the official Chinese news organizations reported today, but there was no indication of the outcome of the talks between the two increasingly isolated Communist neighbors.
Mr.
Kim, who will have spent a total of about 12 days in China by the time his special train rolls back across the Korean border, probably on Tuesday, received a spectacular welcome from his Chinese hosts.


Classical Music in Review
The Shanghai Quartet  Weill Recital Hall
Some day, my fantasy goes, enlightened wealth will make possible the world's best string quartets playing in Weill Recital Hall, 268 listeners at a time.
Hardly good economics, but this space -- handsomely renovated, its once overactive acoustics now under control -- places some of music's important literature in a proper environment.


Hearings Remain a Champion in Ratings
For a third day, the ratings for the hearings on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court continued to eclipse other television programming, including the baseball playoffs.
CBS saw its huge investment in major league baseball seriously damaged by having to compete with the hearings.
The surprise beneficiary was PBS, whose ratings almost quadrupled on Sunday when it was the only broadcast outlet carrying the hearing live in prime time.


Nova Pharmaceutical Names New Chairman
The Nova Pharmaceutical Corporation, a drug research and development company based in Baltimore, said yesterday that it had appointed Donald E. O'Neill as chairman.
Mr.
O'Neill, who retired earlier this year as a senior executive of the Warner-Lambert Company, succeeds John Lloyd Huck, a former chairman of Merck &amp; Company, who is staying on as a Nova director.
Mr.
O'Neill, 65, was an executive vice president and head of international operations with Warner-Lambert, which requires its senior executives to retire at 65.
Hans Mueller, Nova's president and chief executive, said the new chairman would be "a strong addition to Nova's management team" because of his experience with product development, marketing and international operations, and contacts in the pharmaceutical industry.


Unexpected Defiance Greets AIDS Guidelines
THE Federal guidelines to protect against health care workers' transmitting the AIDS virus to patients are in deep trouble because of growing doubts about their scientific basis.
The guidelines, issued in July by the Centers for Disease Control, call on all professional health groups to develop lists of procedures that the centers can consider as high risk for transmitting the AIDS virus.


Classical Music in Review
The New York Concert Singers  Merkin Concert Hall
For the director of a new ensemble, two tasks would seem to be paramount: getting the group to sound polished and cohesive quickly, and establishing a repertory persona.
Judith Clurman has succeeded in both those mandates with the New York Concert Singers, a 17-voice chamber choir she founded in 1988.
In the opening concert of its fourth season, on Sunday evening, the group sang with ravishing smoothness and warmth and with complete flexibility in dynamics and coloration.
These qualities were immediately apparent in Mendelssohn's "Sechs Spruche," (Op. 79), which opened the program, and they were shown off again in a group of Irish melodies, prettily arranged by Alice Parker, at the end.


Victor L. A. Christgau, Director Of Social Security, Is Dead at 97
Victor Laurence August Christgau, a former Republican United States Representative from Minnesota who became executive director of the Social Security Administration, died on Thursday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
He was 97 years old and lived in Washington.
Mr. Christgau died of pneumonia, the hospital said.


Nobel Peace Prize Winner


Against Clarence Thomas; Even 'Don't Know' Calls for a 'No' Vote
After four days of exhaustion, confusion and frustration, the Senate finally must decide.
Did Clarence Thomas overcome Anita Hill's charges of sexual misconduct?
Those who think so, and find him otherwise qualified, can feel justified in voting tonight to confirm him for the Supreme Court.
But those who believe Anita Hill will feel a compelling duty to vote no.
And so can those senators who came out of these ragged hearings unsure who was telling the truth.
Believe him or not, nothing in this bizarre episode enhances Judge Thomas's qualifications, which were slim to start.
Believe him or not, his behavior on the witness stand does nothing to enhance those qualifications.
Believe him or not, to confirm him is to gamble.


Business and Health; Drug Prices Draw Political Scrutiny
CRITICS of the pharmaceutical industry are again urging drug makers to slow their increases in prices, which keep rising much faster than inflation.
But most drug executives are keeping their heads down and their prices up.
With sales growth sluggish, raising prices aggressively is still the main way most drug companies keep profits growing.
Senator David Pryor and others are expected to renew their attacks tomorrow when the Senate Labor Committee takes up Senator Edward M. Kennedy's bill to force drug makers to provide price rebates at community health centers, AIDS clinics and other federally financed agencies.


Review/Television; A 2,000-Year-Old Jigsaw Puzzle
Since Nancy Porter began work on "Secrets of the Dead Sea Scrolls" last year, they have been much in the news: the editor in chief of the small group that had held a monopoly on research for decades was forced to resign; two American scholars managed, with the help of a computer, to re-create the text of the scrolls, and photographs of all the known texts were opened to outside researchers for the first time.
Unless some new breakthrough occurs today, Miss Porter's absorbing account of what she calls "the greatest archeological discovery of the century" is right up to the minute.
You can catch it this evening at 8 o'clock on Channel 13 and 49, and at 9 on Channel 21.
This true detective offering from "Nova" begins more than four decades ago with the discovery in a cave near the Dead Sea of religious manuscripts, including Old Testament texts.
Magen Broshi, the curator of the Shrine of the Book in Jerusalem, where these scrolls and others found later are housed, finds it "very very meaningful" that they were identified just as the United Nations decided on the creation of Israel.


Most in National Survey Say Judge Is the More Believable
After three days of televised inquiry into an accusation that Clarence Thomas had sexually harassed an aide, Americans still favor the judge's confirmation to the Supreme Court by a ratio of 2 to 1, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
The poll, taken Sunday night, shows that a majority of Americans remain skeptical of the accusations made against Judge Thomas by his former aide, Anita F. Hill.
More than half of those surveyed said they believed that the account of sexual harassment offered by Ms.
Hill, now a law professor at the University of Oklahoma, was "probably not true." The poll was taken after the Sunday afternoon testimony of four witnesses who said Professor Hill had spoken to them about her experiences with Judge Thomas.


Study Finds Gap in Benefits
Thousands of small businesses are losing valuable tax savings for themselves and their workers by neglecting to provide flexible fringe-benefit plans for employees, according to a study.
Only 31 percent of companies that respondd to a survey released Sunday by Grant Thornton, an accounting firm, said they offered "cafeteria plans," which permit employees to select the benefits they need most.
Any money a worker pays for such coverage is exempt from Social Security and income taxes, which benefits employers as well.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
TRW said it would allow consumers to get free copies of credit histories, bowing to critics who say computerized credit records are littered with inaccuracies.  [ Page A1. ]


Giants, Gasping at the Finish, Nudge Steelers
The Giants never make it easy, do they?
They beat the Steelers, 23-30, tonight on Matt Bahr's 44-yard field goal with four seconds left.
But the Giants should never have been in that predicament.


Lead Concentrations Down in Greenland Ice
TWENTY years after the United States and several European nations restricted the use of lead in gasoline to reduce levels of the pollutant in the soil and air, there is direct evidence that the policies are paying off on a global scale: concentrations of lead have dropped significantly in the Greenland ice cap.
The study, reported last week in Nature, also showed the levels of zinc and cadmium, pollutants produced in the burning of coal and the manufacture of iron and steel, have also dropped, although at a lesser rate than lead over the same period.


Baby Magazines to Be Sold
Time Warner Inc., the publisher of Parenting magazine, said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Baby Talk magazine and three related publications.
Terms were not disclosed but a source close to the deal and who spoke on condition of anonymity said it was worth about $10 million.


Thomas's Edge Steady, Vote Due Today
With the searing interrogation of Judge Clarence Thomas and Anita F. Hill at an inconclusive end, Senate support for the Supreme Court nominee showed no overall movement in either direction today and the battle turned to which side would control the remaining hours of public debate.
Professor Hill, whose veracity, character and even sanity were questioned by Republican Senators, appeared before reporters and supporters in Norman, Okla., where she teaches law, to denounce the attacks on her and repeat that her accusations of sexual harassment against Judge Thomas were true.


Dollar Higher in Light Day; Gold Declines in New York
The dollar gained against most major currencies yesterday in a lightly traded session dominated by speculators.
Gold prices fell, with gold for current delivery declining $1, to $358.90 a troy ounce, on the New York Commodity Exchange.
A late bid at the Republic National Bank in New York quoted fold at $358.40, down $1.10.


More Talks on Yugoslavia But Key Differences Remain
The Foreign Ministers of Serbia and Croatia met inconclusively today in The Hague with the chairman of the European Community's peace conference on Yugoslavia.
The conference chairman, Lord Carrington of Britain, set a meeting of the presidents of Yugoslavia's six republics in The Hague on Oct. 22 in a further effort to resolve some of the differences among the republics.


A Milestone Amid Ranger Malaise
Although one Ranger made personal history in the first period, the team sputtered to a collective halt in the third and fell to the Capitals, 5-3, last night before an irritated gallery of 13,325 at Madison Square Garden.
The veteran right wing Mike Gartner scored the 500th goal of his career with a flourish that provoked a standing ovation three minutes into the game.
But with three minutes to go and their team trailing by 4-3, the spectators were as subdued as the skaters wearing the home jerseys.


Maalox Account Moved From Grey to BBDO
Grey Advertising Inc., New York, had a "Maalox moment" yesterday when Rhone-Poulenc Rorer moved the agency's Maalox account, with estimated annual billings of $15 million, to BBDO New York.
The move followed a review, announced in June, that included Grey, the agency for five years; BBDO; Angotti, Thomas, Hedge Inc., New York, and Mullen Advertising in Wenham, Mass.


Palm Beach Journal; New for Season: To-Do at Post Estate
In another town, the construction of eight mansions on $2 million lots might not be viewed as bringing down the neighborhood's property values.
But in this enclave of wealth and privilege, Donald Trump's proposal to turn his 17.8-acre Mar-a-Lago estate into a subdivision for the elite has been met with a crusade to keep the town's most famous property intact.
By a unanimous vote on Oct. 8, the town council refused to allow the financially pressed real estate tycoon to break up the former Marjorie Merriwether Post estate, built in the 1920's and designated as a National Historic Landmark in 1980.
A spokesman for Mr.
Trump said he was pondering the council's suggestion that he revise his plan.


Potamkin Coming Back To Late-Night TV
After a four-year absence, commercials for the Potamkin Cadillac dealership, once standard fare on late-night television in New York, will begin reappearing later this year.
Victor H. Potamkin, who had closed his legendary Manhattan Cadillac dealership in 1987, reopens today(), this time as Potamkin Cadillac-Buick-Chevrolet.
The dealership has assigned the $5 million advertising account to Baldi Bloom &amp; Whelan Inc., New York, the same agency that handled Potamkin's advertising from from 1979 to 1987.


Retiree Donates Fortune to Education
Theodore R. Johnson never made more than $14,000 a year, but he invested wisely -- so wisely that he made $70 million.
Now he is donating $36 million of his fortune for education.
"I wanted to do something with the money to help education," Mr.
Johnson, a 90-year-old retired executive for United Parcel Service of America Inc., said today in his apartment in this South Florida retirement community.
"Need is the thing. There are so many kids that can't go to college."


Moscow Journal; The Next Revolution: A Gold Rush on Apartments
At the height of the coup in August, when the future of the nation and vague ideas like private property hung in the balance, a group of Muscovites gathered at an unusual new event -- an auction of city apartments -- to ignore the tanks in the streets and spend more than seven million rubles on buying a dozen apartments.
"It was a very successful auction because people trusted that what was happening in the streets that day was reversible," said Igor O. Dobryakov, deputy director of Housing Initiative.


The House's Turn on Assault Weapons
Earlier this year, the Senate showed some spine: It stared down the National Rifle Association and approved measures to strengthen gun control, including a ban on assault weapons.
Now the House has a chance to show similar courage by protecting a prohibition on assault weapons in an omnibus crime bill.
There is reason to challenge other elements in the large package of crime control measures.
But there should be no uncertainty at all about the need for the provisions to ban importation and domestic manufacture of 22 named assault weapons.
Or to ban copies of the named weapons sold under different names, as well as magazines holding more than seven rounds of ammunition.


More Than Just Up or Down
For more than a week, the Senate Judiciary Committee discussed sexual harassment without even being able to agree on how to pronounce it.
All the central figures in this tragedy -- the judge, the professor and the committee members -- have been caught in a fog of contradictory information about the past, and it is easy to be sorry for them all.
But the question now is not about the past but about the future, not about how to restore the good names of Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill but how to restore the good name of the Senate and do something about the moral squalor in the nation.


Pirates' Pitchers Defy Odds and 9 Hits
Zane Smith was short on rest.
Roger Mason was short on experience.
But when the two pitchers for the Pirates were done today, the Braves were the ones short on optimism and with absolutely no margin for error.
Smith, the left-hander forced into into an accelerated start because of the injury to Doug Drabek, worked seven and two-thirds exhausting but impeccable innings.
Then, Mason, a 33-year-old journeyman whose travels have almost exclusively been limited to the minor leagues, got four excrutiatingly tense outs to finish off Pittsburgh's devastating 1-0 victory over the Braves at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium.


Jerry Schlossberg, 55, Producer for the Stage
Gerald W. (Jerry) Schlossberg, who produced or co-produced 14 plays on and Off Broadway, died Thursday at Englewood (N.J.) Hospital.
He was 55 years old and lived in Englewood.
He died of cancer, his family said.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-15
Iraq's plans to build a hydrogen bomb were further along than generally believed and would have sharply increased the destructiveness of its atom bombs, weapons experts and U.N. documents show.
Page A1
A Burmese opposition leader won the Nobel Peace Prize for her struggle against the military Government in Myanmar, formerly Burma.
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi has been under house arrest in the Burmese capital since 1989 and may not know of her award.
A10


On My Mind; Harassment by Press
Every day in the newspapers and every hour on the hour on TV, the American press tells the country that not only the judge and his accuser are on trial in the harassment hearings but also the Senate, the nomination process, all men and the character of American society.
True enough, but missing from the list of defendants on the harassment charge is the institution that is shaking its finger at the nation.
The American press itself belongs on that list.


Saint or Criminal? Columbus Revisited
On Columbus Day 1991, there were celebrations of whatever it was that Christopher Columbus did when he got to wherever it was that he went.
But this year, the traditional parades were tinged with an unaccustomed sense of uncertainty about Columbus's legacy.


Kevin O'Connor Memorial
A memorial service for Kevin O'Connor, the actor and director, is to be held on Monday at 6 P.M. at the Anspacher Theater of the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, Manhattan.
A Kevin O'Connor Scholarship Fund has been set up at the Neighborhood Playhouse.
Contributions can be sent to Harold Baldridge at the Playhouse, 340 East 54th Street, New York, N.Y. 10022.
Mr.
O'Connor died of cancer on June 22.
He was 56 years old.


BRIEFS
*
American Travelers Corp., Warrington, Pa., an insurance company, will purchase United General Life Insurance Co., Corpus Christi, Tex., for undisclosed terms. *
Brown &amp; Sharpe Manufacturing Co., North Kingstown, R.I., a maker of high-technology tools, said it had agreed to buy all of the stock of Thomas Mercer Ltd., a British measuring-device maker, for $2 million.


Judges of the 'Mother Court' Spend a Day at the Races
What do Federal judges do to get away from the clanking scales of justice, the expostulating lawyers and the sobbing defendants?
Sometimes, they go to the races.
On Saturday, a group of judges from Federal District Court in Manhattan left their flowing black robes behind and went to Belmont Park for the annual running of the Mother Court Stakes, a race the court's Collegiality Committee put together five years ago.


Bridge
If there were a world championship for family teams, the Pollenzes of Long Island would be among the favorites.
They include the brothers, Emmett, of East Meadow, and Ralph, of Wantagh, and four players in the next generation, Alex and Mitchell, also of Wantagh; Lynne Weber, of Redwood City, Calif., and Dr.
Dan Gerstenblitt, a cousin, of Plainsboro, N.J.
All of them except Lynne combined Sunday to win the Flight A Swiss Teams at the Long Island sectional tournament in Melville, L.I.
They were helped by the diagramed deal in which Ralph Pollenz as North employed an unusual bidding device.
Two diamonds was Reverse Flannery, showing five spades and four hearts, a technique popular with those who use short-suit-first canape methods.


A.T.&amp;T. Link to Computer
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company yesterday announced a wireless hookup for its portable computer that will allow the notebook-size machine to receive messages.
A.T.&amp; T. said it was the first such message-receiving system for a portable computer.
The company said its Safari computer, which it started selling earlier this year, would be able to connect to the Skytel Corporation's satellite-based paging system.
Skytel will provide a pocket-size device that connects to the Safari.
The messages can be read on the computer screen and stored for later reference.


Baylor's Job Interviews
DON BAYLOR, the Milwaukee Brewers' hitting coach for the last two seasons, is scheduled to be interviewed this week by both the Brewers and Seattle Mariners about managing vacancies, The Milwaukee Sentinel reported yesterday. (AP)


Pit Viper's Life: Bizarre, Gallant and Venomous
STARING head-on into the face of an angry rattlesnake is one of those things you are not supposed to do and you know it.
The thinking brain tells itself, "Why don't you get out of the way, fool?" while the primal brain resorts to a simple, "Aaagh!"
More unnerving still is the feel of the snake's rattle, a little castanet made of something like fingernail that vibrates ominously at 50 cycles per second.


Florio Asks Study On Insurance Bonds
Gov.
Jim Florio yesterday ordered the State Insurance Department to analyze how much drivers would have to pay if the state issued bonds to pay the debt of the defunct high-risk automobile-insurance pool.
A spokesman for Mr.
Florio, Jon Shure, said the Governor did not think that the proposal, made by an industry group, was a good idea.
"But he wants to be able to speak with facts rather than just opinion," Mr.
Shure said.


Youth, 17, Beaten by Flatbush Gang in a Bias Attack
In what the police called a bias incident, as many as 20 white youths attacked a black teen-ager who stopped at a grocery store in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn Saturday night with three friends to buy soda, authorities said.
The 17-year-old victim, Garry Aviles of Brooklyn, was knocked unconscious with a bat and cut on the stomach with a razor, the police said.
The car he was riding in was virtually demolished by his attackers, the police said.


General Cinema Threatens To Drop Its Bid for Harcourt
The General Cinema Corporation said yesterday that it would drop its proposed $1.5 billion bid for troubled Harcourt Brace Jovanovich unless a group of bondholders that has held out from the deal agrees to go along by Monday at 5 P.M.
In a strongly worded news release, the company's spokesman, Peter Farwell, said General Cinema would not allow the talks to string out any further.


Tarpley Wants Meeting
Dallas Mavericks forward ROY TARPLEY, who was fined $500 for missing a team practice and dinner on Sunday, yesterday requested a meeting with counselors at a drug and alcohol rehabilitation clinic in Houston where he is an outpatient.
Tarpley could not be reached for comment, but his lawyer, JAY ETHINGTON, said: "I can assure you it is a non-drug-related personal matter. He's going to see his drug counselors simply because he enjoys a real good emotional relationship with them."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Assigned Eric Bullock, outfielder, outright to Indianapolis of the American Association.
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Mel Stottlemyre, pitching coach, to a one-year contract with an option year.
Named Earle Fisher marketing representative.


In 6th Grade, Opinions Abound on Senate Panel
Like most Americans, Fran Guzy's sixth-grade students at Jefferson Middle School are abuzz over the shifting tides and emotions of the drama in the Senate Judiciary Committee and just as perplexed about the truth.
Some of her 18 pupils -- all 11 or 12 years old -- grumbled today that the televised hearings into Anita F. Hill's sexual harassment charges had usurped cartoons and their favorite television shows over the weekend.
However, they said they had watched bits of the live hearings, seen newscasts or talked about the hearings with their parents or relatives.


What Did Columbus Do To Deserve a Big Parade?
Yesterday, 499 years after the voyage that started it all, some people celebrated whatever it was that Christopher Columbus did when he got to wherever it was that he went.
The marching bands high-stepped their way up Fifth Avenue and the pompons swished, the same as always.
But this time, there was an unaccustomed sense of uncertainty.
Was Columbus a discoverer or a hype artist?
A criminal or a saint?
Penniless or rich?
The questions just seemed to keep coming.


Focus on Head Of Compliance
The head of a new compliance committee at Salomon Brothers Inc. faces accusations in Europe that he tried to cover up improper British Government aid during a corporate takeover, according to a news report yesterday.
Lord Young of Graffham is in charge of the compliance committee set up last month by Salomon, which is reeling from a bond market scandal.
The committee is made up of four outside directors who will keep tabs on the firm's compliance and trading procedures.


Compelling Evidence on Both Sides, But Only One Can Be Telling Truth
The Senate takes up the debate on Tuesday on the fitness of Judge Clarence Thomas to serve on the Supreme Court with public-opinion polls running in his favor, but with the stain of charges that he sexually harassed Prof.
Anita F. Hill undispelled for now, and probably forever, legal experts and Senate aides said today.
The failure of three long days of hearings to thrash out the truth behind the accusations is not unusual, those experts said.
But it confronts the Senate with the ugliest of choices.
It can reject Judge Thomas's nomination, blotting his record without proof of misbehavior.
Or it can confirm him, and run the risk -- however small -- that evidence will emerge later to show that the nominee had baldly lied to a Congressional committee under oath.


Hill Advisers Say They Took the Initiative to Help
When Prof.
Anita F. Hill arrived in Washington last Wednesday, only two days before she was to testify before the Senate Judiciary Committee, she still had not met most of the lawyers who would represent her.
The legal advisers who counseled her as she testified were assembled largely through the efforts of a group of women law professors who rushed, on their own, they say, to organize legal talent for her.


INSIDE
Baker and Arafat Wrangle
Secretary of State Baker and Yasir Arafat engaged in a tug-of-war over the formation of a Palestinian delegation to Mideast peace talks.
Page A12.
L.I.
Siege Ends in Suicide
A rifleman whose rampage in Queens left his father and three other men dead killed himself in a stranger's bedroom on Long Island.
Page B1.
Pirates Need One More
Pittsburgh beat Atlanta, 1-0, and grabbed a three-games-to-two lead in the National League playoff.
Page B7.


Lasting Tragedy and Trauma for the Country; Can He Now Serve?
To the Editor:  The wrong question is being asked about Judge Clarence Thomas.
The Senate was never designed to pass legal judgment on a sexual harassment case, nor should it.
The question is whether Clarence Thomas can now serve as an objective, dispassionate justice of the United States Supreme Court for the next 40 years.


Stottlemyre Is Staying
The Mets announced yesterday that they had signed Mel Stottlemyre to a new contract as pitching coach.
Stottlemyre, whose deal is for one season with an option for another, had been told by the Mets at the end of the season that the organization was interested in retaining him.
But Stottlemyre, who has been the pitching coach since 1984, had said he would reserve his decision until the club selected its new manager.


Software's Giants to Square Off
Early next year, I.B.M. and the Microsoft Corporation, the two giants of personal computing, will go head to head in their first direct confrontation.
It is a contest that may well determine the shape of the computer industry.
It is a crucial battle that will pit I.B.M.'s ability to produce a next-generation, more powerful software system against Microsoft's pervasive influence in the world of personal computers.
While the International Business Machines Corporation conceded last week that its operating system would be delayed a few months while new features were hurriedly added, it still insisted that it would be delivered in a timely fashion, probably next March.


The Talk Of Hollywood; 'Am I Nervous? You Bet I Am'
At the 20th Century Fox commissary, Joe Roth, the head of the studio, bit into his cheeseburger.
"So many movies, so many
bad
movies," he said, shaking his head. "Ticket prices are up.
Attendance is down.
The economy is bad.
Disposable income is leveling off.
The numbers just don't add up."
Across town at Universal Pictures, Tom Pollock, chairman of MCA, said: "Look, there's a finite pool of talent. More movies are being made than there are talented people to make them. That results in a dilution of quality." Another motion picture executive said pointedly: "Are there any pictures you really want to see? Go to the cineplex. What's playing?"


Observer; Suggest And Destroy
Being a lawyer, Anita Hill must have known from the start that the White House would have to destroy her reputation in order to save Judge Thomas's.
This is the way of the lawyer with those who take such matters into court.
It's why only the most hot-headed accusers refuse to cool down and take their grievances to the psychiatrist, chaplain or bartender instead of the courtroom.
Prosecuting the victim is the legal tradition.


Saturday: Rutgers Versus Reality
Rutgers has won five of its six games, the best start in a decade for the Scarlet Knights, but the record does not fool Coach Doug Graber.
"We are a very quiet 5-1," Graber said yesterday during a conference call of the Big East coaches.
"We're not a great football team. I've never said we were.


By Design; Hair Rollers at the Office
Like many businesswomen, the designer Donna Karan often has lunch at her desk.
But these days, before she tackles her health salad and hot water with lemon, she reaches for a few jumbo hair rollers.
Without consulting a mirror, she twists a hank of hair up over each roller and lets it stay there until her next appointment.
Reshaping her hair with a toss, Ms.
Karan emerges with a coif that may look a bit tousled, but definitely has more volume.
Rollers, those bastions of 1960's high-rise hair styles, have returned to favor at the right time.
Like a good many other women, Ms.
Karan is letting her hair grow longer after wearing it cropped short, and the quick roller routine during the day gives her hair some shape and fullness.


Cellular Network's Big Step
Telecommunications executives have long realized that for the cellular telephone to capture the public's imagination, cellular companies have to improve service and provide a national network like that for the more familiar telephone attached to a wall.
Now, McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., the nation's largest provider of such service, is about to take a big step toward achieving that goal.
McCaw plans to announce in New York tomorrow that after more than a year's work and a $200 million investment, the company has knit together its properties in four giant regions of the country in the first major move toward a national network.


Cornered by L.I. Police After 4 Die, Queens Man Kills Himself
Cornered and exhausted, facing capture and prison, a 47-year-old rifleman who had given up his hostages shot himself to death in a stranger's bedroom on Long Island yesterday, more than 30 hours after a rampage at his nearby Queens home that left his father and three other men dead and two neighbors critically wounded.
The Nassau County police, who had mounted a patient, around-the-clock siege in hopes of a peaceful surrender, said the suspect, Andrew T. Brooks Jr., fired a single shot from his sawed-off .22-caliber rifle into his head and fell dead at the foot of a bed on the second floor of a house in Lake Success about 9 A.M.


Message to Myanmar
By awarding the 1991 Peace Prize to Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the inspirational leader of Myanmar's democracy movement, the Norwegian Nobel Committee gives fresh hope to a people oppressed by one of the world's ugliest remaining tyrannies.
This recognition may shame Asian nations like China and Thailand into withdrawing economic and political support from Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi's jailers, the State Law and Order Restoration Council, or Slorc.
Even if these neighboring regimes remain unmoved, Myanmar's democrats can be heartened by the examples of previous Peace Prize winners like Lech Walesa and Archbishop Desmond Tutu, whose causes passed from hopelessness toward splendid triumph.


Swiss Play Small Role In Iraq Arms Deals
To the Editor:
In "Defeating Hussein, Once and for All" (Op-Ed, Sept. 26), Senator Al Gore labels Switzerland, among other things, a "well-known haven for arms dealers and proliferators."


With the 2-Year-Olds, Sure Bets Don't Exist
Officially, they are "juveniles." Affectionately, Angel Cordero Jr. calls them "babies." Most racing people describe them as "precocious." But whatever they are called, they are 2-year-old race horses, and they keep reminding us old folks of a lesson of life, especially racing life: Don't rush to judgment.
This applies to all levels and all ages in racing, and it's no secret to the trainers and jockeys and bettors who know a flash in the pan when they see one.
But it's a lesson that needs repeating every time a young horse comes along and breaks a speed record and promptly gets billed as the next Secretariat.


Patterns
The Odyssey Begins
The Milan fashion shows ended Thursday with the runway presentations of Gianni Versace and Giorgio Armani, the first a blazing rock opera, the latter a kind of symphony of tailored simplicity and taste. (And like a symphony, it was greeted with bravos.)


T.W.A. Is Cutting Fares To Lure Business Fliers
Gambling that many business travelers are more interested in saving money than time, T.W.A. yesterday announced $500 round-trip fares to more than 40 cities in the United States.
But to qualify for the fares, which the carrier said represent a saving of 40 percent to 60 percent on current full-coach prices, most of the flights will have to connect through the Trans World Airlines hub in St.
Louis.
T.W.A. said the fares were the first such widespread discounts aimed at business travelers and are intended to help the carrier attract a wider business clientele.


Ex-Officers in Parliament Fight to Save Their Regiments
The retired officers and men of some of Britain's oldest and most storied military regiments dug in at the House of Commons today, waging a rear-guard campaign to save their units from a Government plan to reduce Britain's armed forces by 44,000 troops.
In impassioned language on the floor of the Commons, defenders of the Royal Scots, the Life Guards and the Gordon Highlanders, among others, skirmished with Government ministers on the opening day of Parliament in a lively debate that ranged far beyond questions of economics and the need to reduce Government expenditures.


Hospital Investigates Heart Attack Death Of a Brooklyn Man
The death of a 67-year-old Brooklyn man of a heart attack last Friday at the Interfaith Medical Center is under investigation, officials of the private hospital said last night.
The family of the patient, Ivan Williams, claims that he was denied medical treatment at the hospital's Atlantic Avenue emergency room and suffered the first of two heart attacks while being transferred to the medical center's Prospect Place division, said Lars Larmon, a spokesman for the Brooklyn hospital.


USAir Loss Lower Than Expected
USAir reported a smaller-than-expected quarterly loss yesterday but also announced a series of measures to cut costs by about $400 million next year.
One analyst said the carrier still had far to go to reduce its labor costs, which are among the highest for a leading carrier.
USAir Group said it lost $81.4 million for the third quarter, compared with a loss of $120.3 million in the period last year.
Revenues for both third quarters totaled $1.6 billion.


Father of Nobel Laureate Founded Modern Burma
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, who won the Nobel Peace Prize yesterday, is the daughter of a revolutionary who is regarded as the founder of modern Burma: U Aung San, who was assassinated in 1947.
She was 2 years old at the time and he was 32.
Mr.
Aung San was the most powerful figure in Burmese politics when he and about a half-dozen other officials were killed by two men with automatic weapons who burst into their executive council meeting in Rangoon.
He was the head of the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League and de facto prime minister in an interim Government on the eve of the country's independence.
Burma became formally free of British rule in January 1948.


Despite Accord, South African Violence Rages On
More than 100 black South Africans have been killed in politically motivated violence since the Government and South Africa's two most prominent black political organizations signed a peace accord a month ago committing all sides to put an end to such killing.
But the African National Congress and the Inkatha Freedom Party, the major signatories to the agreement on Sept. 14, have not publicly backtracked on their pledges to make peace, despite recriminations and friction between some of their supporters.


Books of The Times; How 'Oh No, After You' Became 'No, No, Me First'
The Rise of Selfishness in America By James Lincoln Collier 308 pages.
Oxford University Press. $24.95.
"Selfishness in America" seems like a rich, if somewhat overexamined, subject for the social historian.
It has been more than a decade since Christopher Lasch's "Culture of Narcissism" appeared, 15 years since Tom Wolfe's "Me Decade" essay, and what with recent social developments in this country -- the growing influence of special-interest groups, the savings-and-loan scandal, the rise of "political correctness," yuppie consumerism, assorted new-age cults, etc. -- there seems room for a new book on the topic.
Selfishness, after all, can be seen as the flip side of the great American promise of freedom and the pursuit of happiness, rugged individualism run amok, the frontier ethic and Emersonian self-reliance taken to an extreme.


Republicans Gain in Battle By Getting Nasty Quickly
Although many on Capitol Hill have stepped up to bouquets of microphones in the last few days to proclaim themselves seekers of truth in the harrowing contest between Anita F. Hill and Clarence Thomas, very few people in Washington were seeking truth at all.
As in all contests in the capital, the parties and the interest groups had already staked out their positions and were spending all their time trying to manipulate the process that they spoke of with words of such concern and reverence.
A Contest About Power
The scalding contest was not only about race and sex, and women and men.
It was about power, and who knows how to use it more effectively.
The answer so far is, still, the Republicans.


A Possible Impact of Thomas Case
NO matter how the Senate votes tonight, Anita F. Hill's clash with Judge Clarence Thomas might have some effect on the content of the nation's advertising.
Executives say the confrontation could lead to changes, particularly in the realm of sexual stereotyping.
The executives, who joined the rest of the nation in being mesmerized by the dramatic, if sometimes sordid, testimony, said yesterday that the debate over assertions of sexual harassment might accelerate changes that have taken place in advertising since the women's liberation movement gained strength two decades ago.


Chop No Longer a Charm As the Braves Lose Again
As unlikely as the whole fourth inning was, as unlikely as it was that a runner should miss third base on his way home in a scoreless game, as unlikely as it was that Roger Mason should be left in the game to get the last three outs, it was more unlikely that the Pittsburgh Pirates should complete their previously futile season in Atlanta by shutting out the potent Braves for the final 18 innings.
Zane Smith and Mason, picking up where three of their teammates left off in a 10-inning, 3-2 victory Sunday night, stopped the Braves, 1-0, today as the Pirates snatched a three-games-to-two lead in the National League playoff.
The shutout string is remarkable considering that the Braves were shut out only three times in 81 regular-season home games.


A Curb on Free Cigarettes
California has enacted legislation to bar tobacco marketers from giving out samples of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco to people in public places beginning next year.
The bill, which Gov.
Pete Wilson signed on Saturday, was supported by anti-smoking lobbyists and other health organizations who contend that when cigarettes are given away, minors can obtain them.


Tucson Electric In Dutch Auction
The Tucson Electric Power Company said yesterday that its latest Dutch auction had succeeded after 16 previous auctions had failed.
The auction involved $117.5 million in tax-exempt revenue bonds originally issued in January 1988 through the Industrial Development Authority of Pima County, Ariz.
Because the bonds are insured by Financial Security Assurance, they are rated triple-A by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
In a Dutch auction, the rate is periodically adjusted through bids, and once established, it must be at a level acceptable to all the holders selling the securities.
In a failed auction, the rate cannot be adjusted to a level acceptable to all those selling the bonds.
Tucson Electric's previous Dutch auctions failed because the rate was not offered at an acceptable level.


U.N. Says Iraq Was Moving Toward More Potent Bombs
Iraq's efforts to build a hydrogen bomb, described last week by the United Nations, were further along than generally believed and would also have sharply increased the destructiveness of its atomic bombs, according to weapons experts and United Nations documents.
Because hydrogen bombs can be hundreds or thousands of times more powerful than atomic bombs and vastly more destructive, some analysts expressed alarm about the recent disclosures.
America's first hydrogen bomb, exploded in 1952, was about 700 times more forceful than the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima in August 1945.


CHRONICLE
There are many ways to survive crises and SUZANNE FARRELL, BETTY FURNESS, LETITIA BALDRIGE, BRIGITTE GERNEY and MARLA HANSON will describe some of them this afternoon at a forum at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Mrs.
Baldrige had cancer, Ms.
Gerney had her legs crushed when a crane collapsed in Manhattan and Ms.
Hanson, a model, was slashed in the face by a man hired by her landlord.
Miss Farrell interrupted her career as a principal dancer with the New York City Ballet Company four years ago for a hip replacement.
She returned for two more years, retired in 1989 and last month underwent a second hip replacement.
"I had danced all of my life and was unprepared for anything else meaningful," she said yesterday.
"I was not looking forward to starting all over again from scratch, relearning to walk."


Quinnett Fighting for Spot on Knicks' Bench
After two seasons with the Knicks, Brian Quinnett finds himself in an uncomfortable position.
He is fighting to make the team.
And even if he makes it, his prospects for regular playing time are not good.
Circumstances have changed Quinnett's status from the end of last season, when he looked to be a definite part of the Knicks' future.
New York's acquisition of Xavier McDaniel has dropped Quinnett to third-string small forward, behind McDaniel and Kiki Vandeweghe.
And with Anthony Mason winning the battle to be Charles Oakley's backup, the power forward position looks stable, too.


Audis, Champagne and Liposuction: Capitalism Arrives for Many Poles
The newest members of Poland's nouveau riche, an increasingly large and visible class of capitalists in this former workers' state, are easy to identify these days by their expensive Swiss watches and the luxury cars they drive.
It is no longer remarkable to hear of Poles who are ordering Moet et Chandon by the case, vacationing in Spain and speaking of their tummy tucks and liposuction.
Some economists see the creation of a new elite based on money, not Communist Party membership, as an essential element in Poland's -- and indeed the region's -- transition to democracy.
But others worry that the "nowobogacy," or new rich, could have the opposite effect, stirring deep resentment in a country where the average industrial wage remains about $150 a month.


Twins Are Looking to Double Post-Season Fun
The Minnesota Twins have four days between now and the start of the World Series on Saturday to savor their American League pennant.
Some, like Kent Hrbek, will fight the anxiety of waiting for a National League opponent and a first pitch thrown in anger by hunting or fishing.
Chuck Knoblauch, the rookie second baseman, who neither hunts nor fishes, will try to take in every movie he missed during a wondrous first year in the American League.
Unless he takes in "Cinderella," however, it's doubtful that he will find a plot any more magical than the one that just unfolded in the first tier of the post-season for the league champions.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
BMW Leasing Corp., Wilmington, Del., is issuing $200 million in 7.375 percent Eurobonds due in 1996 at 99.575 to yield 7.418 percent through Dresdner Bank A.G.
The bonds are guaranteed by the German car maker BMW A.G.


5 Salvador Rebels Go to Mexico for Parley
Five Salvadoran leftist guerrilla chiefs were flown out of battle zones to Mexico City today to work on a possible cease-fire accord in the 12-year civil war, rebel officials said.
On the third day of a renewed round of United Nations-sponsored negotiations to end the civil war, government and rebel envoys spoke optimistically but said political problems remained.


Our Towns
This is a follow-up column about a Newark schoolgirl named Nathalie Pagan who had been to Maryland once, oh, and the edge of Pennsylvania too, although she was sleeping in the back seat at the time.
Eleven-year-old Nathalie was one of thousands of New Jersey parochial-school students who sought $5 donations last winter to help replant burned areas of Yellowstone National Park.
The prize for selling the most trees was a 2,282-mile trip to Yellowstone, a mystical place larger even than Newark.
Every day after school, sometimes alone, sometimes with her Mom, Nathalie went door to door in her poor north Newark neighborhood, where fixing forests in a place called Wyoming does not top every family's priority list.


New Yorker Wounded in Moscow Shooting
A schoolteacher from upstate New York was wounded today in the crossfire of a shootout at a Moscow cafe, the Tass news agency reported.
The shootout, which occurred at a cooperative restaurant, left a Soviet man dead, the news agency said.
The fight took place during a party for Soviet and U.S. cooking experts at the cafe, Tass said.


Albert Neibacher, 81, L.I. Lutheran Pastor
Dr.
Albert L. Neibacher, a former pastor of St.
Luke's Lutheran Church in Manhattan and a community leader on the West Side, died on Friday at Mather Hospital in Port Jefferson, L.I.
He was 81 years old and lived in Brookhaven, L.I.
He died of a heart attack, relatives said.


Gains on Wall St. Swell Primerica's Profit
Reflecting the renewed financial vigor of Wall Street, the Primerica Corporation yesterday reported strong earnings that were pushed higher than analysts had expected by a threefold increase in profits at its brokerage subsidiary, Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
The profits at Primerica, the diversified financial services company, rose 31.4 percent, to $123.5 million, in the third quarter, or $1.11 a share, compared with $94 million, or 82 cents a share, in the third quarter of 1990.
Smith Barney posted third-quarter earnings of $35.9 million, compared with $11.2 million a year ago.


Daniels to Delay Tryout
LLOYD DANIELS will concentrate on his drug rehabilitation program before trying out with the Atlanta Hawks, the club's general manager, PETE BABCOCK, said yesterday.


L.I. Machine to Create Taste of Big Bang
STYMIED by a lack of money for eight years, physicists on Long Island have finally begun building a machine to recreate a dollop of the mysterious soup from which the universe is believed to have condensed.
The machine will be housed in a 2.5-mile tunnel that was abandoned in 1983 when Federal officials canceled construction of the great Isabelle particle accelerator that it was to have contained.
Built at a cost of $200 million, the tunnel has served no more purpose since then than a plundered Egyptian tomb.


Contract Stalemate Cancels Concerts
A contract stalemate at the Hartford Symphony Orchestra has resulted in the cancellation of three performances, including the opening pair of classical subscription concerts scheduled for today and tomorrow.


Life Partners Group Appoints Key Officer
Gene H. Bishop, a powerful Texas banker before turmoil in oil and real estate ruined the region's economy and financial institutions in the late 1980's, was named chairman and chief executive today of Life Partners Group Inc., a life insurance firm with assets of $2.7 billion.
Life Partners was organized in 1990 when Hicks, Muse &amp; Company, a Dallas investment firm, acquired seven life insurance companies from the financially troubled ICH Corporation for $495 million, with $410 million raised from loans issued by the General Electric Credit Corporation.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
N.A.
5.00
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
N.A.
4.96
7.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
N.A.
5.01
7.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
N.A.
7.16
8.65
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.87
7.88
8.93
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.02
9.02
9.98
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.87
6.87
7.83
N.A. -- Not available because of Columbus Day holiday *Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellweather bonds, notes and bills


Chemists Duplicate Miracle of Saint's Blood
THE preserved, clotted blood of early saints of the Roman Catholic Church liquefies on certain ceremonial occasions, drawing crowds of faithful pilgrims eager to witness the miraculous phenomenon.
But a team of Italian scientists has conducted experiments showing that medieval chemists could easily have created imitation blood that would do the same thing.
In a report published by the British journal Nature, a group headed by Dr.
Luigi Garlaschelli, a chemist at the University of Pavia, says that blood liquefaction can be explained in terms of a phenomenon called thixatropy.
Certain substances, including some types of mayonnaise, are normally thick gels, but can be liquefied instantly by shaking or stirring.
Part of the ritual of checking the miraculous blood of Saint Januarius, observed every few months in Naples, for example, involves inverting the blood's reliquary container.
This simple act is enough to liquefy certain thixotropic gels, the authors note.
Left to stand, such liquids soon revert to gels.


Judge Postpones Trial for Miller
Jury selection in the Federal fraud trial of the State Assembly Speaker, Mel Miller, which was to begin today, was postponed until the end of the month because of the judge's court calendar.
Judge Raymond J. Dearie of Federal District Court in Brooklyn told prosecution and defense lawyers yesterday that he could not begin the Miller trial until the completion of the window-contract racketeering case, a mob trial that Judge Dearie is presiding over.


EXECUTIVES
*
Digitalk Inc., Los Angeles, a developer of object-oriented programming systems, named John B. Carrington president and chief operating officer. *
J.
J.
Kenny Co., New York, a McGraw-Hill unit that provides municipal securities information and other services, named Edward J. McBride senior vice president.


An 'Easier' Stretch Ahead? Jets Dare Not Use the Word
Just in case Jets fans may have taken a glance at the schedule for the next month and a half and made plans to cash in a certificate of deposit to buy playoff tickets, Coach Bruce Coslet has a couple of cautionary words: "caveat emptor," or "let the buyer beware."
Coslet has also glanced at the schedule and he, too, noticed that in the next six weeks, his Jets, now 3-4, have two games with Indianapolis (0-7) and single games with Green Bay (1-5), San Diego (1-6) and New England (2-4).


A Police Post In L.I. Home: What It's Like
Dulce Acuna found out what a police command post looks like after the police have left: half-eaten bagels, half-empty cups of coffee and half-drunk cans of soda are all over the place.
In the living room, in the attic, in her son's bedroom.
Mrs.
Acuna knows this because a police command post was set up in her stucco-and-brick home in Lake Success, L.I., over the weekend.
She lives next door to the house where a deranged man barricaded himself and committed suicide after killing four other people in Queens.


INSIDE
U.S. Seeks $1 Billion From Japan for Science
The Bush Administration asked Japan for more than $1 billion to help build a particle accelerator, the Superconducting Supercollider, to explore the basic constituents of matter.
Without a contribution from Japan, the $8.4 billion project in Texas will die.
Page A14.
Gorbachev's Yugoslav Effort
The Soviet President met with the leaders of Serbia and Croatia in Moscow and won an accord on a new truce and peace talks.
Page A10.
Seidman's Parting Shot
L.
William Seidman said he would have quit last year as the nation's senior banking regulator, but he was assailed by John H. Sununu.
Page D1.
State-College Tuitions Soar
States' fiscal crises have forced lawmakers to impose some of the steepest tuition increases in years, and in some cases a two-tier rate.
Page B9.
Nobel Winner in Economics
Ronald H. Coase, a British-born economist retired from the University of Chicago, won the Nobel Memorial Prize in economics.
Page D1.


Stocks Up Sharply, With Dow Rising 21.92
Stock prices moved sharply higher yesterday, mainly on what the market saw as good news in a slew of corporate earnings reports.
The Dow Jones industrial average, up 21.92 points, to 3,041.37, moved within 14 points of its record, while the Nasdaq composite set a new high of 534.10, up 8.44 for the day.


Physicians Failed to Follow Policy In Lawyer's Death, Hospital Says
Harlem Hospital has acknowledged in an internal review that doctors there did not follow hospital policy when they moved to discharge a patient before receiving all the results of blood tests.
The patient, a prominent lawyer and friend of Mayor David N. Dinkins, bled to death.
At the request of the family, William Chance, was not discharged.
He died in the hospital's emergency room on Oct. 7 after spending 18 hours there.


Why Seidman Stayed On For an Extra Year of Duty
In his last full day as the nation's senior banking regulator, L. William Seidman said he would have left more than a year ago had he not been assailed by the White House chief of staff, John H. Sununu.
"Absolutely no question about it," Mr.
Seidman said as he prepared to relinquish the chairmanship of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Resolution Trust Corporation.
Referring to his visit to the White House in the spring of 1990 and the personality clash with Mr.
Sununu, who sought very publicly then to push him out the door, Mr.
Seidman said, "I went over there with the purpose of arranging an amicable, friendly and smooth transition."


Excerpts From Senate Debate on Thomas Nomination
Following are excerpts from the debate in the Senate today on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, as transcribed by The Associated Press, Reuters and the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a private transcription service.
GEORGE J. MITCHELL Democrat of Maine
In 1980 the Republican National Convention adopted a platform which called for the appointment of judges committed to the pro-life position on abortion.
Since 1980, in honoring that commitment, Presidents Reagan and Bush have established as a litmus test for a potential nominee to the Supreme Court: that person's position on abortion.
The President opposes a woman's right of choice.
In order to have any hope of being nominated to the Supreme Court, so must any potential nominee.


Kings County Hospital Study Faults Affiliation System
A lawyer appointed by Mayor David N. Dinkins to investigate conditions at Kings County Hospital has concluded that the conflicting interests of the city's public hospitals and their affiliated medical schools may be contributing to an erosion of the quality of hospital care.
The lawyer, Stanley Lowell, a deputy mayor under Robert F. Wagner, said that the divided loyalty of doctors -- many of whom are employed by both the medical schools and the public hospitals -- made it difficult for hospital administrators to solve even longstanding problems.


An Entire Room Can Bask in Sun As Glass Coating Redirects Light
For anyone who has ever wanted the desk near the window, researchers in California are developing a technique for directing daylight deep into a room.
The invention, a coating for glass that uses the same light-wave principles employed in three-dimensional holograms, can redirect the sun's light to a designated spot on the ceiling, from which it will bounce and diffuse into areas that do not receive much natural light.
Besides cheering up employees, the system could help save money on lighting bills, says one of its designers, Richard Ian-Frese.


Pullout Won't Lessen Iran's Sway in Lebanon
The withdrawal of Iran's Revolutionary Guards from Lebanon, reportedly agreed to last month and disclosed over the weekend, is not likely to alter Teheran's considerable religious and political influence among fundamentalist Lebanese Shiite Muslim groups.
Specialists here say they believe that many of these Shiites will continue to receive financial help and guidance from young, strongly ideological clerics educated in Iranian seminaries.


Cocoa Falls Sharply Again On Worries About Demand
Cocoa futures prices fell sharply for the second straight session yesterday amid indications that demand may not be as strong as previously thought.
Cocoa beans for delivery in December fell $38, to $1,181 a metric ton, in heavy trading on the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange in New York, extending Monday's $47 decline.


Riley's Reign Is Perfect No More
Until last night, all the Knicks had known under Pat Riley was success.
But in suffering their first defeat in three exhibition games, 106-103, to the Boston Celtics before 11,308 at Madison Square Garden, New York played its first preseason game that had regular-season intensity.


For Harvard's Students, The New President Is In
In one of his first acts as president of Harvard University this fall, Neil L.  Rudenstine announced he would hold regular office hours for students.
It might seem a small step.
But it was not without risk considering that student protesters have been known to take over the university president's office here.
And it was something that Mr.
Rudenstine's predecessor, the cool, remote Derek C. Bok, had not done in his 20-year stewardship.


I.B.M. Net Fell 84.5% In 3d Period
I.B.M. came out with some grim earnings numbers yesterday, but after the company indicated that the worst might finally be over, its stock price rose sharply, buoying the whole stock market.
The International Business Machines Corporation, the world's largest computer maker, said its third-quarter earnings fell 84.5 percent, on a 5.6 percent revenue decline, but it also said it had made progress in reducing its work force and bringing several important product lines to market.


Flawed Care for Head Injuries Found
MEDICAL treatment for the 150,000 Americans each year who suffer severe head injuries is often so outdated that patients are more likely than not to receive treatments that could hurt them more than help.
As a result, people are being left with permanant brain damage that could have been avoided.
This bleak picture is disclosed by a new national survey of trauma centers that provides the first extensive look at how intensive care units treat patients who lapse into comas from severe head injuries.
Half of these patients die, and most of the rest are left with brain damage and often-severe disabilities.


New York Seen Facing New State Budget Gap
After receiving a State Comptroller's report showing the state with a modest cash imbalance, Cuomo administration officials said today that the state may once again be facing a gap in its budget.
The report, which analyzes the state's cash flow after the first six months of its fiscal year, showed a cash imbalance of $155.2 million in the state's approximately $29 billion general-fund budget.
The general fund is the part of the budget financed with state taxes and fees.


Critic's Notebook; A Baby Boom on TV As Biological Clocks Cruelly Tick Away
Mary Jo, the divorced mother of two on "Designing Women," practically danced into the room looking for advice on Monday's show, but she wasn't asking her colleagues about interior decoration.
She passed out the bios of the four possible donors from the sperm bank.
Everyone agreed she should pick the Mormon bongo player (which makes you wonder about the other three) and in less than half an hour Mary Jo was artificially inseminated, got pregnant, miscarried and vowed to try again.
She is already a step ahead of Rosie O'Neill, who so far has only discussed artificial insemination with her psychiatrist on "The Trials of Rosie O'Neill."
Meanwhile, it is becoming tough to distinguish some shows from commercials for home pregnancy tests.
"The stick is blue," the pregnant Murphy Brown cryptically told her best friend, Frank.
"Please, God, please don't let it be blue," prayed Ava, the middle-aged mom in "Evening Shade." Teddy, the rebellious sibling on "Sisters," looked ill at the positive blue-toned reading of her home pregnancy test.
Rebecca on "Cheers" was disappointed at the negative results of hers and Hannah on "Anything but Love" learned that home pregnancy tests can lie.
It is just four weeks into the new television season, and already you can't tell the pregnancies, the false alarms and the in vitro fertilizations without a score card.


Magazines Woo Readers With Appeals to Vanity
Magazine readers could be excused for swollen heads from the praise being heaped upon them by a recent spate of trade advertising campaigns.
Readers of Hachette Magazines' 16 titles (among them, Woman's Day, Elle, Car and Driver) have an "unrivaled thirst for knowledge," says one ad, "fueling an impetus to buy." The $2 million campaign was created by RDA Associates, New York.


Bargains End at Public Colleges As States Force Tuition Increases
Bargain-rate tuitions for students at state-run colleges and universities have been a source of hope for American families, regardless of their incomes, but the crisis in state financing is pushing lawmakers across the nation to raise tuitions and force students who can afford it to pay more.
Pressed by the recession and budget deficits, states have been unable to fully support their colleges with tax revenues and are increasingly looking to tuition to cover more of the cost of a student's education.
Last year, tuition at public colleges increased by 12 percent, the biggest single-year jump since 1983, according to figures released yesterday by The College Board.


Nikko Picks Chairman In Shifts at U.S. Unit
Nikko Securities International said yesterday that Ryosuke Suzuki had been appointed chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Suzuki, formerly the deputy chief of the Asia and Oceania group at the parent company, the Nikko Securities Company, will also serve as chief operating officer of the American subsidiary.


Editorial Notebook: Heroes of Capitalism; Eastern Europe: Not Hamburger Heaven
The countries in the northern tier of Eastern Europe are engaged in a common traverse from Communism to capitalism.
With no precedent to guide the way, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary are following radically different strategies.
But capitalism won't be created by elegant government plans.
It has to take hold in the streets, propelled initially by small-scale entrepreneurs willing to take risks.
At least in the capital cities of these countries, privatization of small business is blossoming, even though it's obstructed by the oppressive legacy of decades of centralized control.
Store owners talk candidly about their problems, proudly describing their scramble to survive.
Their stories give sobering testimony to the formidable challenges ahead.


DEMOCRATS IN RACE OPPOSED NOMINEE
All but one of the Democratic Presidential contenders said today that the accusations lodged by Prof.
Anita F. Hill only strengthened their doubts about the qualifications of Judge Clarence Thomas to be a Justice of the Supreme Court.
The candidate who did not take a position, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia, had just returned from a trade mission to the Far East and an aide said the Governor would have no comment on the Senate vote.
While he has never taken a public position on the nomination, Governor Wilder has raised the issue of whether Judge Thomas's upbringing as a Roman Catholic might influence his view on abortion.


No Roses for Lindros
Maybe it's the frustration at the turn his National Hockey League career took before it got started, but ERIC LINDROS, the 19-year-old sensation who chose to stay in junior hockey rather than play for the Quebec Nordiques, the N.H.L. team that drafted him and then rejected his demand for a trade, has been having his troubles with the Oshawa Generals.


Nynex Unit Chooses 3 As Finalists for Account
Nynex Mobile Communications, Orangeburg, N.Y., has selected Amil Gargano &amp; Partners, Ammirati &amp; Puris Inc. and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, all of New York, as finalists for its $8 million to $10 million account, an advertising executive who insisted on anonymity said yesterday.


Beaupre Ends Holdout
With MIKE LIUT and JIM HRVINAK manning the goal and the Washington Capitals off to a 5-1 start this season DON BEAUPRE, last season's No. 1 goaltender with the Capitals, has decided to end his holdout.


Metropolitan Diary
MOTHER GOOSE, Updated Version: Miriam Greyson reading nursery rhymes to grandnephew Matthew Brody, 2 1/2 years old:
Mrs. Greyson:
The cow jumped over the . . .
Matthew:
Moon!
Mrs. Greyson:
Little Jack Horner sat in a . . .
Matthew:
Corner!
Mrs. Greyson:
One, two, buckle my . . .
Matthew:
Seat belt!
. . .
So much for filial love: conversation overheard by Tedd Smith at a midtown automated bank teller: "Saturday we visited my mother. On Sunday we went over to her mother's house. So we didn't have a weekend."
. . .
NEW YORK CITY THOUGHTS People put New York City down (But mostly they're from out of town).
It's dirty, noisy, full of crime (Yes, and poems shouldn't rhyme)!
It isn't safe for man or beast, The perverts thrive, to say the least.
The rats roam free, the car horns blare, It's dangerous to breathe the air.
Yet why then do we choose to stay When others pack and move away?
Why do we dig our roots down deep And through alarms and sirens sleep?
The answer shines like quartz on mud We've New York veins with New York blood.
We know there isn't any place Where we could find this crazy pace.
So next time someone starts to talk, And asks why you stay in New Yawk, Just smile, don't give him any hype.
Reply: "My blood's that New York type." Let those who want to flee, feel free -- Escape, but listen carefully: We choose to stay, we don't complain, We've got New York blood -- AND WE'RE INSANE! -- ILENE BAUER
. . .
This is what Austin Perlow says he saw on a sign in the periodicals room of the library at the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University in Brookville, L.I.: SRRY NO ABBR ACCPTD CHK FRNT INDX FOR FLL TITL
. . .
Ann Peterson, noting the Stars and Stripes flying along the facade of Saks Fifth Avenue recently, commented to a friend: "That's quite a sight, our flags flying in the breeze like that." A passerby, overhearing her, had his own observation.
"When you see a building flying that many American flags, you can bet it's owned by a foreign country!" he said.
. . .
The housewares sale was crowded, but Miriam Weissman's salesclerk, Bonnie, was courteous and helpful and Mrs.
Weissman felt she deserved a commendation.
She wrote the store: "Bonnie, though harried, had been most helpful." She received this answer: "Thank you for taking the time to write about your experience with Ms. Bonnie Thoughharried of our Housewares department. We are grateful for the opportunity to show recognition. Ms. Thoughharried will be given a copy of your letter, along with a copy of this letter to you." Speak up, Ms.
Thoughharried, wherever you are.
. . .
Dear Diary:
I was buying vegetables at an Upper West Side market when I noticed an interesting looking woman selecting apples.
She was short but robust and wore not a trace of makeup.
Her round face was rosy pink, with large well-defined features, and a plain cotton kerchief tied at the nape of her neck covered most of her hair.
She realized she was being watched and smiled.
"I'm sorry for staring," I said. "But you look so familiar to me."
The woman broke into a broad grin.
"Well," she said proudly.
"I'm a dead ringer for a Frans Hals." -- SUSANNAH McCORKLE
. . .
A very private or perhaps absent-minded correspondent, who omitted to sign his communique, relays a story about his daughter, Nora, born in the Bronx, reared in Queens and now married, a mother and living in Elkton, Ore.
Invited to a lunch given by the Elkton Volunteer Fire Department, of which her husband was a member, she sat her 2 1/2-year-old daughter at the table, but the chair was too low.
But remembering her own childhood and the means used to elevate her to table height, she asked for the telephone directory to place under the baby.
The native Elktonites looked at her quizzically but complied.
It had slipped her mind that Elkton's population is in the hundreds and the telephone book consists of 10 pages.
. . .
Setting:
An 86th Street crosstown bus on a rainy traffic-jammed morning last month.
Action:
Tall and lanky fellow, last passenger boarding, fumbles for fare, drops it on floor.
Passengers direct sour glances his way as he stoops to pick up coins and bus remains immobile until the fare is deposited.
Dialogue: Woman, seated next to Jerome Becker, comments loudly:
"Figures. His brother delayed traffic yesterday and he's carrying on the tradition today."
You can't win them all, Jonathan Bush. At least she recognized you.


GTE Profit Up 5.7%
The GTE Corporation said yesterday that its third-quarter earnings increased 5.7 percent.
Earnings totaled $462 million, or 51 cents a share, up from $437 million, or 49 cents a share, in the third quarter of 1990.
Revenues were $5.36 billion, up slightly from the 1990 period.


Serbia and Croatia Agree to Another Cease-Fire
Prompted by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the leaders of Serbia and Croatia met here today and agreed to attempt another cease-fire in the Yugoslav civil war and to hold more peace talks within the next month.
Mr.
Gorbachev, who invited the two sides to the Kremlin, announced an agreement for an immediate cease-fire and issued a communique in which the combatants called for help from Soviet, American and European officials to help get the peace talks under way.


Graham W. Irwin, Historian, 71
Graham W. Irwin, a historian of Africa who directed Columbia University's African Institute from 1974 to 1983, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 71 years old.
He died of stomach cancer, a university spokeswoman, Suzanne Trimel, said.


Kozlodui Journal; A Peril-Ridden A-Plant: It's a Frightening Legacy
In the haze rising off the Danube, Blagoy Dimitrov was heading home after another shift at this town's nuclear power plant, dreaming as he does most mornings of leaving his job and moving away from Kozlodui.
Mr.
Dimitrov, a 39-year-old maintenance worker with tired eyes, has heard the reports that Western experts consider the plant so dangerous that they want to have it closed.
But it is not the fear of a nuclear disaster that is driving him out of town.


John Lewis Cobbs, 74, Ex-Editor of Magazine
John Lewis Cobbs, a former editor of Business Week magazine, died on Sunday at Memorial Hospital in Easton, Md.
He was 74 years old.
He died of complications from cancer and congestive heart failure, his family said.


Schools Go Outside Districts For Money
Despite a budget increasingly buffeted by recession, the school district of Lancaster has been able to provide programs and services that other school systems have been forced to eliminate because of costs.
By the end of the year, for example, the high school will be outfitted with a $65,000 electronic classroom, with television cameras and monitors that will allow the school to broadcast lessons to other schools or tap into classes broadcast by colleges and universities in the area.


COMPANY REPORTS  American Bancorp of Nevada  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Net inc#381,000#397,000# #Per share#.25#.28# #9mo net inc#936,000#1,105,000# #Per share#.62#.75#  Amity Bancorp Inc.  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Net loss#448,000#1,216,000# #9mo net loss#1,623,000#1,442,000#  Amsouth Bancorp (N)  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Net inc#20,229,000#19,433,000# #Per share#.80#.83# #Shares outst#25,200,000#23,407,000# #9mo net inc#58,946,000#58,735,000# #Per share#2.45#2.49# #Shares outst#24,035,000#23,550,000#  Banc One Corp.(N)  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Net inc#133,910,000#109,068,000# #Per share#.81#.68# #Shares outst#159,905,000#158,237,000# #9mo net inc#385,158,000#314,850,000# #Per share#2.35#2.08# #Shares outst#159,511,000#150,024,000#  Bancorp of Mississippi (O)  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Net inc#3,370,000#3,844,000# #Per share#.72#.81# #9mo net inc#10,747,000#10,419,000# #Per share#2.29#2.18#  Bank of Granite Corp.  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Net inc#1,742,000#1,611,000# #Per share#.46#.42# #9mo net inc#5,085,000#4,720,000# #Per share#1.35#1.25#  BB&amp;T Financial Corp.(O)  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Net inc#15,179,000#13,423,000# #Per share#.63#.62# #Shares outst#24,190,169#21,542,038# #9mo net inc#43,604,000#40,772,000# #Per share#1.92#1.89# #Shares outst#22,743,759#21,582,074#  Brenton Banks Inc.(O)  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Net inc#2,859,704#2,548,712# #Per share#.59#.53# #9mo net inc#8,137,109#7,586,454# #Per share#1.69#1.58#  C&amp;S Sovran Corp.(N)  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Net loss#50,764,000#b33,911,000# #Per share#--#.23# #9mo net inc#44,023,000#221,931,000# #Per share#.26#1.59#  b-Net income  Central Banshares of the South  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Net inc#15,243,000#12,330,000# #Per share#.69#.59# #Shares outst#21,438,000#20,753,000# #9mo net inc#42,846,000#35,697,000# #Per share#1.98#1.70# #Shares outst#21,154,000#20,946,000#  Chemical Banking Corp. (N)  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Net inc#131,600,000#b43,700,000# #Per share#1.22#--# #Shares outst#91,900,000#91,000,000# #9mo net inc#312,600,000#221,100,000# #Per share#2.78#1.83# #Shares outst#91,800,000#89,200,000#  b-Net loss  Citicorp (N)  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Net loss#b885,000,000#d221,000,000# #Per share#--#.56# #9mo net loss#c324,000,000#d840,000,000# #Per share#--#2.22#  b-Included $ 930 million of additions to reserves, restructuring charges and writedo


Gunman Who Killed 4 Thought He Was Dying of Blood Disease
A shooting rampage by a deranged man that left his father and three other men dead at his Queens home may have been sparked by the man's belief that he was dying of a blood disease, a high-ranking New York City police detective said yesterday.
Inspector James G. Courtney, acting chief of Queens detectives, said the man, Andrew Brooks Jr., who killed himself on Monday in a Nassau County house where he had barricaded himself after the murders, had told people in his Queens neighborhood that he feared he was dying.
When an ambulance crew responded to his house in Little Neck, Queens, early last week to treat him for a bleeding rectum, he refused medical aid, Inspector Courtney said.
Searching for Mother
"We feel that there is the possibility that whatever illness he did suffer from apparently triggered in his mind the events that transpired," the inspector said.


Ruminating on God, Cuomo Talks of Politics (and Cuomo)
The assigned topic at the 92d Street Y last night was "Who is God?" But perhaps unavoidably, one of the three panelists, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, chose to address the issue of who is Mario Cuomo.
When his turn at the podium came, he described himself as an "ordinary New Yorker" from "the asphalt streets and stickball" of Queens, a Roman Catholic "closer to the peasant roots of the simple Sunday practitioners than the high intellectual traditions of Talmudic scholars and Episcopalian homilogists."


Wine Talk
Bill Mabry is like a boy in a toy shop: he can have anything he wants, thanks to a benevolent fairy godmother.
Mr.
Mabry is the managing partner and general factotum of Landmark Vineyards, a winery here in the Sonoma Valley about 60 miles north of San Francisco.
His fairy godmother is Damaris D. W. Ethridge, a woman of some means who owns the place.
"I say, 'I think we can get by with 16 barrels,' " he said.
"She says to me: 'Forget about getting by. How many should we have?' So I say 50, and she says, 'Go get them.' "


U.S. Offers Japan Major Role in Bid to Save Supercollider Project
Trying to save one of the most expensive science experiments in American history, the Bush Administration today offered Japan an expanded role in managing the giant superconducting supercollider in Texas in return for an investment in excess of $1 billion.
The new proposal seemed to underscore the increasingly complex politics surrounding "big science" projects that the United States has originated, but now fears it cannot afford.
Without Japanese support, many scientists in America say, the huge supercollider project may die on the drawing boards.


Is Gaston's Job Safe? Stay Tuned.
Jimmy Leyland, as secure a manager as there is in baseball, was obviously shaken by the bloodbath that saw four of his peers fired in four days last week.
At the time, the Pittsburgh manager surmised that if Joe Morgan can be fired, no one is safe.
For a few brief moments, it appeared that even for division-winning managers, times were even more precarious than they had hoped.
For an emotional Pat Gillick, the general manager of the Toronto Blue Jays, seemed to pick at his manager, Cito Gaston, immediately after the 8-5 loss that eliminated the team from pennant contention Sunday.


Denting a Legal Galahad's Armor
If one law firm symbolized the Wall Street fever and wealth of the 1980's, it was Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz.
Galvanized by its senior partner, Martin Lipton, the small Park Avenue firm used a combination of frenetic dedication, innovative advocacy, highly aggressive billing and deft self-promotion to become legendary and enormously rich.
Mr.
Lipton himself earned notoriety.
A philanthropist and friend to people like Felix G. Rohatyn, a partner at Lazard Freres, and John H. Gutfreund, former chairman of Salomon Brothers, Mr.
Lipton made Wachtell the firm of choice for companies on the defensive in takeover battles.
Declaring repeatedly that junk bond-financed predators were destroying American industry, he devised -- some say invented -- the so-called poison pill, a defensive maneuver designed to thwart unwanted takeovers.
Generally, the companies Wachtell defended were taken over, but on improved terms, and Wachtell collected its fees anyway.


Theater in Review
Ready for the River  Home for Contemporary Theater and Art 44 Walker Street Through Oct. 27 By Neal Bell; directed by Joshua Astrachan; set design, Derek McLane; lighting, Greg MacPherson; costumes, Melina Root; sound, Tom Gould; stage manager, Kate Broderick; associate set designer, Elizabeth Hope Clancy; guitar, David Lott; special makeup, Jennifer Aspinall; production associate, Andie Coller.
Presented by Home.
WITH: Randy Danson, David Eigenberg, Kathleen O'Neill, Dylan Price and James Riordan.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Air-India, New Delhi, has awarded a multimillion-dollar contract for 22 engines and spare parts to Pratt &amp; Whitney, a unit of United Technologies Corp., Hartford. *
Ethix Corp., New York, a health-care management company, has signed a letter of intent to buy the assets of Preferred Care Inc., a St.
Louis-based managed health-care company, for undisclosed terms.


Prices Up as Rate Cut Seems Near
Fresh signs of economic weakness lifted prices of Treasury securities yesterday and bolstered confidence that the Federal Reserve Board would lower short-term interest rates again soon.
The latest indication that the economy is recovering at an anemic pace came from the nation's auto makers, which announced that car sales were a meager 5.5 million vehicles at a seasonally adjusted annual rate during the first 10 days of October, compared with a 6.5 million rate in early October last year.


At Cal, King Football Enjoys New Stature
Here and there along Telegraph Avenue, flower children still sprout occasionally on the sidewalks near the University of California.
But time hasn't stopped for them.
Even here -- the birthplace of student dissent -- everything eventually changes.
That includes the football team.
The only revolution at Cal this fall is the rising success of the Golden Bears, typically anonymous on campus but currently unbeaten and ranked No. 6 by The New York Times's computer and No. 7 by United Press International and The Associated Press.


Happy Transformation
To the Editor:
I enjoyed reading "The Transformation of a Klansman" by Dan T. Carter (Op-Ed, Oct. 4), on the metamorphosis of the K.K.K. member Asa Carter into the best-selling writer Forrest Carter.


About New York
"It really didn't bother me until it burst out of my skin." -- Evelyn Garcia.
Evelyn Garcia may be one of the few breast cancer survivors who pauses for a long moment before characterizing the disease as the worst thing that has happened to her.


Dietary Supplements: Let the Buyer Beware
AMERICANS take $3.3 billion worth of dietary supplements each year, but the Federal Food and Drug Administration has no idea whether they are safe or not.
In fact, no one does.
The agency, charged with regulating supplements just as it regulates food and drugs, has largely ignored the supplements for the last 15 years.
"The public has to be aware that these products have not been regulated in any systematic way," the F.D.A.
Commissioner, Dr.
David A. Kessler, said.
"We have not set any product standards, any manufacturing controls nor required any safety testing. If you walk into a health food store you have to recognize that we have not approved the safety of these products nor substantiated their claims."


CHRONICLE
More than 200 descendants of Anthony J. Drexel, the 19th-century banker and philanthropist, will begin converging on Philadelphia tomorrow for a celebration of the family and of the 100th anniversary of Drexel University, which Anthony Drexel founded.


Giants Analyze Dramatic Drawback
The draw is a simple football play, a running play in which the quarterback delays before handing off the ball.
The idea is to stop pass rushers from flying in recklessly on the quarterback.
Every team uses the draw, and the play often succeeds.
On Monday night, in the hands of the Steelers in Pittsburgh, the draw almost stole a game that the Giants had seemingly won.


Serbia and Croatia Agree to Another Cease-Fire; 4th Independence Move
The ethnically jumbled republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina declared independence from Yugoslavia today, becoming the fourth of the six units of the old Yugoslav federation to do so since June.
The president of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Alija Izetbegovic, said the declaration of independence and sovereignty was adopted by the Parliament in Sarajevo to prevent his republic from being dragged into the fighting between Serbia and Croatia that in three months has claimed an estimated 2,500 lives.
The others to declare independence are Slovenia, Macedonia and Croatia.


Peggy Guggenheim's Grandsons Challenge Museum's Managers
The question might well have amused Peggy Guggenheim as she held court in Venice in her later years: Would she like to be remembered most for her stormy life as a lover of art and artists, or for her extraordinary collection of Cubist, Surrealist and modern paintings?
Now the question has become topical because, 12 years after her death at the age of 81, her three grandsons have decided to protest the way the owners of the collection, the New York-based Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, are treating her memory.


SENATE CONFIRMS THOMAS, 52-48, ENDING WEEK OF BITTER BATTLE; 'TIME FOR HEALING,' JUDGE SAYS
Judge Clarence Thomas, who was born to unlettered parents living in abject poverty in rural Georgia, won confirmation as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court tonight by one of the narrowest margins in history, barely surviving an accusation by one of his former assistants that he had sexually harassed her.
After an all-day debate, during which President Bush brought heavy pressure on wavering Senators and the public flooded Capitol Hill with telephone calls and telegrams, the Senate voted 52 to 48 in favor of the 43-year-old judge.
Eleven Democrats joined 41 of the 43 Republicans in supporting him.  [ Roll-call, page A19. ] A Victory Margin Narrowed
"This is more a time for healing, not a time for anger or animus or animosity," Judge Thomas said later tonight, standing under an umbrella outside his house in Alexandria, Va.
Referring to the fierceness of the 107-day fight over his nomination, he added, "We have to put these things behind us and go forward."


They Came to California for the Good Life; Now They're Looking Elsewhere
The enormous migration to California from other states, which brought profound political and economic consequences over the last decade, appears to have slowed substantially.
Demographers and geographers attribute the slowing largely to the recession, which has hit California particularly hard, leaving its once-robust economy to bring up the rear of the national recovery.
But they also point to many other factors, including high housing costs, air pollution, traffic congestion, crime, deteriorating social services and fear of earthquakes and other disasters.


Book Notes
New North Secrets
"Under Fire" is being kept under such incredible wraps that HarperCollins refuses to acknowledge that it is on the verge of shipping the book, Oliver L. North's account of the Iran-contra scandal, written in collaboration with William Novak.
HarperCollins and Mr.
Novak would not admit to any involvement with the North book, but reliable publishing sources confirmed the much-guarded title and Mr.
Novak's role as co-writer.
They also said that the initial print run was "way up there" in the 400,000's and that the book was expected to be in stores by the end of the month.


Study Challenges a Reputed Effect of Exercise
Aerobic exercise by itself does not appear to be an effective treatment for mild high blood pressure, according to the results of a carefully designed new study.
But the director of the study, Dr.
James A. Blumenthal, a psychologist at Duke University Medical Center, emphasized that physical activity still had potential value in helping people to lower their blood pressure.
The study, conducted among 99 sedentary men and women with moderately elevated blood pressure levels, sought to determine whether exercise, apart from any effect of diet and weight loss, would help to lower the blood pressure.


Bulldozers Leave Some Bereft, Some Relieved
Around Tompkins Square Park on the Lower East Side, in an area called Alphabet City because the avenues are named A, B, C and D, it was quiet yesterday, except for the bulldozers grinding away in the rain.
Gears gnashing, shovels jerking up and down, the bulldozers rolled in around sunrise, after the police had cleared out three large lots where an estimated 200 homeless people had been living.


The Dollar Is Mostly Higher In Absence of Fed Moves
The dollar rose against major currencies yesterday as traders re-evaluated their earlier speculations that the Federal Reserve might push interest rates lower.
Gold prices fell, with a troy ounce slipping $1.20 on the New York Commodity Exchange to $357.70.
The Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $356.85, off $1.55.


Women in Senate Have Their Say Before the Vote Confirming Thomas
NANCY L. KASSEBAUM Republican of Kansas
Mr.
President, I believe that Judge Thomas, or any nominee, deserves a fair, honest, and straightforward decision from the Senate on the merits of his nomination.
Judge Thomas will not get that now, regardless of whether he is confirmed or rejected.


Washington Talk; In 'Waiting for Mario,' Only the Plot Goes On
"Waiting for Mario" has become a play of many acts for the Democratic Party -- sometimes dramatic, sometimes poignant, always cryptic and never, ever, conclusive.
The speculation waxes and wanes; just when the party begins to believe Governor Mario M. Cuomo's protests that he has no interest in running for President, he or one of his associates or some knowing party leader who insists on anonymity seems to suggest that the door may not be absolutely, positively closed.
That is what happened last week, just when the race for the Democratic nomination seemed fully under way.
This helps explain why the latest round of Cuomo rumors has generated a certain frustration in the party, as well as excitment.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.12
n.a.
7.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.96
n.a.
7.17
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.99
n.a.
7.20
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.11
n.a.
8.60
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.85
7.87
8.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.99
9.02
9.98
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.86
6.87
7.83
N.A.-- Not available because of Columbus Day holiday
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate
**Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer
Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellweather bonds, notes and bills


Iacocca Urges U.S. Limits on Japanese Car Sales
Lee A. Iacocca said today that the Big Three auto makers should consider promoting Federal legislation to limit the Japanese car industry to a fixed percentage of the American market.
Speaking at the dedication of the Chrysler Corporation's $1 billion technology center outside Detroit, Mr.
Iacocca, Chrysler's chairman, said: "We've never favored a complete restriction, but we'll have to decide our collective position. We have to deal with our own self-interests. At some point, you have to decide what you stand for."


LOW TURNOUT SEEN FOR POLISH VOTE
Poland's passion for democracy has cooled considerably in the two years since this nation triumphantly voted the Communists out of office.
Recent public-opinion surveys indicate that less than 50 percent of Poles will vote on Oct. 27 in the country's first fully free Parliamentary elections, mirroring the trend toward political apathy in other Eastern European nations.
Turnouts of 20 percent or less are being forecast for younger voters.


COMPANY REPORTS  A&amp;W Brands Inc.(O)  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Sales#35,090,000#33,318,000# #Net inc#3,403,000#2,894,000# #Share earns#.37#.32# #9mo sales#95,938,000#94,616,000# #Net inc#9,614,000#8,782,000# #Share earns#1.05#.96#  Sales represented net sales.  ALC Communications Corp.(A)  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Revenue#88,168,000#82,900,000# #Net inc#1,888,000#c4,457,000# #Share earns#.0 2#--# #Shares outst#20,622,000#17,141,000# #9mo rev #260,623,000#244,820,000# #Net inc#b4,729,000#c16,028,000# #Share earns#.0 2#--# #Shares outst#20,618,000#9,030,000#  b-Included impact relating to accretion of discount on ALC class A preferred stock, dividends on ALC class A preferred stock accrued but not declared and accretion of payment to certain holders of ALC class A preferred stock under the amendment agreement in both the quarter and 9 months.  c-Net loss  The company said shares outstanding are adjusted for the impact of the 1-for-5 reverse stock split effective September 1991. Included the conversion of 14,324,000 shares of class D preferred stock into common shares upon issuance in June 1990. Shares were actually converted during the fourth quarter of 1990. 1991 assumes conversion of class B and class C preferred stock.  Alpine Lace Brands (O)  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Sales#38,005,782#34,245,216# #Net inc#233,547#50,765# #Share earns#.0 5#.01# #9mo sales#115,708,443#108,680,476# #Net inc#1,414,532#1,741,459# #Share earns#.28#.35#  Altera Corp.(O)  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Sales#28,076,000#20,471,000# #Net inc#4,745,000#3,427,000# #Share earns#.23#.17# #Shares outst#20,634,000#20,072,000# #9mo sales#77,295,000#57,103,000# #Net inc#12,633,000#9,828,000# #Share earns#.62#.49# #Shares outst#20,491,000#19,986,000#  American Electric Power Co. (N)  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Revenue#1,286,000,000#1,333,000,000# #Net inc#135,961,000#129,078,000# #Share earns#.74#.70# #Shares outst#184,535,000#184,535,000# #9mo rev #3,774,000,000#3,892,000,000# #Net inc#382,900,000#386,235,000# #Share earns#2.08#2.06# #Shares outst#184,535,000#187,907,000#  American Home Products Corp.(N)  #Qtr to Sept 30#1991#1990# #Sales#1,875,793,000#1,743,463,000# #Net inc#384,933,000#317,551,000# #Share earns#1.22#1.01# #Shares outst#315,695,000#314,308,000# #9mo sales#5,259,638,000#5,161,962,000# #Net inc#1,002,668,000#b902,389,000# #Share earns#3.18#2.87# #Shares outst#315,585,000#313,955,000#  b-Included a p


Seattle Drops Kemp So Krieg Can Return
Three interceptions may have proved to be one too many for Seahawk quarterback JEFF KEMP.
He was waived yesterday to make room on the roster for the returning Seattle starter, DAVE KRIEG, who is expected to start against the Steelers on Sunday.
The decision means that 27-year-old KELLY STOUFFER will continue as backup with DAN McGWIRE next.


Early-Month Vehicle Sales Down 11.4%
Sales declines of 11.4 percent for domestically built cars and light trucks in early October were reported today.
Analysts said the drop was expected, because widespread incentives helped increase sales late last month.
They also noted that car sales over the last 30 days were in line with recent months.


Japanese Coin Word for Their Unease About U.S.
A former national security director for Japan, Atsuyuki Sassa, wrote recently that Americans were still "intoxicated with a war-victory mood," though they had done little to overcome economic stagnation, drugs, declining schools and other problems.
Kazuo Inamori, chairman of the Kyocera Corporation, a major high- technology company, also took this general theme, an increasingly popular one, writing in a recent article that Japanese were growing tired of feeling that "America doesn't like us or respect us despite our efforts."


Executive Life Offer Is Raised
An insurance industry group that is one of the bidders for the failed Executive Life Insurance Company today sweetened its offer for Executive Life, raising the restored value of policies it said all policyholders would receive.
The National Organization of Life and Health Insurance Guaranty Associations, an industry-financed group set up to help bail out customers of troubled insurers, said it had increased from 85 percent to 89 percent the value of all policies it would restore if it was chosen to take control of Exeuctive Life.
Other bidders have said they will restore as much as 86 percent of policy values, or as little as 81 percent.


How Thomas Hearings Affected the Ratings
After three weeks in first place, CBS fell to third place in the weekly Nielsen ratings behind NBC and ABC as coverage of the Clarence Thomas hearings disturbed many regular viewing patterns.
For example, when NBC covered the hearings on Friday night, it fared much better than it had in previous weeks with entertainment programming.


Lukens Looks Ahead In Naming a President
Lukens Inc., which specializes in making plate steel, said yesterday that R. William Van Sant, a former president and chief executive of Blount Inc., a construction company that also makes power equipment, would become the steel producer's president and chief operating officer.
Lukens also said that Mr.
Van Sant, a director since 1988, would become chairman and chief executive after W. R. Wilson retires next June.


When Only the Voyeur Turns Out to Be Sane
He is first seen only as a close-up of an eye, then as a pair of feet, finally as the shadowy shape of a Peeping Tom.
A man peers through the bushes toward the lights of a house where, behind a picture window, a pretty young woman is preparing to have supper while watching television.
These initial images suggest that "The Cry of the Owl" ("Le Cri du Hibou") will be vintage Claude Chabrol, possibly even in the same romantically ruthless category with his "Femme Infidele," "Boucher" and "Rupture." Everything appears to be as perfectly ordered as it is perverse.


How Poles and Jews Can End the Enmity
To the Editor:
Peter Steinfels's commentary on Polish-Jewish relations ("Cardinal Glemp's Visit Points Up the Polish-Jewish Rift," The Week in Review, Sept. 29) was an intelligent and refreshing change from the usual diatribes that regularly appear on the subject.


Redmen, Steeped in Experience, Can't Wait to Put Ball in Motion
Could it be: St. John's making its first Final Four appearance since 1985?
The Redmen held their first practice session of the 1991-92 season yesterday, and it was at Madison Square Garden, fueling speculation that Coach Lou Carnesecca has a whip of a team on his hands.


When Bell Makes a Point, It Bellows Loud and Clear
The official ruling on David Justice's failure to touch third base in Game 5 of the National League Championship Series was that it did not constitute an appeal play and that the putout was scored 7-2-1-6.
But in an unofficial sense, the play did amount to an appeal, a subtle, quiet campaign for credit by the shortstop designated by the 6 in the scorebook's sequence.


Theater in Review
Our Lady of Perpetual Danger  Judith Anderson Theater  422 West 42d Street By Adam Kraar; directed by Joel Bishoff; produced by Roy Gabay; production stage manager, Roger Lee; set design, Steve Carter; lighting, Matthew Frey; costumes, Amy Lenzcewski.
Sea Crest Associates presents a Quaigh Theater production.
WITH: Robert Arcaro, Arija Bareikis, Kevin Cristaldi, Nancy Kawalek and Mary Tahmin.


Image More Than Reality Became Issue, Losers Say
After the vote, the gloomy feminist contingent on Capitol Hill concluded that Clarence Thomas triumphed because he came across as more of a victim than Anita F. Hill did.
Many Senators told disappointed lobbyists for the coalition of civil rights groups and women's groups opposing Judge Thomas that it was not so much Professor Hill's credibility that determined the outcome as a range of other issues.
Everyone knew what "other issues" meant.


Theater in Review
A Tempest  Ubu Theater 15 West 28th Street Through Oct. 27  By Aime Cesaire; translated by Richard Miller; directed by Robbie McCauley; set by Jane Sablow; lights by Zebedee Collins; costumes by Carol Ann Pelletier; musical director, Tiye Giraud; movement director, Marlies Yearby.
Presented by Ubu Repertory Theater, Francoise Kourilsky, artistic director.
WITH: Rafael Baez, Ron Brice, Leon Addison Brown, Leo V. Finnie 3d, Clebert Ford, Arthur French, Bryan Hicks, Lawrence James, Jasper McGruder, Sharon McGruder, Patrick Rameau, Robert G. Siverls, Kim Sullivan and Marlies Yearby.


Immunization Of Children Is Said to Lag
Preschool children in the New York City region, particularly poor ones, have a worse record of immunization against measles, tuberculosis and other diseases than children in poorer countries like Grenada, Uganda and Mexico, state and city health officials say.
They say that the difference can be attributed to aggressive government campaigns to eradicate communicable diseases in third world countries and the lack of an organized campaign in the United States.


Economic Scene; Productivity Gain: What, Me Worry?
THOSE who pass their days fretting over the size of the trade deficit or the shape of the Federal budget may seem an unromantic bunch.
But economists do have their own version of the Holy Grail: productivity growth -- or raising output per worker.
If only America could rekindle the productivity flame, they say, every burger-flipper would soon take home a living wage and every poor child would have a place in Head Start.
Cities would no longer be forced to choose between filling the potholes and keeping the local felons at bay.
Even Uncle Sam would be able to pay his debts.


Queens Man, 78, Stabbed to Death Outside a Bar
A 78-year-old Queens man whom neighbors likened to a "country gentleman" was stabbed to death early yesterday in a robbery attempt outside a tavern in his neighborhood, the police said.
The victim, John Hill, of St.
Albans, was taken to Mary Immaculate Hospital in Jamaica, Queens, where he died yesterday morning, hospital officials said.


Postal Workers Honor Their Slain Colleagues


Sharp Gains at Merrill and Paine Webber
Good news continued to flow from Wall Street yesterday, as two of the nation's largest brokerage houses reported strong earnings.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the nation's largest brokerage house, announced that its third-quarter earnings had more than tripled over the period last year.
And Paine Webber Inc. reported that its earnings in the quarter increased fourfold.


J.H. Axelrod, Textile Leader, 75; Former Owner of Wamsutta Mills
Joseph H. Axelrod, a textile manufacturer and philanthropist, died on Sunday at Beth Israel Hospital North.
He was 75 years old and lived in Manhattan and Washington, Conn.
Mr. Axelrod died after a brief illness, his family said.


Bridge
The Brazilians are accustomed to nail-biting tension in world championships.
In 1976 they beat out Italy for the world title on the last few deals of a round robin in which, through a curious accident, the two teams never met.
In 1985 they lost a Bermuda Bowl semifinal on the last deal against the United States, though they gained their revenge four years later by winning the title.
In Yokohama, earlier this month, the Brazilians defeated an American team in the quarterfinal on the last deal and were locked in a close duel with Poland in the semifinal.
The diagramed deal encouraged Brazilian supporters to hope for victory.


Johnson to Miss Game
Former Nevada-Las Vegas star LARRY JOHNSON will apparently miss a homecoming game today between the Charlotte Hornets and the Golden State Warriors at the Nevada-Las Vegas campus arena, costing the event an estimated 5,000 ticket sales.
Johnson, the No. 1 pick in the National Basketball Association draft, has yet to come to contract terms with the Hornets and has not joined the team for practice or exhibition games. (AP)


To Usher in Fall, a Rich Harvest From Summer's Last Hurrah
THERE are still many mild, beautiful days to come in October, perfect for gathering some of the vegetables that are still flourishing in the garden or are still available inexpensively at the market.
I make use of some of these seasonal vegetables in my recipes today.
Pissaladiere, a specialty in the Nice region of France, is a type of pizza usually made with fresh bread dough that is covered with onions, anchovy fillets, black olives and, sometimes, tomatoes, then baked.
In my recipe, I use French bread rolls, splitting them and topping the halves with red onion, cherry tomatoes (still juicy and delicious at this time of year), garlic and the anchovy and olive oil puree that is the signature of this dish.


MAN IN THE NEWS: Jeremiah Abraham Barondess; Chief for Hospital Panel
Dr.
Jeremiah A. Barondess, who was named yesterday to head the mayoral committee investigating New York City's municipal hospitals, paused briefly during a telephone interview when asked if he had officially accepted the job.
"Umm, we're still working on the details," he said of his continuing discussions with Mayor David N. Dinkins.
"No one is talking about limiting me, but there are some parameters we have to work out."


Sheridan Released
The Yankees waived outfielder PAT SHERIDAN.
The 33-year-old Sheridan, a former minor league free agent who joined the Yankees' Class AAA farm club in Columbus last January, had a .204 average with 4 home runs and 7 runs batted in in 62 games. . . .FRED STANLEY, the Milwaukee Brewers' infield coach, was named director of player development.
The 44-year-old Stanley, whose 14-year major league career with six teams included a stint with the Yankees, succeeds BRUCE MANN, who was named last week as an assistant to new general manager, SAL BANDO.


Alaskans Ply Their Seas for Many Meals' Staple, the Halibut
HALIBUT in Alaska is like beef in the lower 48, a menu staple.
Every coffee shop has its fried halibut sandwich, bits of halibut do the work of fried calamari rings in the fern bars and in better restaurants, halibut shows up in various guises from pasta sauce to Provencal.
Home freezers are perennially stocked with slabs, steaks and even pot roasts of halibut.
Like beef.


Yields Fall On C.D.'s and Bank Funds
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts declined for still another week, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, the North Palm Beach, Fla., publication that covers interest rates.
"There has been no letup in the downward speed of certificate of deposit yields," said Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor.
"This evidence continues to suggest that another cut in the Federal discount rate and the banks' prime rate could occur soon."


New York's Buildings Are Bound by Fire Code
To the Editor:
In his Sept. 24 letter on the recent Staten Island Ferry Terminal fire, James S. Russell questions whether buildings owned by New York City are required to follow local codes.
The answer is emphatically yes.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
Citicorp, reeling from bad loans, said it lost $885 million in the quarter and would rebuild its strength by eliminating its dividend and cutting expenses further.  [ Page A1. ]  Security Pacific also reported a stunning loss and suspended its dividend, but Chemical and Manufacturers did better.  [ D8. ]
I.B.M. came out with some grim earnings numbers, but after it indicated that the worst might finally be over, its stock price rose sharply.
It said it had made progress in trimming its work force and bringing several important product lines to market.  [ D1. ]


Free-Spending Leader Wins CUNY Vote
Three weeks after being widely criticized for spending hundreds of thousands of dollars of students' money on items like limousines, luxury hotel rooms and a job for his twin sister, the chairman of the City University of New York's student government has been re-elected by a two-vote margin.
But his opponents -- who said they will challenge the election -- called the results suspicious because the winning ballot was found by a supporter of the chairman, Jean LaMarre, under a pad of papers after all the other ballots were counted.
They also said that Mr.
LaMarre's sister, Elizabeth, who is paid $26,000 a year as Mr.
LaMarre's personal assistant, was seen handling the ballots before she was supposed to.
Ms.
LaMarre was one of the students who counted the ballots from the election, in which a two-vote margin was needed for victory. 'A Case of Sour Grapes'
"This is just a sad day for CUNY," said Kim Ray, who ran against Mr.
LaMarre.
Ms.
Ray, a 25-year-old president of the Day Student Government at Hunter College, said delegates from several campuses, including Hunter, City College, the College of Staten Island and Borough of Manhattan Community College, are filing appeals.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Chang Wins in China Michael Chang, appearing in China for the first time and getting acquainted with the country where his ancestors were born, beat Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands, 6-3, 6-1, yesterday in the first round of a tournament in Beijing.
The 19-year-old Chang, a former French Open winner and currently ranked 20th in the world, was born in the United States but has a 91-year-old great-grandmother living in the southern Chinese city of Canton.(AP) HOCKEY Red Wings Win at Last Shawn Burr's second-period goal broke a 1-1 tie, and Tim Cheveldae stopped 18 of 19 shots as the Red Wings beat the Edmonton Oilers, 3-1, last night in Detroit for their first victory of the season.
The Red Wings were the last of the 22 National Hockey League teams to record a victory, as they had only managed a tie in their first four games.
The first period was scoreless, and fairly slow-paced, but the action picked up after a penalty to Craig Muni of Edmonton six minutes into the second.
Detroit had missed on its power play in the last 15 attempts, and looked even worse when Oiler captain Esa Tikkanen intercepted Steve Chiasson's pass and broke in for a shorthanded goal at 6 minutes 31 seconds.
Less than a minute later, though, the Red Wings ended their power-play drought on an odd goal.
Steve Yzerman had the puck in front of Oiler goalie Bill Ranford, when Bob Probert swiped at it.
Probert hit Yzerman's stick, sending the puck shooting across the goal mouth, off the leg of Edmonton defenseman Jeff Beukeboom and into the net.
Yzerman was given credit for the goal. (AP)


Family Leave Makes Economic Sense Too
To the Editor:
"Family Leave: Fine, in Modest Doses" (editorial, Sept. 26) falls far short of the kind of support this important legislation deserves.
You miss the fundamental truth about family-leave policy, which is that it makes both human sense for today's working families and economic sense for American business.


Quotation of the Day
"This is more a time for healing, not a time for anger or for animus or animosity." -- Judge Clarence Thomas.  [ A1:6. ]


Philips Brings Out New CD System
Philips Industries N.V., the Dutch consumer electronics company, said it will officially introduce a compact-disk home entertainment system today.
It demonstrated the system earlier this year at a consumer electronics show.
The system, called Compact Disc Interactive, attaches to a TV set and plays special multimedia compact disks that include games, children's stories, reference works and other programs.
Philips says it will announce 30 compact disk titles today.


Thomas H. Eliot, Ex-Congressman And University Chief, Dies at 84
Thomas H. Eliot, a former Congressman, political science professor, university chancellor and a drafter of the Social Security Act, died Monday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 84 years old.


Senators Who Switched Tell of Political Torment
Facing the competing pressures of 11th-hour phone calls from President Bush and intense lobbying from interest groups and many colleagues, three Senate Democrats reversed themselves tonight and voted against confirming Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.
All said they had been influenced by Prof.
Anita F. Hill's accusation that she was sexually harassed by Judge Thomas when the two worked together at the Department of Education and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in the 1980's.


In Queens 'Mosaic,' Proof of the Melting Is in the Eating
IT may no longer be fashionable to talk about New York as a melting pot.
Mosaic is the word officials use when they talk about ethnic diversity.
But just go to Queens.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a Haitian protest march in New York City misstated Benjamin Dupuy's title.
He is Haiti's Ambassador at Large.


Decision for Continental Air's Chief
For Robert R. Ferguson, the chief executive of Continental Airlines, the carrier's fate has narrowed largely to two choices -- either it will be taken over by Northwest Airlines or remain independent and come out from under the shadow of bankruptcy by spring.
"Northwest Airlines is meaningfully interested," he said in an interview yesterday at the midtown offices of Continental Airlines Holdings Inc., the parent company.


Bush Lends a Hand


Escaped Militant Has Role in Hostage Talks
A pro-Iranian militant whose imprisonment with other radicals in Kuwait was linked to the kidnapping of Westerners in Beirut has returned home to lead the hostage-takers, Muslim fundamentalists say.
The militant, Mustapha Badreddine, was arrested in Kuwait in 1983 after a series of bombings of Western targets there.
In the chaos accompanying Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, Mr.
Badreddine and 14 of his men walked out of their jail cells and fled to Iran.
A few months later, they returned home to Lebanon.


The Pop Life
A Wider Generation Gap
With people in their 40's still buying pop music, and kids buying music made by rock's elders, the generation gap in pop music keeps getting harder to find.
But the Red Hot Chili Peppers, who generate enough noise and attitude to rattle most Crosby Stills and Nash-listening parents out of their reverie, make it a bit easier.


For a South Bronx Survivor, Cancer Was Just Another Battle


Pencil-and-Paper Math Goes Way of Abacus; More and Better
To the Editor:
Since the advent of the hand-held calculator in the early 1970's, there has been much controversy and confusion about its use in the teaching and learning of mathematics.
Such controversy and confusion must have also been around when the abacus and the slide rule were introduced into instructional programs.


What About Fruit Butters?
To The Living Section:
Florence Fabricant's article, "Jam-Making Today: Fruit Spreads, Yes; Sugar, Largely No"  [ Oct. 2 ] , failed to mention a category of all-fruit spreads that is at least 100 years old: fruit butters.
Fruit butters are not called all-fruit spreads (which, essentially, is what they are) because they contain more fruit and less sugar than fruit spreads, and thus come under the Federal fruit butter category.
Fruit butters must, by Federal law, contain 43 percent solids, and the ratio of sugar to fruit cannot exceed two to five (two pounds of sugar to five pounds of fruit).
This means they start out with much more fruit, and much less sugar, than jams, jellies, preserves and products called fruit spreads.
And like fruit spreads, many fruit butters are now produced with grape juice concentrate as their sweetening agent.


Breaking Bread, and Cups, in South India
EVERY month, Sadanand Maiya, a partner in the Mavalli Tiffin Room, perhaps the best-known coffeehouse in southern India, supervises a task that would make most small restaurateurs cringe: he orders the smashing of all chipped or cracked crockery.
The damage adds up to more than 200 cups and saucers every few weeks, said Mr.
Maiya, a pudgy man who wears the loose shirt and sarong or lungi that is preferred by many southern Indian men.


Italians Drop Coach
AZEGLIO VICINI, the coach of Italy's national soccer team for the last five years, was dismissed yesterday and will be replaced by ARRIGO SACCHI, who coached A.C.
Milan to the world club championship in 1989 and 1990.


Food Notes
Culinary Institute West
The Culinary Institute of America, one of the top professional cooking schools in the country, has announced that it will open a center for advanced studies in the Napa Valley in California.
It plans to buy Greystone Cellars, a massive neo-Gothic building in St.
Helena, from Heublein Inc.


Islanders Lose Hold Of 4-Goal Lead in 3d
Early in the game, Derek King was playing like Brett Hull.
Later in the game, Mario Lemieux was playing like Mario Lemieux.
And although they never played like defending Stanley Cup champions, the Pittsburgh Penguins rallied from a four-goal deficit in the third period to beat the Islanders, 7-6, in overtime tonight in a wacky, sloppy affair before 7,065 witnesses in Nassau Coliseum.


New Proposal For Cable TV
Local governments would get broad powers to regulate cable TV prices and control some of the industry's business practices under legislation proposed today.
A bill introduced by Representative Dennis E. Eckart, Democrat of Ohio, and Representative Jim Cooper, Democrat of Tennessee, would restore to cities and counties powers Congress took away in 1984 and add some new ones.


Corrections
A diagram yesterday about Iraq's nuclear program depicted the fusion reaction of deuterium and tritium incorrectly.
They come together to produce energy, helium and neutrons.


Soviet Economy In Bleak Shape, Aides Tell West
Soviet officials offered a startlingly bleak assessment of their economy to Western financial leaders here this week, saying that the failed coup in August had caused a crippling withdrawal of international lines of credit to Soviet banks, setting off a debt crisis and accelerating the economy's precipitous fall.
A top Soviet economic planner, Grigory A. Yavlinsky, explained the painful slide during a wide-ranging, two-hour interview today.
Mr.
Yavlinsky had offered the assessment earlier in a confidential report to Western financial leaders in the hope of winning their support for his program of radical economic reform.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Waived Jeffrey Leonard, outfielder.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Named Fred Stanley director of player development.
Reassigned Dick Hackett, vice president of marketing, to the position of vice president of governmental affairs.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Waived Pat Sheridan, outfielder, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Announced Mario Diaz and Gary Green, infielders, and Mark Parent, catcher, have rejected outright assignment to Oklahoma City of the American Association and become free agents.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Named Hank Zacharias scouting department administrator; Bill Moore scouting supervisor for southern California; and Joe Siers and Alvin Rittman scouts for Florida.
Assigned Efrain Valdez, pitcher, outright to Syracuse of the International League.
Added Domingo Martinez, first baseman, to the 40-man roster.
Announced John Stearns, manager of Knoxville of the Southern League, and Julio Division, pitching coach for St.
Catharines of the New York-Penn League, will not return to their respective positions next season.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Exercised the 1992 option of Ryne Sandberg, second baseman.
Texas League
WICHITA WRANGLERS -- Named Bruce Bochy manager.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
NEW JERSEY NETS -- Waived Teo Alibegovic, forward. Continental Basketball Association
GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Signed Jim Paul, center, and Anthony H. Jones, guard.
FOOTBALL National Football League
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Waived Brian Blados, offensive lineman, and Joe King, safety.
Signed Rick Trumbull, offensive tackle, and Brent Collins, linebacker.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Waived Mark Cannon, offensive lineman.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Waived Jeff Kemp, quarterback. HOCKEY National Hockey League
MINNESOTA NORTH STARS -- Acquired Tony Joseph, right wing, from the Winnipeg Jets for Tyler Larter, center.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Recalled Corey Millen, center, Rick Bennett, left wing, and Per Djoos, defenseman, from Binghamton of the American Hockey League.
Assigned Mark Janssens, center, to Binghamton for conditioning.
QUEBEC NORDIQUES -- Signed Stephane Fiset, goalie, to a multiyear contract.
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Recalled Ed Courtenay, forward, from Kansas City of the International Hockey League.
Sent David Bruce and Kevin Evans, forwards, to Kansas City.
SOCCER National Professional Soccer League
CHICAGO POWER -- Signed Tommy Isirov, Michael Richardson and Ed Puskarich, defensemen, to 1-year contracts.


Justice Thomas
As the Supreme Court nomination of Clarence Thomas headed for yesterday's confirmation vote, a supporter, Senator Hank Brown of Colorado, uttered the hope that the new Justice would now experience something he had not since he was nominated July 1: a day of joy.
During the same closing Senate speeches, an opponent, Barbara Mikulski of Maryland, found consolation even in defeat, regarding women's rights.
"The silence is broken, as well as our hearts," she said; that is, at least the issue of sexual harassment had finally been accorded wide and serious attention.


Knicks's Pre-Season Streak Stopped by Celtics


F.A.A. Seeks to Halt Rise in Near Collisions of Jets
Every few days, another report comes in to the Federal Aviation Administration: two planes, or perhaps a plane and a maintenance vehicle, just came uncomfortably close to colliding on a busy airport runway.
The problem has seized the agency's attention in the last year, especially since two major accidents involving runway collisions, one at Detroit and another at Los Angeles.
But despite a major program to combat the problem, the number of incidents reported each year continues to rise.


Public &amp; Private; The Perfect Victim
She seemed the perfect victim.
Or perhaps it is more accurate to say that she was the perfect person to teach us that there are no perfect victims, that no matter how impressive your person, how detailed your story, how unblemished your past, if you stand up and say, "He did this to me," someone will find a way to discredit you.
And so it was with Anita Hill.
Intelligent, composed, unflappable, religious and attractive, she testified to her sexual harassment by Clarence Thomas and even to her own inadequacies, agreeing that it had taken her too long to come forward, that it was hard to understand why she had kept in touch.
And as soon as she left the room, she was portrayed as nut case, romantic loser, woman scorned, perjurer.
Clarence Thomas thundered about the sexual stereotypes of black men, and the Senate gasped obligingly.
Little attention was paid to the stereotypes leveled at Professor Hill.
Aloof.
Hard.
Tough.
Arrogant.
This is familiar shorthand to any successful woman.
She wanted to date him.
She wasn't promoted.
She's being used by his enemies.
This is familiar shorthand to anyone who has ever tried to take on the men in power.
African-American women are sometimes asked to choose sides, to choose whether to align themselves with their sisters or the brothers.
To choose whether to stand against the indignities done them as women, sometimes by men of their own race, or to remember that black men take enough of a beating from the white world and to hold their peace.
The race card versus the gender card.
Clarence Thomas milked the schism.
With his cynical invocation of lynching, he played masterfully on the fact that the liberal guilt about racism remains greater than guilt about the routine mistreatment of women.
We saw more of Judge Thomas's character last weekend than we ever did during his confirmation hearings.
What we learned is that he is rigid, histrionic and anxious to portray himself as perfect too, a man who will not even allow that two men watching a football game might talk differently than they would if there were women in the room.
The members of the Senate took to the floor yesterday and congratulated themselves on educating the American people about sexual harassment.
Well, here is what they taught me:
That Senator Orrin Hatch needs to spend more time in the taverns of America if he thinks that only psychopaths talk dirty.
That the party of the Willie Horton commercials is alive and well and continuing to wrap itself in the deft smear for the simple reason that it works.
That the Democrats behaved in these hearings the way they have in Presidential elections, hamstrung by their own dirty linen, ineffectual in their pallid punches, weak advocates for the disenfranchised.
I learned that if I ever claim sexual harassment, I will be confronted with every bozo I once dated, every woman I once struck as snotty and superior, and together they will provide a convenient excuse to disbelieve me.
The lesson we learned, watching the perfect victim, is that all of us imperfect types, with lies in our past or spotty job histories, without education or the gift of oratory, should just grin and bear it, make nice and try to stay out of the supply closet.
"This sexual harassment crap," Senator Simpson called it, evidencing his interest in women's issues.
What I learned from Professor Hill was different.
When she returned to Oklahoma, where she may well teach all the rest of her days, unmolested by offers of high appointment because of her status as a historical novelty act, she had a kind of radiance.
It seemed to me the tranquillity of a person who has done the right thing and who believes that is more important than public perception.
There is only one explanation for her story that seems sensible and logical to me, that does not require conspiracy theories or tortured amateur psychoanalyzing or a member of the United States Senate making himself look foolish by reading aloud from "The Exorcist." There is only one explanation that seems based not in the plot of some improbable thriller but in the experiences of real life, which the members of the Senate seem to know powerfully little about.
That explanation is that she was telling the truth and he was not.
Simple as that.
She got trashed and he got confirmed.
Simple as that.


Price of Gasoline Drops
The retail price of gasoline fell to a six-month low in the week ended yesterday, the American Automobile Association said in a survey.
The nationwide average price for a gallon of self-service regular unleaded gasoline dropped 1.3 cents, to $1.122, the association said.
That was the lowest price reproted in the weekly report since April 23, when gasoline was $1.119 a gallon.


Accreditation Unit Visits Uneasy Harlem Hospital
Armed with a ragged broom and dust rags, a maintenence worker eyed the front carpet in Harlem Hospital's lobby yesterday and began his assault.
He swept and then swept again, squatting to see that no speck had escaped him.
He paced the carpet, looking for dirt.
Then he swept once more and headed for the windows.
"I haven't ever seen him do that before," said Jessie King, a 42-year-old Harlem resident, one of several people sitting in the lobby.
"Everyone seems a little jumpy today." A Bad Review Could Be Costly
Yesterday was a big day for Harlem Hospital -- inspection day.
And every hospital worker had been reminded more than once that a bad review could cost Harlem its national accreditation and cripple its ability to collect Federal Medicare and Medicaid payments, the bulk of its revenue.


Newspaper Reveals Editorial Conflict
The Washington Post disclosed yesterday that a columnist at the newspaper who had criticized those bringing sexual harassment accusations against Judge Clarence Thomas in a widely quoted opinion piece last Thursday was at the time being investigated on allegations that he had sexually harassed a co-worker.
The huge impact the article had at a critical time raises questions about a news organization's sometimes conflicting obligations to be candid with readers and also to be fair to an employee under investigation.


Real Estate; Mixed Results in Philadelphia Plan to Curb Business Flight
THE decision of a record retailer to expand its distribution center in northeast Philadelphia rather than move to another city illustrates the mixed results of a tax policy this city uses to help it compete with suburban industrial parks.
Under the tax policy, adopted in 1985 to help stem the flight of companies and jobs out of the city, companies pay taxes only on the portion of sales or net income generated within the city limits.


Mandela and Backers Press for Multiparty Talks
Giving new impetus to prospects for serious negotiations on South Africa's future, the African National Congress said today that it was seeking immediate consultations with other political groups to pave the way for a multiparty conference before the end of this year.
In a statement circulated today by the congress, its secretary general, Cyril Ramaphosa, said his organization had already met with its political allies and friends and now wanted to "immediately engage" all other parties, including the governing National Party and the Inkatha Freedom Party, the foremost rival of the African National Congress.


Getting Computers to Accept Poor Penmanship
S.
Gerrold Kaplan, one of the fathers of so-called pentop computing, admits he is embarrassed about overlooking until recently one of the most obvious uses of these featherweight portable computers that use electronic "pens" in lieu of keyboards.
Mr.
Kaplan, who is the founder of the Go Corporation based in Silicon Valley, has, like many other pioneers in this fresh industry, labored for almost five years to design software intelligent enough to recognize the inconsistent chicken scratchings of most human writers -- so far with only mixed success.


Two Drug Companies Post Strong Quarterly Earnings
Two large pharmaceutical companies reported double-digit increases in third-quarter profits yesterday, heralding continued strong growth in drug company earnings.
The American Home Products Corporation said profits were up 21.2 percent in the quarter, led by strong sales growth in three pharmaceutical products.


Corrections
A television review on Monday about coverage of the Senate confirmation hearings for Judge Clarence Thomas misidentified a Newsweek correspondent in some copies.
She is Eleanor Clift.


Pope Defines Role of Priests; Moderation Prescribed in Brazil's Class Battle
As his newest odyssey in Latin America has unfolded, Pope John Paul II has addressed Brazil's big themes of poverty and inequality along with smaller issues of personal morality in a way that suggests he is setting clear but conservative markers for this country's militant priests in their confrontation with the rich and powerful.
But at the same time, he has served notice on the authorities that the church expects fundamental economic change, major agrarian reform and justice.


G.E. Profits Rose by 2% In 3d Quarter
The General Electric Company reported a modest 2 percent increase in third-quarter profits yesterday but said earnings of its finance subsidiary jumped 19 percent as nonperforming assets declined.
With earnings at its Kidder, Peabody brokerage improving and with its NBC division benefiting from the sale of an asset, the company said that most of its major businesses were resisting the economic downturn.
However, it said that earnings at its appliances, aircraft engine, aerospace and materials divisions were weaker and acted as a drag on earnings.


CBS Considers Its Options After a Death in the Family
The death of Redd Foxx, who starred in "The Royal Family" on CBS, has left the network, advertisers and agencies facing delicate choices, from whether the series will stay on the air to what will become of the commercials running on the show.
While no decisions have been made yet, CBS would like to avoid canceling the series, because that would free advertisers from millions of dollars in commercial commitments.


U.S. Offers to Negotiate on 'Star Wars'
Apparently in an effort to prevent further Congressional cuts in the "Star Wars" program, the White House said today for the first time that the United States is willing to negotiate specific limits with the Soviet Union on antimissile defense systems.
The White House presented the offer, announced in a written statement, as a significant shift in policy intended to capitalize on the new momentum toward arms control created by the collapse of Soviet Communism.


Mixed Patent Ruling for Texas Instruments
In an initial determination, the International Trade Commission ruled today that five United States chip companies had infringed a patent on semiconductor packaging technology held by Texas Instruments Inc.
But the commission also ruled that an alternative process the companies are now using does not infringe, effectively nullifying Texas Instruments' efforts to block imports of chips designed by these companies but manufactured in other countries.
The ruling, which was handed down by an administrative law judge, Sidney Harris, said that Analog Devices, Cypress Semiconductor, Integrated Device Technology, LSI Logic and VLSI Technology infringed Texas Instruments' patent for packaging integrated circuits by inserting fluid plastic into the mold cavity underneath a chip.
Developed in the 1960's, this process is called "bottom gating."


Owens-Illinois Plans Offering to Clear Debt
Owens-Illinois Inc., a leading maker of glass and plastic containers that went private in a 1987 leveraged buyout organized by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, said yesterday that it planned to go public with an initial public offering it hopes will raise up to $1.1 billion.
Owens-Illinois said it filed papers yesterday for the offering with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
It said it also plans to sell $1 billion in new senior debt.
The Morgan Stanley Group was named as the lead underwriter.


Hill Says Little About Confirmation
Anita F. Hill quietly accepted Clarence Thomas's confirmation to the Supreme Court and said she hoped the outcome would not stop others from complaining about harassment at work.
"What I hope is that none of this will deter others from coming forward," Professor Hill told reporters outside her home.
"This is an important issue and the dialogue should not stop here." She declined to comment specifically on the Senate vote.


Foreign Affairs; Clinton Vs. Kerrey
Into a Democratic Party now totally dispirited by the performance of its senators in the Thomas hearings, into Democratic Presidential primaries long scarred by race and interest-group politics and long dominated by old-style liberals and unappetizing technocrats, come two men from the nation's heartland who could be credible and compelling leaders.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska are easy to like.
They have presence and brains.
Their handsomeness holds eyes on them.
They are in their 40's with their eyes fixed on America's bleak future for those now in their teens.
Both have spent much of their adult years in politics -- with spotty accomplishments.
Their ideas are similar -- not more government but better government, and not just government but people taking greater responsibility for their own lives as well.


60-Minute Gourmet
WHEN you consider foods that lend themselves to quick cooking, scallops -- either sea scallops or scarce and expensive bay scallops -- rank high.
They are also highly versatile, in dozens of preparations.
There are 400 varieties of scallops in the oceans, although fewer than 20 varieties are harvested commercially.
Sea scallops are among the most widely available, primarily from cool waters like those of the North Atlantic.
At maturity, sea scallops can measure five inches across.
Calico scallops, the least expensive, are widely available.
They come from waters off the southern United States and resemble bay scallops in size -- up to three inches across -- but are inferior in flavor.


Personal Health
THE knee is fast becoming an active woman's Achilles' heel.
Growing numbers of women who pursue sports and other physical activities are discovering that there is often a price to pay for fitness in the form of injury to their body's most vulnerable joint.
Orthopedic surgeons say they are seeing more and more women with painful knees.
Sooner or later half of women suffer knee injuries.
The problem is not limited to athletes.
Women who are merely fitness buffs seeking to control weight, ward off disease or delay the ravages of age are sustaining both acute knee injuries and chronic damage caused by gradual wear and tear.


Pencil-and-Paper Math Goes Way of Abacus
To the Editor:
A couple of centuries ago when pencils and paper became cheap enough for all schoolchildren, mathematics teachers like Richard J. Klutch ("The Calculator Crutch," Op-Ed, Sept. 29) no doubt argued against their use on the grounds that students would no longer learn the mental arithmetic skills so carefully nurtured by mathematics teachers for ages.
Such teachers were wrong then and Mr.
Klutch is wrong now, dangerously so if American mathematics education is going to improve from its current lowly state.


Sports of The Times; At 21, He's the Braves' 'Full-Growed Man'
WHEN Manager Bobby Cox of the Atlanta Braves was asked to compare his 21-year-old left-hander, Steve Avery, to other pitchers this good this young, he shook his head.
"I can't remember a left-hander," he said. "Maybe Carlton."
Steve Carlton, who had a career total of 329 victories, was 3-3 with the St.
Louis Cardinals in 1965, the season he was 21.
Whitey Ford was 9-1 with the '50 Yankees, Sandy Koufax 5-4 with the '57 Dodgers, Tommy John 2-9 with the '64 Indians, Jim Kaat 1-5 with the '60 Washington Senators, Warren Spahn 0-0 with the 1942 Boston Braves.
Lefty Grove and Carl Hubbell didn't get to the big leagues until each was 25.
"Then there's Gooden," Cox said.
Dwight Gooden, the Mets' right-hander, has been the only recent pitcher this good this young.
Gooden was 20 in 1985 when he had a 24-4 record; he was 21 in 1986 when he was 17-6.
"I really can't compare myself to those pitchers," Avery, who had an 18-8 record this year, was saying Monday in Atlanta.
"People say Carlton, but I didn't even see him pitch."
But last Wednesday night the baseball world saw Steve Avery pitch.
With ninth-inning help from Alejandro Pena, he blanked the Pirates, 1-0.
"He acts 21; he's like a little kid when he's wearing his uniform -- except when he goes out and pitches," said Don Sutton, the 324-game winner who is now a Braves broadcaster.
"Out on that mound, as people would say in Alabama where I grew up, 'He's a full-growed man.' "
When the National League championship series resumes tonight in Pittsburgh, Avery will be entrusted with keeping the Braves alive in a marquee matchup with Doug Drabek, the Pirates' ace right-hander, who is recuperating from a damaged hamstring muscle in his left thigh.
"Doug threw off the mound Monday," said Jim Leyland, the Pirates' manager.
"He threw fine. It looks good."
Drabek injured himself trying to stretch a double into a triple during his 5-1 victory in last Wednesday's opener.
"It probably wasn't the right move," Drabek acknowledged.
"But my leg feels a lot better. I've had a lot of treatment. The trainer's been stuck on my hip. I pulled my other hamstring in 1987 and was out three or four weeks. This isn't as bad. But when you come back, you try not to do something to hurt it again, but you try not to favor it."
Tonight's forecast in Pittsburgh is chilly and cloudy, weather not conducive to a pulled hamstring muscle.
"Wrap it well, get it heated, stretch it out," Drabek said.
"Get it loose even before I start warming up."
Drabek had a 15-14 record this year, quite a drop from his 22-6 record in 1990 that earned him a Cy Young Award, but he's the Pirates' best pitcher.
How much his hamstring will bother him remains to be seen, especially in chilly weather.
But the forecast doesn't concern Avery.
"I'm from Michigan," the Braves left-hander said.
"My first two starts my senior year in high school, I pitched in snow. I had to put on gloves between innings to keep warm."
His senior season at John F. Kennedy High School in Taylor, Mich., he had a 13-0 record with a 0.51 earned run average, two no-hitters and seven shutouts.
In 88 innings, he struck out 156 and walked only 24.
He turned down a basketball grant-in-aid from Stanford to sign with the Braves, who had selected him third in the June 1988 draft.
Chosen ahead of Avery in that draft were Andy Benes, now a Padres right-hander, and Mark Lewis, now an Indians shortstop.
"I was in Kansas City then," said John Schuerholz, the Braves' general manager, "but Steve was rated a blue-chipper."
Now 6 feet 4 inches and 190 pounds, Steven Thomas Avery has a boyish face that Norman Rockwell would have cherished.
He insists he has to shave every day, but don't believe it.
Ever since he was a little boy, this "full-growed man" has been tutored in the art of pitching by his father, a minor league pitcher himself until he developed arm trouble.
"My father worked with me on my mechanics," he said.
"And he taught me my curveball and my change-up."
But nobody had to teach Steve Avery his fastball.
Except for Roger Clemens of the Red Sox, he is arguably baseball's best pitcher right now.
In the heat of the National League West race, he stopped the Dodgers, 9-1 and 3-0.
In a chilly rain last Thursday night, he blanked the Pirates on six hits while striking out nine.
Tonight this "full-growed man" at 21 has another chance to show that few, if any, left-handed pitchers have ever been this good this young.


One of Those Days


Pencil-and-Paper Math Goes Way of Abacus; Numerically Lost
To the Editor:
I was happy to read Richard J. Klutch's article on excessive calculator dependence ("The Calculator Crutch," Op-Ed, Sept. 29).
All of the feeling you acquire in doing arithmetic and algebra by hand will not be developed by the use of a calculator.
It will be a mysterious set of buttons you punch that will produce an answer you assume to be correct.


Beijing Warns Taiwan's Independence Advocates
The Chinese Government accused the authorities in Taipei today of trying to disrupt the mainland and warned that it "will not sit idly by" if a campaign for independence continues in Taiwan.
The latest warnings, in seven articles in People's Daily today, underscored the rising tensions across the Taiwan Strait.


CHRONICLE
Apparently a promise is a promise on the Washington social circuit, so Senator ORRIN G. HATCH's staff vowed to NANCY RUWE yesterday afternoon that he would be on hand to roast PATRICK J. BUCHANAN in the evening no matter how the vote on the nomination to the Supreme Court of CLARENCE THOMAS turned out.
Another Senator, JOHN D. ROCKEFELLER 4TH, also on the list of roasters, and two of the honorary chairmen, Speaker THOMAS S. FOLEY and Senator CHRISTOPHER J. DODD, said they would honor their commitments, too, along with 600 other guests less directly involved in the Capitol showdown.


Pepsico's Net Falls by 15.2%; Charge to Snack Unit Cited
Pepsico Inc. said yesterday that third-quarter profits fell 15.2 percent as a result of a $62.4 million charge taken to cut expenses in its snack- food division.
Sales rose 9 percent, and excluding the restructuring charge, profits rose 7 percent, the company said.


COMPROMISE NEAR ON ABORTION RULE
The White House and Congress worked today toward a compromise that would at least partly overturn a Federal rule forbidding doctors and counselors at Government-supported family planning clinics to mention to pregnant women that one alternative was abortion.
A House-Senate conference committee is near agreement on legislation that would void the rule and is expected to approve that legislation on Wednesday, with or without the Bush Administration's backing.


Defense Disappears and So Does the Rangers' Edge
There's no sustained offense and no obsessive defense, and there are too many cliches about tough scheduling, fractured training camps and teammates who consider themselves virtual strangers despite the fact they're all Rangers.
The Garden may have completed its makeover, but its hockey team isn't quite there yet.
There was a consensus of posture, the slumping shoulders and downcast eyes of men in the midst of a three-game downswing, as the players pondered their 5-3 defeat Monday by the Capitals, the division rivals who seem bent on making a habit of embarrassing them.


Arthur W. Bernal, 78, Food Critic And Author Known as Stendahl
Arthur W. Bernal, who under the name Stendahl was a food and restaurant critic for The Daily News and WNCN-FM radio, died Sunday morning at his home in Bayside, Queens.
He was 78 years old.
Mr.
Bernal died of a heart attack after several strokes, said his publicist, M. J. Boyer.


Japanese Front-Runner Pauses in Kyoto to Observe Tradition


Politics, A Movie, And a Tale Of 2 Cities
Like many other writers and movie makers, Martin Kaplan insists that Hollywood and Washington are two sides of the same coin.
"They're both company towns," he says, "they both do something whose ultimate judge is the American people, and they both operate on the assumption that the perception of power is power."
Unlike many other writers and movie makers, however, Mr.
Kaplan has served close to the pinnacle of power in both places and has now, at least in Hollywood terms, "come close to winning the jackpot."


Corrections
An article on Oct. 1 about film making in New York City misstated the tentative title of Spike Lee's new movie.
It is "Malcolm X."


Review/Cabaret; Curmudgeonly Reminiscing In Oscar Levant Impression
Barbed epigrams fly from the stage of Michael's Pub (211 East 55th Street), where the pianist and composer Stan Freeman is portraying Oscar Levant in his one-man show, "At Wit's End."
"I am a deeply superficial person," he announces early in the evening.
The only difference between the Democrats and Republicans, he asserts a little later, is that "the Democrats allow the poor to be corrupt, too." "Integrity is a lofty attitude assumed by someone who is unemployed," he declares further on.
As nasty about others as he is about himself, he recollects taking Elsa Maxwell to a Halloween party and ripping off her mask "to find I had beheaded her." His first embrace with Judy Garland, he speculates, "may well be the greatest moment in pharmaceutical history."


Baker Meets Syrian Leader; Palestinian Progress Is Seen
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and President Hafez al-Assad of Syria met today in an effort to finalize Syria's participation in a proposed Middle East peace conference, and Jordanians and Palestinians in Amman reported progress in forging their joint delegation for the parley.
Mr.
Baker and Mr.
Assad met for seven hours today, and American officials announced that the two would meet again tomorrow.
Mr.
Baker had been scheduled to depart first thing Wednesday for talks in Jerusalem with Palestinians.


These Days, Talking Seems to Be Touchy Topic for Tyson
Mike Tyson was not in the mood to talk last week.
When he is that way, his expression goes bland.
He appears restless.
His answers tend to be brief and cliched.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Georgia Municipal Electric Power Authority priced $215.7 million in revenue and special-obligation bonds with a 6.6 percent coupon through First Boston.
The higest yield in the issue is 6.65 percent for the 2018 maturity.
Moody's rated the issue A1 and Standard &amp; Poor's rated it AA-. *
The Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae, the Government-affiliated housing-loan investor, plans to redeem two debenture issues totaling $300 million in mid-November: series SM 1994-L debentures carrying an 8.44 percent coupon and series SM-1993-L debentures with an 8.20 percent coupon.


Ossified Child-Welfare System Needs Reform
To the Editor:
Almost daily you carry a story of yet another child in New York City who has been battered or murdered by its parents.
We are told that there are hotlines to report suspected abuses, and city staff to investigate within 24 hours if the facts warrant.
But when faced with yet another abused child gone undetected and severely harmed as a result, city and state social-services officials lower the curtain of confidentiality, which serves to cover bureaucratic failure since the names of the child and parents and the details of the abuse or murder have already been revealed in the press.
Whose interests are being protected? Certainly not the interests of the child.
For years child advocates have called for a complete overhaul of New York City's child welfare system, which is ossified by protectionist bureaucratic interests (public and private) and a maldistribution of resources.
These advocates champion a neighborhood integration of services for children and families so that, among other things, teachers won't have to call a hotline to get help for a child.
Surely the time has long come for a change in the way we handle the needs of unprotected children.
Nineteenth-century precepts governing child welfare and other human services won't hold as we approach the year 2000.
GEORGIA L. McMURRAY  New York, Oct. 3, 1991 The writer is professor of social policy at the Graduate School of Social Service, Fordham University.


Drabek Aims to Wrap It Up, but Avery Has Own Plan
Doug Drabek, an ice pack bound to the back of his left leg, sat on a sofa in the Pirates' clubhouse today, having a catch with his 3-year-old son, Kyle.
Only a few feet away, Randy Tomlin, 5 feet 11 inches tall, was playing one-on-one basketball with 6-6 Roger Mason, on the players' makeshift clubhouse court.


Violence in Somalia Jeopardizes Food Aid
Fighting in Somalia has put 4.5 million people at risk of starvation, and unless the security situation improves it will be impossible to distribute food aid, the United Nations food agency said today.
The Food and Agriculture Organization cited Somalia and Sudan as the African countries worst hit by food shortages, with recent unrest in Zaire adding it to the list of those affected.


Israelis Suggest Talks On Peace Could Falter
While asserting that they remain committed to attending a Middle East peace conference, senior Israeli officials have made clear in the last few days that the Government would shed no tears if the United States-engineered process fell apart.
Even though the talks are being arranged on their terms, especially on the key question of which Palestinians will be allowed to participate, the officials increasingly argue that Washington is tilting so far in the Arabs' favor that the deck is stacked against them.


Market Place; Revived Interest In Country Funds
THE boom in country funds is back.
This time, Latin America and its hoped-for economic revival are the objects of attraction.
That has been shown dramatically by the market success of the Argentina Fund, which went public late last week, zoomed on Monday and fell back a bit yesterday.


When Diary Pages Can Fill Out Lives
THE publication this month of "The Journals of John Cheever" (Alfred A. Knopf), a bruised account of a failed marriage, alcoholism, loneliness and bisexuality, has revived interest in journal writing.
"For Cheever, the journal accorded him a place to record his private thoughts," said Daniel Halpern, the poet and editor of the literary journal Antaeus.
"There is an amazing generosity in his work. Through the journal you feel that you've known him a long time."


Chicago Journal; A Library Opens to Revive and Heal
At a time when cities around the country are either closing libraries or cutting their hours to save money, Chicago has opened a $144 million neo-classical library building in an ailing downtown business area.
The new library, the Harold Washington Library Center, is named for Chicago's first black Mayor and, city officials say, is the nation's largest municipal lending library.
It is already seen as a healer of political bruises and a symbol of urban revival.


Church Retains Minister Who Admitted Affair
After months of increasingly public controversy, the members of the Unitarian Church of All Souls in Manhattan voted last night to confirm the Rev.
F.
Forrester Church as its pastor, rejecting demands that Dr.
Church resign because of an acknowledged extramarital affair with a member of the congregation.
The vote was 372 to 136.


Sports of The Times; Midnight Scrambler Wins Again
EVERYBODY who had stayed up until 2 A.M. on Monday, watching the drama of the Senate hearings, could have used some sleep.
But this year's Giants don't do anything easily, or early.
Still, something good came out of Monday night's 23-20 victory over the Steelers: a reminder that if left to his own devices Jeff Hostetler can make things happen.


Bad Dumpling Grammar
To The Living Section:
If Joseph Ben-Moha, the owner of the Roxy Deli, really said, "What makes a wonton not a kreplach, a kreplach not a pirogi, a pirogi not a wonton?" as Molly O'Neill reports in "The Universal Dumpling (Dough, a Little Filling, a Lot of Ancestry)"  [ Oct. 2 ] , then shame on him.
Kreplach may be singularly delicious, but they are grammatically plural, from the Yiddish krepel, or dumpling, and so are pirogi, from the Russian pirog, or pie.
LOUIS JAY HERMAN  New York, N.Y.


Retired Police Detective Fights Mugger and Is Slain
A retired New York City police detective was shot and killed early yesterday while resisting a mugging outside a Queens bar where he worked as a bartender, the police said.
The victim, John Hastings, 67 years old, a 20-year veteran of the Police Department who retired in 1967 as a detective second grade, was the father of Judith Hastings, confidential secretary to Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown.


Review/Ballet; From Hartford, Pirouettes, Splits and Playfulness
Michael Uthoff, who was a leading dancer in the Joffrey Ballet in the 1960's, became the artistic director of the Hartford Ballet in 1972.
On its latest visit to New York, the company, dancing with a new stylistic unity, displayed a marked rise in its already professional standards.
When last seen in Whitman Hall at Brooklyn College a few years ago, the troupe's notable success was "Land's Edge," a commissioned premiere from choreographers in another company, Pilobolus.
On Saturday night in the same theater, the bill presented by the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts consisted of an all-Uthoff program.
Like many other regional companies, the Hartford Ballet serves as a creative outlet for its director, although major choreographers are apparently also included in the repertory.





Anderson's Status Remains Uncertain
Offers from around the world for the services of the Nets' No. 1 draft pick Kenny Anderson have begun reaching his agent, Atlanta-based Richard Howell said, though none yet have Anderson thinking he might be spending his winter abroad.
In a telephone interview yesterday, Howell said he has been contacted by European teams that he wouldn't name but that Anderson remains focused on coming to terms with the Nets.


Celebration in Thomas's Hometown


New York City Bulldozes Squatters' Shantytowns
Police officers wearing riot gear staged a dawn raid yesterday on three city-owned lots in the East Village of Manhattan, evicting an estimated 200 people from shantytowns that many said they had moved into after being evicted in June from nearby Tompkins Square Park.
The evictions were carried out amid the din of bulldozers crushing and overrunning the makeshift quarters -- knots of shacks and tents that had become notorious for their squalor and a symbol of the city's inability to deal with its growing homeless population.


Senate's Futile Search for Safe Ground
At the end of the bitter fight over Clarence Thomas, Senators sat quietly and listened to dignified speeches.
They usually don't.
Then, even more unusually, they listened to each other vote, wondering how other senators had decided the issue.
At its simplest political level, tonight's 52-to-48 vote to confirm Judge Thomas as a Supreme Court Justice was a search for safe political ground.
But, despite the dignity of the last minutes, it was not a moment that is likely to do much to heal the self-induced doubts about the Senate and its confirmation process or to salve the anger of many Americans.


How Lawmakers From Area Voted
Five of the six Senators from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut voted against the confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court and one voted in favor, all along party lines.
Those opposing him were all Democrats: Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, Bill Bradley and Frank R. Lautenberg of New Jersey, and Christopher J. Dodd and Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut.


Davis Pratt, 68, Dies; Photography Curator
Davis Pratt, the associate curator of photographs at the Fogg Art Museum of Harvard University and a senior lecturer on fine arts at the university, died on Monday in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 68 years old.
He died of cancer, said his son, Samuel.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Question Broad Reach of 'Son of Sam' Law
The Supreme Court gave a sympathetic hearing today to the publishing industry's challenge to a New York law designed to limit the ability of criminals to profit from selling their stories.
In a fast-paced, hourlong argument, the Justices appeared to react with skepticism to New York's defense of its statute, known as the "Son of Sam" law after a series of killings that inspired its passage in 1977.


Duke's Disguise
The ordeal of Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill has stoked hostility toward the news media.
How deeply should reporters probe in assessing a person's character and past?
In the case of David Duke, they haven't gone far enough.
The 1970's Ku Klux Klan leader won election to the Louisiana Legislature in 1989 as a remade Republican.
The real story, largely ignored, was and is his career as a neo-Nazi apologist.


Economics Nobel to a Basic Thinker
Ronald H. Coase, a British-born 81-year-old economist retired from the University of Chicago Law School, was awarded the $1 million Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences yesterday.
The work for which he was cited is almost as remarkable for its brevity and accessibility to non-economists as for its profundity.
Unlike many of the recent economics prize winners, Mr.
Coase is known for his thinking on the role of institutions in the economy -- work that contains little or no mathematics.


Stranding the Jobless
President Bush vetoed the Democrats' bill to aid the long-term jobless because it wouldn't pay for itself.
Yet the Republican proposals he prefers are a sham.
They help too few people and depend on gimmicks that waste future revenue.
More than three million of the nation's eight million jobless are collecting unemployment insurance.
New claims have mounted slowly but steadily.
Mr.
Bush has made much of his measures to boost the economy by easing credit.
But he ignores the depressing effects of job insecurity.
People don't spend when they fear being laid off.


Books of The Times; Investigating the Chief Investigator
J.
Edgar Hoover  The Man and the Secrets.
By Curt Gentry  846 pages.
W.
W.
Norton. $29.95.
From the Secret Files of J. Edgar Hoover  Edited with commentary by Athan Theoharis  370 pages.
Chicago: Ivan R. Dee. $24.95.
During the Senate Judiciary Committee's hearings last weekend, the chairman, Joseph R. Biden Jr., emphasized that the Federal Bureau of Investigation was only an
investigative
body, that its reports did not offer opinions, and that no one should draw any conclusions from the raw data its agents collected.


Accounts
*
Kroger Co., Cincinnati, to Campbell-Mithun-Esty's Chicago office, for broadcast advertising for the 104 stores in its Delta marketing area, covering six Southern states.
Billings were not disclosed.
The agency had handled Kroger's total $20 million national account, but the supermarket chain has decentralized its advertising into 10 local market areas, each selecting its own agency. *
Southwestern Bell Telephone, St.
Louis, to Colle &amp; McVoy, Minneapolis, for its business-to-business advertising.
Billings were not disclosed.


Help Save the Schools! Buy a Candy Bar
ON a cool, sunny day last week, Joseph Malagoli and his third-grade classmate Jacquelyn Lopez, both 8 years old, were demonstrating their sales technique.
Dressed in crisp blue and gray parochial school uniforms, toting books under one arm and boxes of candy bars under the other, they approached a telephone repairman outside their school at 10th Avenue and 21st Street: "Would you like to buy a bar of candy to help our school?" they asked sweetly in unison.
It worked like a charm.
That day, the children sold 16 bars in 10 minutes.
Occasionally, they ran into a tough customer, one who claimed that a candy bar would ruin a diet.
Did Joseph and Jacquelyn push?
No way.
All it took was a "Thanks, anyway," and before they could turn and walk away, the customer was reaching into a pocket for the money.


No Runs, No Pennant: Braves Force Game 7
The Atlanta Braves watched in agonizing frustration as the number of innings in their scoreless streak rose.
They began the night with 18, and at the end of the eighth inning, the number was 26.
But, Bobby Cox, their manager, said: "We still felt good because the Pirates didn't get any runs. Everybody was getting frustrated, but Steve was still out there pitching."


Centocor Product Receives Patent
Centocor Inc., a biotechnology company, said it had received a United States patent covering its flagship product, Centoxin, a treatment for bacterial infections and septic shock that is awaiting approval by the Food and Drug Administration.
Centoxin employs monoclonal antibodies created by the company.


2 Held in Rapes Of 3 Teen-Agers During Robbery
A fingerprint on a telephone receiver has led to the arrest of two men on charges of raping three teen-age girls Saturday night during a robbery in an apartment in the Inwood section of Manhattan, the police said yesterday.
They said the fingerprint was left by Candelario Vasquez, 31 years old, of 660 West 162d Street, Manhattan, who they said telephoned for a livery cab after he and another man broke into an apartment on Isham Street and terrorized the three teen-age girls, as well two children, 8 and 6, and a 26-year-old man who was at the apartment.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Stock prices rose smartly on the strength of corporate earnings that exceeded expectations.
The Dow capped a five-day rally to vault to a new high, 3,061.72, up 20.35.  [ Page D1. ]  Prices of Treasury securities slipped a bit in slow trading.  [ D21. ]


Dollar Closes Mostly Lower As Traders Await Reports
The dollar settled mostly lower yesterday in lackluster trading on world currency markets.
Gold prices advanced after settling lower in foreign markets.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, bullion for current delivery settled at $358.20 an ounce, up 50 cents from Tuesday.
The Republic National Bank said gold gained 85 cents an ounce, to $357.70.


Talking Deals; A Computer Plan Runs Into Trouble
THE Advanced Computing Environment, begun earlier this year by a renegade industry consortium of computer makers and software publishers with bold predictions of a technology revolution, has fallen prey to internal bickering and industry politics.
The consortium's plan was to remake the personal computer by blending the power of the most advanced computer chips with new software that would orchestrate networks of computers, re-energizing the industry.


Dorothy Berliner Commins, Pianist, 102
Dorothy Berliner Commins, a concert pianist and author, died on Monday at her home in Princeton, N.J.
She was 102 years old.
Mrs.
Commins was born in New York City and made her recital debut at Town Hall at the age of 12.
She studied in New York and in Europe and had an active career for five decades.
Her last concert was at Town Hall in the mid-1950's.


No Truce So Far In Albany Fight On Court Budget
The feuding legal titans of New York, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Chief Judge Sol Wachtler, today proposed new ways to end their battle over financing the state courts.
But after each man effectively trampled upon the other's olive branch, there were no signs that peace was at hand.
The Governor said he would be glad to sit down and discuss possible ways to provide more money for the court system, just as long as the Chief Judge immediately withdrew his much-publicized lawsuit that seeks to force Mr.
Cuomo to spend more on the judiciary.


3-Day Event Is Opening For Collectors of Crafts
In 1984, the Associates of the American Craft Museum sponsored "The Collector's Eye," a three-day event devoted to crafts and the idiosyncrasies of their devotees.
There were lectures, an auction, and visits to galleries and collectors' homes.
The seventh "Collector's Eye" begins today at 6 P.M. at the Equitable Building at Seventh Avenue and 52d Street in Manhattan.
There will be cocktails and a sale of 98 objects chosen by Jack Lenor Larsen, the textile designer and president emeritus of the American Craft Council.
At 8 P.M. there will be a dinner and an auction of 34 items chosen by American collectors.


Georgia-Pacific Posts Loss, Citing Depressed Markets
The Georgia-Pacific Corporation, citing a downturn in the market for pulp and paper and building products, reported a net loss yesterday of $27 million for the third quarter.
In the comparable period last year the company, the nation's largest paper producer, earned $95 million, or $1.11 a share.


A Passion to Hang Designs From Nature on Walls and People
TED MUEHLING'S Manhattan apartment contains the following: Moths' wings.
Quail eggs.
Venus combs.
Nautilus shells.
Beach rocks.
One gilded cupid.
Fossilized squids.
A stuffed striped bass suspended from the ceiling.
An apartment decorated with leaves and tree branches might not be everyone's idea of serenity.
Neither would his studio, where a birch bark canoe is suspended from the ceiling.
"I was trying to make the woods in a corner of Manhattan," Mr.
Muehling said.


Albany Seeks Seizure of Mutual Fund Firm
The State of New York has asked a judge to seize control of the First Investors Corporation, a mutual fund management company already accused of defrauding buyers of its junk bond funds.
In papers released yesterday, the State Attorney General's office said First Investors had paid out $33 millon to its owners last year in a series of actions the state said were intended to "hinder, delay and frustrate the claims of investors."


Dance in Review
Paco Pena Flamenco Company  Town Hall
Rhythm triumphed on Sunday night when the Paco Pena Flamenco Company appeared at Town Hall.
What made this troupe from Cordoba, Spain, exciting was not its intensity, even though the dancers, singers and guitarists performed with extraordinary vitality.
Nor, although its offerings were heartfelt, did the company try to overwhelm the audience with emotional hysteria.


For a Home, A Choice of 8 Architects
EIGHT Chicago architects, including Margaret McCurry and Ralph Johnson, have created models of a suburban development in Burr Ridge, Ill.
The naturalistic designs are on exhibit at the Gwenda Jay Gallery in Chicago, (312) 664-3406, through Nov. 9.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Tom Petty
Brendan Byrne Arena
Tom Petty's show at the Brendan Byrne Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., on Oct. 9 was easy enough to sink into.
Mr.
Petty, unlike many larger rock acts, makes soft, cloudlike music with a laziness to it that allows a listener to relax.
And Mr.
Petty, who is one of rock's more misanthropic songwriters, interspersed the show with vignettes; his stage was covered with odd things like candelabra, old trunks, a totem pole and a large anthropomorphic tree.
Mr.
Petty is an ironist, and while the show had a languid quality to it, cynicism and humor regularly nudged it toward a semblance of thought.
It wasn't stupid, and in an arena, almost everything meant to have nuance becomes overblown and dumb.


Review/Theater; Who's Real, The Puppeteer Or the Puppet?
"In a gray sky, the full moon is like a pearl," reads one of the haiku that the Brazilian puppet-theater company Grupo Contadores de Estorias illustrates in its lyrical 90-minute dream play, "Maturando."
The work, which was performed at the Brooklyn Academy of Music last week, Wednesday through Sunday, as part of the Next Wave Festival, is a luminous, moonlight-drenched evocation of a woman's life cycle, in which the two characters, a woman and her lover, are alternately portrayed by hand puppets and by the actors who manipulate them in the style of Bunraku puppetry.
By the end of the wordless piece, one is left with the eerie sense that the miniature figures are more "real" than the humans who slip in and out of the same roles.


Primary in Queens Ordered for Tuesday; 2 Elections Are Canceled
A Manhattan justice rejected a legal challenge by Councilwoman Miriam Friedlander yesterday, upholding Antonio Pagan's 132-vote victory in the Democratic primary race for the District 2 seat on the Lower East Side, Board of Elections officials said.
In Brooklyn, meanwhile, the state Appellate Division reversed several similar lower court decisions, ordering one special primary in Queens and cancelling two others that had been ordered by the lower courts.
The losers have said they would appeal to the Court of Appeals in Albany, the state's highest court, elections officials said.


People
*
Nancy J. Megan, 55 years old, has been named to the new position of executive director of the Advertising Women of New York.
She previously worked in promotions and public affairs for Time and Sports Illustrated magazines. *
Alan Levenstein has been promoted to vice chairman at Bozell Inc., New York, from executive vice president and managing director of Chrysler marketing worldwide.
He continues with overall responsibility for the Chrysler account. *
Jeff DeJoseph has been appointed to the new position of strategy director at Waring &amp; LaRosa, New York.
He had been executive vice president and managing director at Deutsch Inc., New York. *
David Fowler has resigned as senior vice president and associate creative director at Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, to become creative director of advertising at the Fox Broadcasting Company, Los Angeles. *
Lisa Strassman has been named president of the new New York office of Taglairino Advertising Group, Miami.
She had been vice president and associate media director at McCann-Erickson, Los Angeles.


Old-World Images via Brooklyn
JOAN NELSON, a New York artist who paints mostly landscapes, has lifted her brush to create Old World naturalistic designs on wallpaper.
The artist, who lives in Brooklyn, searched Prospect Park for images of leaves and vines.
"I brought home oak, sassafras and tulip leaves," she said, "and took pumpkin vine from our backyard."
The crackly, Pompeiian backgrounds of her creations are as much an artistic foray as the loopy vines and decaying leaves -- inspired by Dutch still lifes -- in the foregrounds.
"I wanted to show transience and decay," the 33-year-old Ms.
Nelson explained, "that beyond-the-peak point, as in the Dutch tradition, which says, 'We all die.' "


The Sputtering California Miracle
California, a big engine of growth during the 1980's, is turning out to be an economic caboose in 1991, as it suffers from consistently high unemployment, a weakening real estate market and troubles in key industries like aerospace,
While many other parts of the country appear to be pulling out of the recession, economists here said California might not yet have hit bottom.
Even after it does, they said, myriad problems are likely to dampen the strength of its recovery.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.50
5.12
6.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.97
4.96
7.19
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.01
4.99
7.21
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.13
7.11
8.60
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.87
7.85
8.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
8.99
9.98
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.86
6.87
7.81
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellweather bonds, notes and bills


How Much Is It Worth? Well, It All Depends
Go figure. Count on your fingers, if you wish, or hire an accountant.
On one hand, the National Hockey League is selling its expansion franchises for $50 million.
That pricetag doesn't include any arena.
That's only for the right to do business in the untapped markets of Tampa and Ottawa.


RESULTS PLUS
RACING Cordero Comes Close ANGEL CORDERO moved within one victory of joining BILL SHOEMAKER and LAFFIT PINCAY in the exclusive 7,000 Club with two winners Wednesday at Belmont Park.
The 48-year-old Puerto Rican jockey won the fifth race aboard Devil's Mistress ($3.80) and took the ninth with Fenter ($10.40).
Cordero failed to win with two other mounts.
Actually, Cordero believes that two more winners will put him one up on the Shoe and Pincay because he insists he has 253 winners in Puerto Rico that the American Racing Manual does not recognize.
"Angel Cordero Jr.'s career totals, like those of many foreign-born riders, do not include mounts, wins and purse earnings accumulated before he began to ride in the United States in 1962," said The Daily Racing Form, which publishes the manual.
But Cordero said that some of those winners were recorded in 1963-64 and noted that Puerto Rico is not a foreign country. (AP) TENNIS Navratilova Wins Top-seeded Martina Navratilova defeated Elna Reinach, 6-4, 7-5, yesterday in Filderstadt, Germany, in the second round of a Women's Tennis Association tournament.
Navratilova, who will turn 35 tomorrow, advanced to the quarterfinals.
Eighth-seeded Nathalie Tauziat, who lost in the final to Steffi Graf Sunday in Zurich, defeated Pam Shriver, 5-7, 6-3, 6-1, in a first-round match.
In other second-round action, seventh-seeded Helena Sukova beat Amy Frazier, 6-7, (2-7), 7-5, 6-3, and fourth-seeded Jana Novotna defeated Natalya Medvedeva, 6-4, 6-4. (AP)


DELAY IN ELECTION URGED BY YELTSIN
President Boris N. Yeltsin, feeling the heat of prime responsibility for crisis management, has urged the Parliament of the Russian federated republic to postpone a new round of democratic elections and consider more stringent economic measures ranging from higher prices to currency controls.
Mr.
Yeltsin, whose high opinion-poll ratings are leveling off as the public awaits relief through his promises of reform, is trying to halt some infighting in his government and stir impressions of progress with a variety of fresh plans.


Corrections
A sports article on Monday about the remaining undefeated college football teams in Division I-A omitted one such team.
Fresno State University is also undefeated.


N.B.A. Is Paying for Its Success
One of the most appealing days of the basketball year is draft day, around the third week in June, when David Stern stands before a television camera and tells the reigning stars of the college game to which National Basketball Association campus they will be assigned to pursue their post-graduate work.
As the host of this popular, lucrative, prime-time mating game, the attorney-turned-commissioner offers no monologue, no encouragement, nothing more than a corporate detachment that smartly allows his show to play to its stars.
Stern, more than any commissioner in the history of professional team sports, knows who they are.


Idaho Tribe Stops Nuclear Waste Truck
A growing restiveness in the West over the transport and storage of radioactive wastes escalated yesterday when tribal police dispatched by the Shoshone-Bannock Tribes in Idaho intercepted a truck carrying spent nuclear fuel and refused to allow it to cross their reservation.
The spent fuel from a plant in Colorado was being taken to an Energy Department weapons plant near Idaho Falls.
The 12-hour confrontation between the tribal police, the truck driver, a Federal inspector, the state police and representatives of the utility occurred along Interstate 15 in southeastern Idaho.
It ended late yesterday when a Federal district judge in Boise ordered the Shoshone-Bannock Tribes to clear the way for the truck to dispose of its cargo at the Energy Department's Idaho National Engineering Laboratory, 50 miles from the reservation.
The laboratory is an 890-square mile nuclear weapons plant that is also one of the oldest and largest nuclear waste sites in the country.


Bond Prices Slip in Slow Trading
Prices of Treasury securities slipped a bit in slow trading yesterday, as credit market participants continued to watch and wait for a signal from the Federal Reserve Board that it had eased monetary policy.
The Fed sent no such signal yesterday, but analysts said the central bank would have been ill advised to make any such attempt.


Borisov Journal; German Prefabs Await an Unwelcome Red Army
In late 1941, Werner Bohnke, a German Army conscript, fought his way across Byelorussia toward Moscow.
Half a century later, his only son, Hans Wilhelm, is back in Byelorussia, overseeing the construction of apartment blocks for Soviet officers under a German-financed withdrawal of Soviet troops from eastern Germany.


NCNB Picks President For New Nationsbank
When Kenneth D. Lewis graduated from Georgia State University in Atlanta in 1969 he had two job offers at large regional banks.
One, from the Citizens and Southern Corporation in Atlanta, would have paid $7,800 a year.
The other, from the Charlotte, N.C.-based NCNB Corporation was for $8,000.
"I needed the $200," Mr.
Lewis said, explaining why he opted for Charlotte.


Editorial Notebook; Lynching, as Surreal Slogan
When Clarence Thomas accused the Senate Judiciary Committee of lynching him by airing Anita Hill's charges of sexual harassment, his claim exploded across the country in surreal fashion.
Nearly everyone was stunned.
No one should have been.
Judge Thomas has consistently played the race card, in the tradition of his patron, George Bush, whose Willie Horton commercial in 1988 touched a low point in political campaigns.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ADULTS carry powerful feelings left over from childhood.
They might blame their parents for giving them too little attention, or too much; for divorcing, or for not separating earlier; perhaps even for physical or sexual abuse.
Such memories can gnaw, distorting an adult's relationships, self-image and sense of accomplishment.
Dr.
Nancy K. Schlossberg recalls having dinner with a senior Government official, a man who had achieved a great deal by anyone's measure and who wielded tremendous power.
"He did all these important things, but all he could talk about was what his father had done to him years ago as a child," said Dr.
Schlossberg, a professor of counseling at the University of Maryland.


DeOssie Enters Plea
A lawyer for Giants linebacker STEVE DeOSSIE entered a not guilty plea yesterday for his client, who was arrested last month on a misdemeanor drug charge, court officials in Grapevine, Tex., said.
A Nov. 14 trial was scheduled before Municipal Court Judge DAVID FLORENCE, according to BEVERLY PORTER, the court clerk.
DeOssie, represented by MARK DEUBNER, a Dallas lawyer, remained free on $170 cash bond, Porter said.


CHRONICLE
OLEG PROKOFIEV was always upset when he saw "Alexander Nevsky," the 1938 film whose score was composed by his father, Sergei Prokofiev, because he could barely hear the music.
"Many details of the music disappeared because the sound track was imperfect, very faint," he said yesterday at the beginning of a 10-day visit to New York from England, where he is a sculptor.
"In addition, they had to finish the film urgently: Comrade Stalin wanted to see it in a hurry."
No one will have to strain to hear the score when the Sergei Eisenstein film is shown with new subtitles at Avery Fisher Hall on Oct. 25.


Her Mood Now


Coca-Cola Profit Up 15.8% On Strong Overseas Sales
Bolstered by strong sales overseas, the Coca-Cola Company said yesterday, profits rose 15.8 percent in the third quarter.
Earnings rose to $456.3 million, or 69 cents a share, it said, compared with $394.1 million, or 58 cents a share, a year earlier, while sales increased 13.6 percent, to $3.17 billion, from $2.79 billion a year ago.


What to Do With D.C.
To the Editor:
"Free the Government's Plantation" (editorial, Oct. 6), on a bill pending in Congress that would admit Washington, D.C., to the Union as New Columbia, the 51st state, overlooks a solution that does not require amending the Constitution and has historical precedent on its side.
Congress need only draft a bill that returns all of the District of Columbia except for the Federal properties to Maryland.
Congress ceded the areas now known as Arlington and Alexandria back to Virginia almost 150 years ago.


Home Video
The Beatles, Act I
The plane was about two hours from Idlewild, as Kennedy International Airport was called in 1964, when the telephone rang in the office of the film makers Albert and David Maysles.
On the plane were the Beatles, about to land for the first time in the United States.
On the phone was Granada Television of Britain.
Would the Maysles, Granada asked, be interested in making a film about the Beatles' trip to New York?


Gun Used in Slayings Has Lethal Reputation
The Glock 17, the pistol used in the slaying of 22 people in Killeen, Tex., yesterday, is a partly plastic semi-automatic weapon that is popular with drug dealers and at one time was banned by the New York City Police Department, which feared that terrorists could sneak it through airport metal detectors.
Karl F. Walter, vice president of Glock Inc., in Smyrna, Ga., said Wednesday that the pistol was developed in 1982 by Gaston Glock, an Austrian bayonet and shovel manufacturer, at the request of the Austrian Army.


Police 'Chop Shop' Fools Car Thieves in Queens
The word began going out last May to the shadowy but pervasive circles that include career car thieves who stalk the streets of Queens, the borough with the most auto thefts in New York City.
If you want to dispose of a hot car, the message went, here's the beeper number of the guy to call.
Some two dozen people called over the next four months, and 50 stolen cars were bought.


Debate Raises NBC's Ratings
NBC's coverage of the Senate debate on Tuesday on the confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas gave the network its highest daytime ratings in several years.
The only major network to cover the entire debate, NBC had a 5.1 rating in the 25 largest television markets during the day, up 65 percent from its 3.1 average for those hours, the A. C. Nielsen Company reported.
The 5.1 rating meant that about 4.5 million households were tuned to NBC.


For Environment's Sake, Recharge Your Electric Car at Night; Best at Constant Speed
To the Editor:
To achieve longer range in an electric car, James Graham proposes battery interchange (Op-Ed page, Sept. 26).
For the task he offers common interchange points, such as gasoline service stations.
I have made battery interchanges.
It isn't easy.
There are at least three problems:


SUICIDE RULED OUT IN BLAST ON SHIP
Revising its findings about the 1989 explosion that killed 47 sailors aboard the battleship Iowa, the Navy has concluded after months of tests and analysis that it does not have definitive proof of sabotage, Navy officials said today.
The new findings, which will be announced Thursday by Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations, overturn the Navy's earlier conclusion that the explosion was probably an act of suicidal sabotage by a despondent sailor.


Pope Asks Pardon of Brazil's Indians
Pope John Paul II offered symbolic atonement to Brazil's dwindling Indian population today for the "weakness and defects" of some missionaries during centuries of evangelism.
But he defended the "shining and eternal example" of the Roman Catholic orders that brought Christianity to Latin America.
With his comments to 160 Indian leaders in this city deep in Brazil's interior, the Pope seemed to enter a gathering debate before the Columbus quincentenary next year over whether the European arrival in the Americas brought development and justice or destruction and cultural loss.


South Bronx Residents Oppose Medical Waste Incinerator


Knicks Retaliate Against Celtics
One night after suffering their first pre-season loss, the Knicks got a small measure of revenge tonight.
Taking the lead for good in the third quarter, the Knicks (3-1) defeated the Boston Celtics, 111-101, at the Hartford Civic Center.
Trying to establish a winning attitude, Knicks Coach Pat Riley took this game much more seriously than did the Celtics.
Patrick Ewing (25 points) played the final 7 minutes, while both Larry Bird and Robert Parish sat out the fourth quarter for Boston.
After losing to the Celtics on Tuesday at Madison Square Garden, Riley thought this game had significance.


Less Money, More Pupils Spell Trouble For Schools
Peter Allong was hired by Public School 308 in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, to give its gifted children provocative lessons in mathematics.
But until this week, his room was a bare field of shiny brown linoleum with no chairs.
Two floors below, the rooms have chairs, but in one class 46 first graders -- 18 more than the limit -- are squeezed together, their colliding elbows and notebooks offering a memorable initiation into the deprivations of New York City school life.


12 Hurt After 2 Jets Collide on Newark Taxiway
Two jetliners collided on a taxiway at Newark International Airport last night, and 12 people were injured as they slid down chutes while evacuating the planes, the authorities said.
The airport was closed for about an hour after the accident.


Imcera Names Chief Who Aided Big Change
M.
Blake Ingle, a microbiologist who helped transform the International Mining and Chemicals Corporation, a fertilizer maker, into the Imcera Group, a technology-based medical specialty company, was named Imcera's chief executive yesterday.
Mr.
Ingle, 49 years old, succeeds George D. Kennedy, 65, who remains chairman and will also head the board's executive committee.


District Attorney Seeks Information on Clios
The Manhattan District Attorney's office, continuing its investigation into the financially troubled Clio Awards, yesterday asked to hear from people holding canceled checks that were used to pay for tickets to the 1991 awards ceremonies.
The preliminary investigation of Clio Awards Enterprises Inc. began in June, shortly after the two ceremonies were disrupted and canceled.
The fiasco came amid reports that Clio suppliers had not been paid for their services.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Amy Grant
The Paramount
On the fringes of mainstream pop is a shadow world.
There, music mimics the latest arrangements in order to insinuate a message far removed from most rock.
The music is contemporary Christian pop or rock, and it's available in styles from pop-folk to hard-rock to rap.
Now and then, a Christian performer slips into the Top 10, either by fudging pronouns ("you" can mean Jesus or a romantic attachment) or by switching from proselytizing to more general positive sentiments.
The latest Christian crossover success is Amy Grant, who came to the Paramount on Oct. 10 in the wake of her Number 1 single, "Baby Baby."


INSIDE
Reversal on Battleship Blast
The Navy concluded that it had no definitive proof that sabotage caused the explosion that killed 47 sailors aboard the battleship Iowa.
Page A25. 2 Win Nobel Awards
A French specialist in liquid crystals won the Nobel Prize in Physics, and a Swiss chemist won the Nobel in his field.
Page A16.
Bacteria and Cancer
Risks of stomach cancer are greatly increased by infection with a common bacterium, Helicobacter pylori, two new studies conclude.
Page B10.
Braves Force a 7th Game
Atlanta beat Pittsburgh, 1-0, with a run in the ninth inning and set up a pennant-deciding game.
Page B13.


Dance in Review
Danspace Project  St. Mark's Church
Peggy Baker is an intriguing anomaly, a tall, large-boned dancer who looks all jarring angles until she begins to move in a soft, liquid flow filled with small stillnesses.
Ms.
Baker, a Canadian modern dancer who performed with Mikhail Baryshnikov's White Oak Project, set all that out plainly in her recent "Sanctum," which opened a program presented by the Danspace Project at St.
Mark's Church in Manhattan.
"Sanctum" caught something of the odd, dry percussive sound of Ahmed Hassan's score, which he performed on stage, seated in a square of light diagonal to the light square Ms.
Baker was rooted in.
There was a sense of mystery to the piece, as there was to James Kudelka's new "This Isn't the End," a tour de force of fragmented motion and storytelling performed to taped spoken fragments of a murder tale by James Oswald.
A kaleidoscopic picture of a crime, the comic solo revealed Ms.
Baker's piquant, humorous charm.
Dressed like a nurse, her long limbs chopping through the narrative, Ms.
Baker was a saucy, slightly raunchy criminal suspect.
In "The Volpe Sisters," an equally mysterious duet choreographed by Doug Varone and performed in near silence, Ms.
Baker was a backward baby who bothered and comforted her silent sister as the two grew old, alone, together.
Janie Brendel, as poignant as Ms.
Baker, was the sister.
Paul-Andre Fortier's "Non Coupable," set to a churning score by Henry Kucharzyk, was a mystifying, chic rendezvous with an angst-ridden destiny.
Ms.
Baker gave it a strong but surprisingly untroubling performance.
Fine dancer though she is, Ms.
Baker is sometimes diminished on stage by a muted dramatic projection and too little dynamic variation.
Those problems were most apparent in Molissa Fenley's "Inner Enchantment," set to music by Philip Glass, a long journey into culs-de-sac that turned out to be through roads.


A Louvre Retrospective Of Rene Lalique's Works
RENE LALIQUE is often called the most original jewelry designer of the French Art Nouveau movement.
Starting Oct. 23 and running through March 8, Paris's Musee des Arts Decoratifs in the Palace of the Louvre will show a retrospective of Mr.
Lalique's jewelry, glassworks, silversmithing, engravings and silk designs.
It will offer more than 200 pieces culled from the museum's collection as well as that of the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation of Lisbon and public and private collections, including pieces owned by Marie-Claude Lalique, his granddaughter.


Public's Turn at Design Showrooms
For the next three days, members of the public are invited into many design showrooms usually open only to architects, designers and decorators.
Designer's Saturday runs through Saturday, and a guidebook can be picked up at one of three locations: in Manhattan, at the Architects and Designers Building (150 East 58th Street) or the Decorative Arts Center (305 East 63d Street), and in Queens at the International Design Center New York (30-20 Thomson Avenue) in Long Island City.
All events are free.
In addition to those at the three centers, a handful of other design companies around Manhattan will be participating.
They include Jack Lenor Larsen (232 East 59th Street), F. Schumacher &amp; Company (939 Third Avenue, at 56th Street) and the Knoll Group (105 Wooster Street, near Prince Street).


Scripps Earnings Fall 14.4%
The E. W. Scripps Company, the Cincinnati-based media company, said today that its third-quarter earnings fell 14.4 percent because of declines in advertising revenue.
The company said it earned $14.9 million, or 20 cents a share, down from $17.4 million, or 23 cents a share, from a year earlier.
Revenues totaled $317.3 million, down 1.4 percent from $321.7 million.


BRIEFS
PREFERRED STOCK *
Niagara Mohawk Power Corp., which gets its power from Niagara Falls, sold 914,005 shares of preferred through Merrill Lynch at a price of $25 each.
Yielding 7.85 percent and noncallable for five years, the issue was rated BAA by Moody's and BBB- by Standard &amp; Poor's.
COMMON STOCK *
General Nutrition Cos., Pittsburgh, filed for a $100 million initial public offering with Morgan Stanley &amp; Company as lead underwriter.
Proceeds will be used to redeem debt and possibly repurchase preferred stock of its General Nutrition Inc. unit. *
Puroflow Inc., Santa Monica, Calif., has filed for 1.2 million common shares to be offered through Sutro &amp; Company Inc.
After the offering, the company will have 4.4 million shares outstanding. *
Cambridge Neuroscience Inc., Cambridge, Mass., has filed for 1.5 million common shares through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
The company develops and makes pharmaceutical products for severe neurological and psychiatric disorders.
RATINGS *
Parker-Hannifin Corp's $300 million of long-term debt has been downgraded by Moody's Investors Service, with senior debt lowered from A-2 to A-3 and subordinated debt from A-3 to BAA-1.
Moody's noted the company operates mainly in industrial and aerospace markets, which are expected to experience little growth and offer little chance to improve current low profit margins.


Bush Nominates Deputy as Head Of Justice Dept.
President Bush today named Deputy Attorney General William P. Barr as his next Attorney General, passing over several high-profile political appointees in favor of a conservative Government lawyer who seemed unlikely to touch off the kind of controversy that has dogged the President's last two nominations.
Mr.
Barr, who is 41 years old, has been Acting Attorney General for the two months since Dick Thornburgh stepped down from the post to run for the Senate in Pennsylvania.
Mr.
Bush had been under pressure to fill the post permanently, since it is difficult for an Acting Attorney General to exert control over the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Justice Department's other agencies.


Profit Off at 2 Baby Bells; United Telecom Net Up
A stagnant economy took its toll on third-quarter earnings reported yesterday by three telephone companies, setting a pattern for the industry that is in line with Wall Street expectations.
The Pacific Telesis Group and Ameritech, the first two "Baby Bells" to report, had slight declines in net income from normal operations.


Market Place; Owens's Offer: Take It Or Lose It
OWENS-ILLINOIS INC. has an interesting proposition for some of its bondholders: take some cash in return for giving up rights or risk losing them and getting nothing.
That proposal from the huge maker of glass and plastic containers is a central part of its financial reorganization, which is intended to reduce its leverage significantly by paying down debt that resulted from the company's 1987 leveraged buyout by investors led by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-17
A new Western European army corps would be established under a proposal by France and Germany.
The two countries said they would bolster an existing joint brigade of 5,000 members as a step toward giving the region an independent defense capability.
Page A1
Lithuania will not exonerate Nazi war criminals.
A Supreme Court justice overturned a decision to rehabilitate thousands of people who had been convicted of killing Jews in World War II.
A1


Guide Charts Path For Sex Education
AN overwhelming majority of Americans tell pollsters that they favor sex education in the public schools.
That is the easy part.
Carrying out such teaching is another matter entirely.
Opinions differ sharply on what should be taught and when, and by whom.
As a result, sex education remains one of the most intense and emotional battlefields of public education in the United States.


Jay R. Kennedy, 80, Writer for the Screen
Jay Richard Kennedy, a novelist and screenwriter who wrote the script for the 1956 film "I'll Cry Tomorrow," died on Monday at the Westlake (Calif.) Hospital.
He was 80 years old.
He died of heart failure, said Eileen Newman, his longtime secretary.


Conner's Net Off Sharply
Conner Peripherals Inc., a maker of disk drives for personal computers, today reported a 57 percent decline in third-quarter earnings.
The company said earnings of $17.4 million, or 30 cents a share, compared with profits of $40.6 million, or 71 cents a share, in the comparable period a year ago.
Sales rose nearly 4 percent, to $394.7 million from $380.4 million in the third quarter of 1990.


Money-Fund Yields Continue to Decline
Yields of both tax-exempt and taxable money funds continued to decline in the week ended yesterday, according to IBC/Donoghue's, which monitors the funds and issues The Money Fund Report.
Walter S. Frank, chief economist for IBC/Donoghue's, reported that total assets of tax-exempt funds rose by $495 million in the last week, to $89.7 billion, a modest increase coming after a $2.9 billion surge of buying the previous week.


California Orders Insurance Refunds
California regulators today ordered 14 leading insurance companies to refund more than $1.5 billion to consumers under a ballot initiative passed three years ago.
But insurers said they would challenge the order in administrative hearings and in court, making it unlikely that consumers would receive any money soon.


For Environment's Sake, Recharge Your Electric Car at Night; Power Plant Problem
To the Editor:
I applaud James Graham's idea for replaceable batteries in electric cars (Op-Ed Sept. 26).


Court Hears Appeal Of Ruling That Bars Abortion Protesters
A Bush Administration lawyer told the Supreme Court today that it was "wrong as a matter of law and logic" to regard opposition to abortion as the equivalent of discrimination against women.
The lawyer, Deputy Solicitor General John G. Roberts Jr., argued that demonstrators who block access to abortion clinics are not singling out women for discriminatory treatment, but rather "seek to prohibit the practice of abortion altogether."


House Approves Measure Adding Capital Crimes
The House today narrowly approved an amendment to its anti-crime bill that would add several new offenses to the expanded list of Federal crimes for which the death penalty can be imposed, including murders committed in the course of a drug felony and attempted murders of witnesses in drug cases.
The Republican amendment to the House anti-crime bill, approved 213 to 206 with the support of 63 Democrats, helped resolve some of the differences between the House crime package and a similar bill that was passed by the Senate in July.


Thompson Reorganizes Its Los Angeles Office
The J. Walter Thompson Company, New York, is reorganizing its Los Angeles office a month after scaling down operations there.
In a statement issued yesterday, the agency said Bill Lane, the executive vice president who had been overseeing creative work in Los Angeles, had moved to New York, where he would work on new business development and other creative assignments.
Earlier this week, trade publications reported that Mr.
Lane would concentrate on Thompson's Northwest Airlines account.


Haiti Town, an Aristide Stronghold, Defies Army
Life is slowly returning to normal in Port-au-Prince, the capital, after the military coup that overthrew President Jean-Bertrand Aristide on Sept. 30, but in this small town a smoldering test of nerves between the army and a defiant population continues.
Even as military reinforcements arrive from the capital to hold this isolated region, a cradle of the leftist "liberation theology" that helped thrust Father Aristide forward as a leader in the fight against the Duvalier dictatorship, poor residents angrily vow never to submit to the army.
To avoid the soldiers' bullets, they say, they sleep in the bush at night.


Oil Surges to $24 a Barrel But Retreats as Rally Slows
Crude oil futures prices jumped in heavy trading yesterday, briefly touching a nine-month high of $24 a barrel before falling back and settling lower.
Analysts said it was premature to say whether the reversal signaled the end of the market's five-week rally.
Most other energy futures also fell.


New York to Install Pollution Meters on the Streets
New York City's streets, already festooned with signs that tell the time, the temperature and the national debt, will soon have signs that provide air pollution readings, Mayor David N. Dinkins said today at a meeting here of leaders of the world's major cities.
He said the plan is to install monitors at pollution "hot spots" throughout the city to increase public awareness of the problem.


Essay; Myths of the Confirmation
Myths are already being made about the Clarence Thomas hearings that should be exploded before they become received truth.
Myth 1.
Because Anita Hill was sharply cross-examined and ultimately not believed by a majority, abused women will now refuse to come forward.


A Little Fantasy To Be Comfy With
THEY form a congenial group at the French Designer Showhouse, which opens today in a mansion at Park Avenue and 64th Street.
Some of them French, most of them Francophiles, the 38 designers seem to have nothing but compliments for one another's rooms, which is somewhat unusual for a show house.
The display, which is open through Nov. 17, is the second French show house to benefit the American Hospital of Paris Foundation.
The first was in 1989.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
GLORIA UBOH-ABIOLA says she had no idea when she married M. K. O. ABIOLA in Nigeria in 1982 that he had so many other wives.
Now she wants him to have one wife fewer: she is suing for divorce.
Chief Abiola -- a Nigerian businessman, publisher and Yoruba tribal leader -- has from a dozen to two dozen other wives and from 79 to 100 children, lawyers for him and Dr.
Uboh-Abiola said.


Review/Dance; A Symphonylike Tap Troupe That Tries for More
The American Tap Dance Orchestra is a relatively new kid on the block, but it is clearly a kid with tap talent to spare, a great love for the art and a good many ambitious ideas.
Ambition sometimes got in the way on Tuesday, when the company opened a one-week season at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street).
But overall it was a happy and provocative evening.
The company was founded in 1986 by Brenda Bufalino, a veteran tapper.
It functions like a symphony orchestra, with the dancers performing as an ensemble.
The tone is set with an opening number called "Strike Up . . . the A Train," choreographed by Ms.
Bufalino.
Drawn together in a loose cluster, the dancers eventually peel out into a single long line across the stage to tap as a group to the Billy Strayhorn song of the title, performed by an onstage jazz ensemble.
The initial impression of smooth-flowing, almost orchestral group dynamics, of inventive encounters and even more inventive exits, remains through the entire evening.


Fantasies for Halloween
Creative Costume Company,
330 W. 38th St., New York, N.Y. 10018; (212) 564-5552.
"We make people look like their fantasies," said Susan Handler, co-owner of the Creative Costume Company, a nine-year-old costume rental company currently gearing up for its biggest night of the year.
People want to look pretty or sexy -- or both -- for Halloween, Ms.
Handler said.
She and her partner, Linda Carcaci, have designed more than 300 different rental costumes.
On the glamorous side are a Cleopatra gown in pleated gold lame and a billowy Ginger Rogers dress. (There is a complimentary Fred Astaire top hat and tux.) On the sexy side are a Lady Godiva bodysuit and a sassy French maid's dress, popular with men and women alike.
The shop also has a selection of Halloween standards: witches, devils, skeletons, bats and weird Freddy Krueger from the film "Freddy's Dead." Movies are a big inspiration for costumes, Ms.
Handler said.
Halloween is not the only time of year for dressing up, of course.
Ms.
Handler recently designed an Elvis costume for a groom who plans to sing "Love Me Tender" to his bride at their wedding reception.
Seasonal costumes include Santa Claus, Uncle Sam, George Washington and a big satin Valentine built for two people.
Ms.
Handler predicts this Halloween's most popular guises will be Scarlett O'Hara ("because of the new book") and Jessica Rabbit ("men love to dress up as her").
Rentals cost from $35 to $175 for 48 hours.
Frankie Steinz Costumes
(212) 274-8524.
Frankie Stein, of Frankie Steinz Costumes, used to be a certified public accountant.
But she quit years ago when she discovered that designing and renting costumes, not to mention dressing up in them, was more fun.
Ms.
Stein's costumes, which fill her TriBeCa loft, range from a vintage satin flapper dress with cloche hat to a slinky Diana Ross-style dress purchased from a stripper.
"I like unusual stuff," she said, holding a Christmas tree suit for a child.
Ms.
Stein's specialty is vintage costumes: clothes from the 1920's through the 1960's (Peter Max vests, beaded headbands).
Theme costumes are another specialty: decks of cards, characters from "The Wizard of Oz."
Robin Hood and Star Trek will be big themes this Halloween, Ms.
Stein predicts.
Rentals range from $65 to $100 for 24 hours.
Rubie's Costume Company
120-08 Jamaica Ave., Richmond Hill, N.Y. 11418; (718) 846-1008.
Rubie's Costume Company, which opened 36 years ago, is enormous, with thousands of costumes.
"I can't even count," said Terry Goldkranz, secretary to the president.
The shop is jammed with togas, clown suits, flamenco dresses, Dracula capes, medieval gowns, sailor suits and reindeer outfits (yes, the noses light).
Rubie's has high expectations this Halloween for vinyl Terminator 2 jackets, Morticia Addams gowns and Desert Storm shirts.
New this year are full-cut costumes for large people; choices include samurai warriors and Madame Butterfly.
Rentals start at $50 for five days; new costumes can be bought from $10.98.


Eagles Claim Kemp
The Philadelphia Eagles, down to two quarterbacks because of injuries, claimed 11-year veteran JEFF KEMP yesterday and waived backup PAT RYAN, the former Jets quarterback.
The 32-year-old Kemp, waived by the Seattle Seahawks on Tuesday, has the National Football League's lowest quarterback rating, 52.9, and a league-high 12 interceptions. (AP)


Five Elected to U.N. Council
The General Assembly today elected five new members to the Security Council: Cape Verde, Hungary, Japan, Morocco and Venezuela.
They will take their seats on Jan. 1, replacing Cuba, the Ivory Coast, Romania, Yemen and Zaire.
Five countries, chosen by region, are elected each year to two-year terms on the 15-member Council.
Austria, Belgium, Ecuador, India and Zimbabwe are serving on the Council, as well as five permanent members: Britain, China, France, the Soviet Union and the United States.


For Cactus, Watering Does NOT Equal Love
"IF in doubt, let them do without" seems to be the motto of those who grow cactuses and other succulents.
These are those rare house-plant devotees who have learned to control a natural inclination: equating love with water.
"I water maybe once a week," said Zabel Meshejian president of the New York chapter of the Cactus and Succulent Society.
"And I've learned that nothing dire will happen if my plants are ignored for two weeks."


Going Broke on Medicaid
To qualify for Medicaid, elderly Americans have to be ill and destitute.
In many cases it also helps to be a bit crooked; proving poverty often requires legal sleight of hand.
Now the Federal Government and Connecticut have come up with a plan to allow the elderly to receive Medicaid and still hold on to some assets.
Few of the elderly start out with larceny in their hearts.
But because Medicaid is welfare, people over 65 have to prove they're almost flat broke before the program will pay for a nursing home or home care.
In New York, seniors can apply for Medicaid when they're down to their last $4,850.
That's enough, the state says, to get a decent burial and have a few thousand left over.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Traded George Canale, first baseman, to the Montreal Expos for Alex Diaz, outfielder.
National League
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Assigned Ron Jones, outfielder, outright to Scranton Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
Announced that Darrel Akerfelds, Amalio Carreno and Chuck Malone, pitchers; and John Morris and Sil Campusano, outfielders, rejected outright assignment to Scranton Wilkes-Barre and became free agents.
Activated Pat Combs, Ken Howell and Steve Ontiveros, pitchers; Darren Daulton, catcher; and Lenny Dykstra, outfielder, from the disabled list.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
NBA -- Permanently dismissed Roy Tarpley, Dallas Mavericks forward, under terms of the league's anti-drug agreement.
NEW JERSEY NETS -- Named Joe Macdonell vice president of ticket operations.
GOLF  LPGA STRATTON MOUNTAIN CLASSIC -- Signed a 5-year agreement with McCall's magazine to be the event's presenter.
FOOTBALL National Football League
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Activated Bruce Pickens, defensive back.
Placed William Evers, defensive back, on the practice roster.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Placed Jack Trudeau, quarterback, on injured reserve.
Re-signed Rusty Hilger, quarterback, and Cornell Holloway, defensive back.
NEW YORK JETS -- Placed Ken Whisenhunt, tight end, on injured reserve.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Claimed Jeff Kemp, quarterback, on waivers.
Waived Pat Ryan, quarterback.
PHOENIX CARDINALS -- Placed Dexter Davis, defensive back, on injured reserve.
Signed Chris Oldham, cornerback.


Israel Gives Life Term To Palestinian Leader
An Israeli military court in the occupied Gaza Strip today sentenced the founder of an outlawed Islamic fundamentalist organization to life in prison.
He will probably have to serve 25 years of the sentence.
The defendant, Sheik Ahmed Yassin, a 53-year-old quadraplegic, has long been suspected by the army of being one of the leaders of the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories.


Bridge
Those who carry an umbrella when the sun is shining, and those who go without when storm clouds threaten, are extremists neglecting circumstances.
In bridge, as in life, the context should determine whether pessimism or optimism is indicated.
There was an excess of optimism on the diagramed deal, played a week ago at the annual experts' night of the Harmonie Club at 4 East 60th Street.
The expert winners, with 72 percent, were Margie Gwozdzinsky and Jim Linhart, both of Manhattan, while Edward Shufro and Doris Gelfand, also of Manhattan, headed the member-guest division.


Flutie Will Stay With Canadian League
He won the Heisman Trophy as the best college player in the United States and was a regular quarterback in both the United States Football League and the National Football League.
But now DOUG FLUTIE plans to remain in the Canadian Football League.


Heisman Bias Has No Defense
They're telling us that the Heisman race is on.
At some point since the days that the Downtown Athletic Club had a ballcarrier's stiffarm transformed from clay to bronze, the award for the outstanding college football player has been presented as a coast-to-coast sweepstakes.
Out of the gates by Labor Day, around the first turn by Columbus Day, through the backstretch by Halloween.
And then, sometime around Thanksgiving weekend, down the stretch they come, and everyone puts on tuxedos while waiting for the photo finish.


Rebels Clash With Government Troops in El Salvador


Quotation of the Day
"I didn't know I could run, but I did today." -- Betty May, a 67-year-old witness to the massacre yesterday in Texas.  [ B10:3. ]


Stomach Cancer Is Linked to Persistent Infection With a Common Bacterium
Persistent infection with a common spiral-shaped bacterium greatly increases the risk of stomach cancer, two new studies have concluded.
Stomach cancer is the second most-common cancer in the world, after lung cancer.


Honda Ready to Show a Car That Gets 100 Miles a Gallon
At the Tokyo Motor Show next week, the Honda Motor Company is expected to display a prototype of an unusual two-seat passenger car whose fuel efficiency it says could top 100 miles a gallon.
Though most auto makers have created ultrahigh-efficiency prototypes for research and demonstration, the Honda vehicle is apparently intended to look like a model that could be put into production.





Ann C. Whitman Is Dead at 83, Eisenhower and Rockefeller Aide
Ann C. Whitman, an influential figure in the White House as the personal secretary to President Dwight D. Eisenhower and later as chief of staff to Vice President Nelson A. Rockefeller, died Tuesday at Morton Plant Hospital in Clearwater, Fla.
She was 83 years old and lived in Clearwater.
Mrs. Whitman died of heart failure, friends said.


Clear Picture of White Power and Black Achievement
So the show is over.
Judge Clarence Thomas will go to the Supreme Court, and in violation of all the rules of television drama, the mystery that kept millions at their sets through a long, tense weekend remains unresolved.
But there were rewards.
The days and nights of Senate Judiciary Committee coverage, though in some ways depressing, brought out realities of American society in the form of the faces of white power and black achievement.
Most conspicuously, there was the committee itself -- 14 white men sitting in judgment of a black woman and a black man who accused them of participating in a sort of lynching.
The Senators seemed self-conscious in this neighborhood, like tourists on a visit uptown.
In their questions to the nominee, the Democrats tiptoed around him as if he were an undetonated mine.


A Homeless Man's Fresh-Cooked Meal


Sexual Harassment Flourishes in Secrecy
To the Editor:
I am a psychotherapist who sees and hears the human suffering resulting from abuse on a daily basis, and I am delighted to see the issue of sexual harassment explode into awareness on national television.
The message of this whole process is that at last there will be serious consequences for sexual harassment.
This is an extremely prevalent form of abuse in this country.


JOBLESS BILL VETO SURVIVES IN SENATE BY NARROW MARGIN
The Senate today narrowly failed to override President Bush's veto of a $6.4 billion bill to provide extended unemployment benefits to millions of jobless workers, and Democrats warned that the veto would become an issue in next year's elections.
The vote was 65 in favor of an override and 35 against, two votes short of the two-thirds necessary to overcome the President's rejection and the same tally by which the Senate passed the bill two weeks ago.


Board Faults F.A.A. In Crash That Killed 35
A collision between two airplanes on the runway at Los Angeles International Airport last February was caused by faulty traffic control procedures, the National Transportation Safety Board said today.
Thirty-five people died Feb. 1 in the fiery collision of a Skywest commuter plane and a USAir jetliner.
In its final report on the accident, the safety board said the Federal Aviation Administration should have provided one controller with an assistant to help handle the work at her station, and said the control tower used a faulty system of routing the paper strips that help controllers track planes on the ground.


MAN IN THE NEWS: William Pelham Barr; Attorney General Choice With Low-Key Style
William P. Barr, President Bush's nominee as Attorney General, is a bagpipe-player, China scholar and one-time employee at the Central Intelligence Agency who got his law degree in night school and has never prosecuted a criminal case in court.
He has served as Acting Attorney General since Dick Thornburgh left two months ago to run for the Senate in Pennsylvania, and his affable, unpretentious style at the Department of Justice has been an antidote to the aloof and sometimes imperious approach of Mr.
Thornburgh.


The Man Who Carried the Flag at Iwo Jima
To the Editor:
I was very upset by your book review of "Iwo Jima: Monuments, Memories and the American Hero" by Karal Ann Marling and John Wetenhall (Word and Image, Oct. 1).


Met Gives New Glint to Romance of Armor
On a recent afternoon, the Metropolitan Museum of Art's assistant armorer was bolting a 12-foot-long war lance to the side of a fearsome mannequin, a mounted knight in a full suit of 16th-century Italian battle armor.
"It's been a long time since he had a lance in his hand," said the technician, Theodore F. Monnich, moving the knight's gilt gauntlet so it grasped the lance.
"Makes you wonder what the ghosts are thinking, doesn't it?"
There was no response from the mute suits of armor about him, the glittering, once-clanking trophies of the arms and armor galleries, which have been closed for redesign and renovation for nearly four years.
The exhibition, which has been one of the most popular attractions at any museum in the city, opens to the public on Nov. 8.


Corrections
The At the Bar column on the Law page on Sept. 27 referred incorrectly to Roman L. Hruska, former United States Senator from Nebraska.
He is alive and practicing law in Omaha.


U.S. Plans to Press Japan For Financial Changes
Breaking months of official silence about Japan's scandal-ridden financial markets, a senior American Treasury official said today that Japan could not "go on with business as usual" and that the United States would use the mounting evidence of improper behavior to press for a far more open financial system in Tokyo.
The official, David C. Mulford, the Treasury's Under Secretary for International Affairs, also told reporters tonight that "everyone knew what was going on" in the Tokyo market, "and they tolerated it."


Books of The Times; A Life of Meyer Lansky Says He Died Hard Up
Little Man  Meyer Lansky and the Gangster Life  By Robert Lacey  Illustrated. 547 pages.
Little, Brown. $24.95.


Cyanamid Net Declines 40.1%
The American Cyanamid Company today said its third- quarter earnings fell 40.1 percent from a year earlier, when net income was helped by the sale of a subsidiary.
Net income for the three months ended Sept. 30 was $56.3 million, or 60 cents a share, compared with $94 million, or 99 cents a share, in the period last year.
Sales rose to $1.12 billion, from $1.06 billion.


EXECUTIVES
*
Apple Bancorp Inc., New York, named Alan Shamoon treasurer of the company and chief financial officer of its principal subsidiary, the Apple Bank. *
Eastern Enterprises, Weston, Mass., a gas and river barge operations company, named J. Atwood Ives chairman and chief executive, effective Dec. 1, succeeding Robert W. Weinig, who is retiring.
Mr.
Ives has resigned as vice chairman and chief financial officer at General Cinema Corp., Chestnut Hill, Mass., and from similar positions at its subsidiary Neiman Marcus Group Inc.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the third-quarter earnings of a number of large banks misstated the provision for loan losses at Wells Fargo &amp; Company in the latest quarter and a year ago.
It was $200 million in this year's third quarter and $75 million in the 1990 third quarter; a provision of $350 million was taken in the 1991 second quarter.


With Time and Money to Spend, Giants and Redskins to Go Fishin'
All this time off for all these strong young men.
What to do?
After the Redskins jumped off to a 2-0 start, Coach Joe Gibbs wondered how to keep it going.
Gibbs contemplated the Redskins' bye week and his solution was to promise the team a day off for every game they had won.
That's why the 7-0 Redskins weren't preparing yesterday for the Giants.
And today, when the Giants go back to work, the Redskins will still be sightseeing, or riding to the hounds on their owner's Virginia farm, or even stealing away for a few days.


Corrections
A schedule on the sports statistics page yesterday listing this season's college basketball games at Madison Square Garden misplaced two games and omitted one.
A corrected schedule appears today on page B18.


Weld Denting Massachusetts' Liberal Framework
In nine months in office, Gov.
William F. Weld has begun a profound transformation of Massachusetts, a state long regarded as a bastion of liberalism, the only state to vote for George S. McGovern for President.
After years of fiscal chaos here, Mr.
Weld, the state's first Republican Governor in 16 years, has managed to win passage of a a budget with no new taxes.
His budget for the fiscal year 1992, which started in July, even cut spending by 6 percent, making Massachusetts the only state to reduce spending from the previous year.


Battered Jets Offensive Unit Adds McNeil to Casualty List
In the midst of trying to figure out a way to patch up their battered offensive line and get their ground game back into order, another problem arose for the Jets today when it was announced that Freeman McNeil would miss Sunday's game against the Colts with a sprained knee.
McNeil, the Jets' leading career rusher, will have exploratory arthroscopic surgery on the knee Thursday morning to determine if there is any damage to the cartilage in his left knee.
Everybody is optimistic, but everybody is also keeping fingers crossed.
The Jets, who have a bye after Sunday's game in Indianapolis, are hoping for an improvement by the Nov. 3 game against Green Bay.


Charles L. Morris, 82; Was Early Copter Pilot
Charles L. Morris, a pioneer in helicopter flight, died on Saturday at the Saybrook Convalescent Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 82 years old and lived in Old Saybrook.
He died of complications of lung cancer, his family said.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL -- 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


To the Witness
Dear Anita Hill,
Some people look at the poll figures showing that more Americans side with Clarence Thomas than with you and blame you.
There are probably many reasons for the poll figures.
But to blame you misconceives the role you played during those seven or so agonizing hours in the Senate Caucus Room last Friday.
You were doing what you understood your responsibility required of you: to bear witness.


McGraw-Hill Profits Down
McGraw-Hill Inc. said yesterday that third-quarter earnings dropped 18.2 percent because of the soft advertising market.
The New York-based publishing conglomerate said earnings in the three months ended Sept. 30 were $55.1 million, or $1.13 a share, down from $67.4 million, or $1.38 a share, for the period a year earlier.
Revenue totaled $489.5 million, down from $502.8 million a year earlier.


S.&amp; P. Set to Open Office in Frankfurt
Standard &amp; Poor's said yesterday that it planned to open a rating office in Frankfurt to support growing activity in Germany.
"In its short nine-month history the German commercial paper market has shown favorable growth in the number of isssuers and volume of debt outstanding," said George Dallas, senior vice president and head of S&amp; P's London rating actvities.
The new office will be S.&amp; P.'s sixth outside the United States; the other offices are in London, Paris, Tokyo, Stockholm and in Melbourne, Australia.


Dow Rises To 3,061.72, A Record
Stock prices rose smartly yesterday on the strength of corporate earnings that exceeded expectations and were free of jolting surprises.
The Dow Jones industrial average capped a five-day rally to vault past the high it set less than two months ago, and some other indexes continued plowing into record territory.
The Dow ended the day at 3,061.72, up 20.35 points, in heavy trading.
That represented a gain of 115 since Oct. 9 and surpassed the previous best level, 3,055.23, set on Aug. 28.


Prosecutor's Appeal Dropped On Police Beating of Protester
The Manhattan District Attorney said yesterday that he was withdrawing his appeal of a judge's ruling that the police beat an Act Up demonstrator and then did not tell the truth about what happened.
But the District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, again took issue with the decision by Justice Edgar G. Walker of Manhattan Criminal Court.
The judge said in his opinion last month that videotapes made at the rally outside a Manhattan police precinct showed that the only "violent, tumultuous and threatening behavior" that day "was on the part of the police."


Nonprofit Groups in Line For New Wall St. Home
Wall Street, the profit center of New York City, would become a nonprofit center in the near future under a plan announced yesterday by the Dinkins administration.
Twenty floors in a 34-story office tower at 120 Wall Street, owned by Larry A. Silverstein, would become the Association Center, available for use as headquarters by national and international nonprofit organizations.
The exodus of such organizations from New York is a source of worry at City Hall.


Corrections
A brief report on the Company News page of Business Day yesterday about plans by the Amoco Corporation to shift its Denver explorations division to Houston misstated the number of jobs to be cut.
The shift will affect 155 employees: 90 will be offered a transfer and 65 jobs will be eliminated.


A Mouse but No Cat? Peanut Butter Might Do
NOW that the temperature is dropping, mice are making tiny tracks out of the cold and into your home.
For those who balk at borrowing the neighbor's cat, Greenhome Inc., a Chicago company specializing in environmentally safe home products, offers a kindlier removal system: the Better Mouse Trap.


New York Urged to Improve Tourist Services
Warning that the New York City tourist industry is being threatened by competition from other American cities as well as by the erosion of the city as a gateway from Europe, a study by the Urban Research Center of New York University has suggested a variety of improvements.
They include a direct rail service from New York to Newark International Airport and the adoption of a year-round tourist policy rather than one based on attracting political conventions and other high-profile events with short impact.
The study also suggests that hotels and retailers sponsor shopping trips for tourists and that arts institutions sponsor cultural weekends.


Officers Shoot and Wound New Jersey Man in Harlem
A 19-year-old New Jersey man was shot and critically wounded on a street in Harlem last night in a shootout with two police officers, the police said.
The incident occurred after the police responded to a report of shots being fired on West 142d Street, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
When the police arrived shortly after 10 P.M., they found Eric Tyson, of Newark, standing in the street, just east of Amsterdam Avenue, with a 9-millimeter gun in his hand, Officer McInnis said.
"He fired once at the officers, and they returned fire, striking him twice in the torso," Officer McInnis said.
Mr.
Tyson was taken to Columbia-Presbterian Hospital where his condition was critical, the police said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Amerihost Properties Inc., Des Plaines, Ill., a motel company, acquired certain assets of Diversified Innkeepers Inc., for about $60 million, including management contracts for 11 hotels in Georgia, Louisiana and Kentucky. *
Granada Group P.L.C., London, said it planned to restructure its computer maintenance and service unit and take an extraordianry charge of $:15 million for the year ended Sept. 28.


Richter Finds a Home In the Nets for Rangers
Almost four years ago they were Olympic teammates for the United States, a couple of pint-sized college boys hoping to build a reputation for stinginess in the goal crease.
Their team finished a distant seventh in Calgary, but since then, Mike Richter and Chris Terreri have undergone a plethora of reversals of fortune, most of them in their own favor and a few of them at the expense of more celebrated National Hockey League incumbents.
Last night at Madison Square Garden, they were pitted against each other, and only Richter survived.
He ended a personal two-game losing streak in beating Terreri, who started the year with four straight victories.


Reviews/Theater; Drama of Hard Hats and Soft Heads
Tempers are flaring on a construction site in Kevin Heelan's "Distant Fires," as five laborers pour cement and react diversely to the limits of their lives.
This perceptive group portrait of men at work is the combined contribution of the playwright, his director, Clark Gregg, and an ensemble cast.
"Distant Fires" is at the Atlantic Theater, a company initiated by David Mamet and W. H. Macy.
Both the play and the production owe at least an unconscious debt to Mr.
Mamet, as was also true of Howard Korder's "Boy's Life," an equally fine example of the Atlantic style of theater.
In the Mamet tradition, the dialogue is pithy and profane and filled with a sidewalk spontaneity.
The play moves effortlessly from amusing working-class conversation to an atmosphere that is highly charged with conflicting points of view.


Northrop Net 26.8% Higher
The Northrop Corporation reported today that its third- quarter net income rose 26.8 percent, helped by strong sales of its B-2 bomber.
Northrop said it earned $53.8 million, or $1.14 a share, in the quarter ended Sept. 30, compared with $42.4 million, or 90 cents a share, in the 1990 period.
Sales rose 22 percent, to $1.55 billion, from $1.27 billion.


S.E.C. Is Checking Into Play-Stealing
The Southeastern Conference is checking allegations that a dismissed Tennessee assistant football coach sent facsimile copies of the Vols' offensive formations to Florida.
Mark Womack, executive associate commissioner of the S.E.C., told The Knoxville News-Sentinel on Tuesday that the S.E.C. would investigate allegations that the information was sent by Jack Sells, a former assistant, before last Saturday's Gator victory in Gainesville, Fla.


Review/Television; On 'L.A. Law,' New Faces but the Same Nasty Edge
Last season, NBC's "L.A. Law" seemed determined to self-destruct as most of the major players at McKenzie, Brackman turned on one another venomously, some leaving to establish their own law firm.
The show has now returned for a sixth year, Thursdays at 10 P.M., but the still festering wounds could well turn out to be fatal.
The unseemly nastiness that erupted among formerly close colleagues was hardly spontaneous.
Its practical roots could be found behind the cameras as several key members of the cast decided that they had had enough of courtroom theatrics and that it was time to push their careers in different directions.
Among the defectors were Harry Hamlin, Susan Dey and Jimmy Smits.
Actually, Miss Dey's Grace Van Owen, once in love with and made pregnant by the Smits character, has returned with neither lover nor baby.
Explanations so far have been sketchy, but poor Grace does look grim.
Meanwhile, Michele Green, the long-suffering Abby Perkins, has also decided to leave the show.


Rolls vs. G.E. in a Sales Dogfight
Charles J. Cuddington's blue eyes flash with anger as he talks about how the General Electric Company vanquished Rolls-Royce P.L.C. in the battle to supply engines for Boeing 777 wide-body jets ordered by British Airways, a longtime Rolls customer.
G.E. won the engine contract in August, worth as much as $1.4 billion, by underbidding Rolls and then outbidding it to buy British Airways' engine-overhaul operation in Wales.
Analysts say the price for the operation -- $:272 million, or $$460.7 million -- vastly exceeds its worth.


Prince Urges U.S. to Help End Yugoslav War
Crown Prince Alexander of Yugoslavia, who visited the country for the first time in his life this month in hopes of uniting the ethnic groups waging civil war there, said today that he was "bitterly disappointed" but would go back to try again if he could get more outside support.
"Yugoslavia has ceased to exist," said Prince Alexander, a 46-year-old former British Army officer and businessman born in a hotel room in London a few months before the monarchy was abolished in 1946.


Drabek's Profile In Courage
Inning after inning, Doug Drabek was on the floor of the runway underneath the dugout, resiliency being massaged back into his damaged left hamstring.
And inning after inning, Drabek got off the floor, went to the mound and pumped life into the hopes of the Pirates.
For eight innings, Drabek, an uncertain starter right up until gametime, posted zeros on the scoreboard.


Interim President Chosen for Troubled School Unit
Arthur Bates, a specialist in building design and construction, has been appointed interim president and chief executive of the troubled New York City School Construction Authority, the agency announced yesterday.
Mr.
Bates succeeds Gen.
Charles E. Williams, who reportedly resigned from the $145,000-a-year post a month ago after a series of management and policy disagreements with Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and another trustee of the agency.
General Williams said he had left because he had a better offer from the private sector.


U.N. to Warn Khmer Rouge on Refugee Shift
The United States and the four other permanent members of the Security Council plan to warn the Communist Khmer Rouge on Thursday against trying to force thousands of refugees back into areas of Cambodia that they control in an attempt to influence the outcome of elections.
The five permanent members -- Britain, France, China and the Soviet Union, in addition to the United States -- suspect that the Khmer Rouge is trying to take over refugee camps on the Thai border in advance of a final peace settlement.


Update of 911 System Could Add 35 to Telephone Bill
A surcharge of at least 35 cents would be added to the monthly telephone bills of New York City residents under proposed legislation, described yesterday by Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown, to help finance modernization of the city's 911 emergency response system.
New York would be one of the last major cities in the country to install enhanced 911, as the high tech system is called, Commissioner Brown said in testimony before the City Council's public safety committee.


Citicorp's Solution: Chopping More Costs
One day after Citicorp announced a surprising $885 million loss and eliminated its dividend on common stock, the banking company's chairman, John S. Reed, told analysts that cutting expenses and selling nonessential businesses remained the centerpieces of the company's plan to restore financial health.
Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company and parent of Citibank, described the same moves last December, but now more cost-cutting is required, Mr.
Reed said, because revenues in Citicorp's consumer and corporate banking businesses have declined recently, and they show no signs of increasing soon.


The Tract House As Landmark
KATHLEEN WEBER was reading the latest issue of Circa, a newsletter published by the Hempstead Town (L.I.) Landmarks Preservation Commission, when she came upon this headline: "You May Be Living in a Levittown Landmark!"
Destiny, she sensed, was knocking at her door, even though she had recently removed the original Levittown door knocker and donated it to the Levittown Historical Society.
Other than that and -- "Oh, yes, the aluminum siding" -- Mrs.
Weber and her husband, Charles, a retired airline mechanic, have done nothing to change the exterior of their modest Cape Cod-style house at 52 Oak Tree Lane since they moved in as newlyweds in 1947.


Reviews/Theater; Frederick the Great and Not So Great
By devoting a full year to the plays of Romulus Linney, the Signature Theater Company is performing a distinct service for theatergoers as well as for the playwright.
The wide-angle perspective should lead to a greater awareness of the depth and diversity of Mr.
Linney's work.
Late last season, audiences were offered a sampler -- revivals of two one-acts.
Currently the company is revisiting the author's first play, "The Sorrows of Frederick," with Austin Pendleton returning to a role he has played several times in the past.
Though it was written in the mid-1960's and presented in England, the play did not have its New York premiere until 1976.
Today, as in that earlier rudimentary production, this is an introspective look at a most contradictory monarch, Frederick the Great of Prussia, the warlike philosopher-king.


Neither Mercer Nor Morrison Set Out to Make His Living in the Ring
Neither man meant to be a fighter.
Tommy Morrison had fought amateur bouts and won some money beating up his elders as a teen-ager.


Ticonderoga Journal; A Mayor Who Protests That His Pay Is Too High
Just a few months into his term as Mayor here, Michael Diskin is in a major feud with Village Council members over his salary.
But this is no garden-variety pay dispute.
He says the council is giving him too much money.
"I feel the people are paying too much for what they are getting," said Mr.
Diskin, who receives an annual salary of $10,500 for a 30-hour week.
A few weeks ago he introduced a measure to the Village Board that would cut the job to a $3,500, 10-hour-a-week position.


Bulgaria Vote Gives Key Role to Ethnic Turks
Its rights restored after years of forced assimilation under Communist rule, Bulgaria's ethnic Turkish minority has emerged from national elections last Sunday with a critical role to play in the formation of the next Government, thrusting the volatile issue of ethnic relations to the forefront of Bulgarian politics.
The Movement for Rights and Freedom, representing the country's one million Muslim Turks, won about 7 percent of the vote.
As a result. it is seen as the most likely coalition partner for the Union of Democratic Forces, the opposition group that on Sunday pulled ahead of the Bulgarian Socialist Party -- as former Communists here now call themselves -- to take its place as the country's major political force.


In the Nation; A Glorious Victory
The gutter tactics that helped win confirmation for Clarence Thomas as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court were authorized by President Bush (not by something impersonal called "the White House").
Those tactics resulted in a glorious victory -- the smallest margin of confirmation for a high court nominee in 103 years; an Associate Justice who will sit for decades with neither an unblemished name nor the unstinting consent of the Senate.
Judge Thomas's reputation was injured by more than charges of sexual harassment, or by his showing in the original hearings that he is not much of a scholar of the law or the Constitution, and has little experience outside the bureaucracy.


Merrill Lynch Sells Three-Year Notes
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company yesterday priced a $200 million issue of its own 7 1/8 percent notes at 99.875 to yield 7.172 percent.
The three-year issue is being sold through an underwriting group headed by Merrill Lynch.
Noncallable, the notes were priced at 107 basis points over the Treasury's three-year note, which traded about 6.09 percent.
A basis point is one-hundredth of 1 percent.


Dun Earnings Up 1.9%
The Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation said yesterday that third-quarter earnings inched up 1.9 percent as its revenues, hurt by the weakened economy, fell 13 percent.
The business information and services company said it earned $142.4 million, or 80 cents a share, in the three months that ended on Sept. 30.
That compares with earnings of $139.7 million, or 77 cents a share, for the same period a year earlier.
Revenues fell to $1 billion, from $1.15 billion.
Revenues rose 6.8 percent in financial information services, which includes Moody's Investors Service Inc., and 6.4 percent in the directory information services unit, the company said.


MITTERRAND JOINS KOHL IN PROPOSING A EUROPEAN ARMY
Hoping to influence NATO and European Community summit meetings in the next two months, France and Germany called today for creation of a corps-strength Western European army as a step toward giving the region an independent defense capability.
The two Governments said they would strengthen an existing 5,000-member French-German brigade and indicated that units from other countries in the European Community could eventually join the force.
Officials here in Paris said the expanded French-German force could have 30,000 troops.


Gunman Kills 22 and Himself in Texas Cafeteria
A man smashed a pickup truck into a busy restaurant at lunchtime here today, stepped out of the cab, shot 22 people dead and wounded at least 20 others.
As blood-drenched patrons and employees tried to scramble to safety, dozens of police officers arrived and exchanged gunfire with the man, apparently wounding him.
He then shot and killed himself with a bullet through the left eye, witnesses said.


San Diego Star Out
MARSHALL FAULK, San Diego State's freshman running sensation, will remain hospitalized at least through today while he recovers from a collapsed lung, the team's athletic trainer said yesterday.


Iowa Bank Rating Will Be Reviewed
The debt rating of First Interstate of Iowa Inc., about to be merged into a strong bank, will be reviewed with positive implications by Standard &amp; Poor's.
The bank has a B+ rating from S.&amp; P. on its $27.6 million of subordinated debt.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in The Living Section yesterday about journal-writing misstated the location of The Diarists' Journal, a quarterly newspaper.
It is published in Lansford, Pa.


A Novelist's Education In a Bruising School Of Hard Knocks
Pete Dexter, the National Book Award winner and Emmy Award nominee for "Paris Trout," is talking about a time before prizes.
"There's a certain kind of people who have time missing in their lives," Mr.
Dexter says.
"There's about 8 or 10 years for me that I don't remember anything that happened. And 8 or 10 may be giving me the benefit of the doubt. It wasn't like I was always drunk. But I was always up for something. I was always doing something I shouldn't have been doing, and it usually involved drinking or leaving someplace in a hurry."


A Bargain for the Nation's Police
Earlier this year, the Senate approved the first serious Federal law enforcement innovation in years: a Police Corps offering college scholarship money in exchange for a student's pledge of four years' service with a local police department.
The plan promises both fiscal relief and a welcome infusion of talent for the nation's overburdened urban police departments.
An amendment now before the House would push this good idea closer to reality.
The plan, costing $100 million in the first year, would eventually provide some 80,000 students with scholarship stipends and two summers of training at local academies or new Federal centers.
After graduation from college, the students would be assigned to local police departments under plans coordinated at the state level.


For Environment's Sake, Recharge Your Electric Car at Night
To the Editor:
Although "Electric Cars? Cut the Cord" by James Graham (Op-Ed, Sept. 26) makes a case for having electric car batteries switched at service stations, that is not the best way to get electric cars around.
It is environmentally unsound for service stations to charge batteries during peak hours, which would include most daylight hours.
We do not want to increase the need for constructing new electric generating facilities.


Women Accusing Democrats of Betrayal
Judge Clarence Thomas's confirmation to the Supreme Court on Tuesday caused great commotion today among Democrats, who found themselves accused of betrayal by women's groups, a powerful part of the Democratic camp.
While an overwhelming number of Senate Democrats -- 46 of 57 -- voted against Judge Thomas, women's organizations across the country protested that Democrats had initially failed to pursue the sexual-harassment accusations against him and later failed to blunt Republican efforts to tarnish the character of his accuser, Prof.
Anita F. Hill.


Saudi Insult at U.N. Confirms Israeli Fears
To the Editor:
One year after America's grand coalition with Saudi Arabia and other Arab states, several months after Saudia Arabia's agreement to attend a face-to-face conference with Israel, and one week after President Bush's landmark speech to the United Nations calling for peace in the Middle East and repudiation of the infamous Zionism-is-racism resolution, this astonishing event took place.


Sports of The Times; Pitchers, Umpires: Efficient
SOME people will say it was the night nobody could hit, and others will remember it as the night young Steve Avery of the Braves and sore-legged Doug Drabek of the Pirates pitched scoreless ball into the ninth inning.
If it had been a World Series game, it might be remembered as a classic.
It was still the sixth game of the National League Championship Series, and the Braves outlasted the Pirates, 1-0, to set up the deciding game tonight.


Werner D. Falk, 85, Philosophy Professor
Dr.
Werner David Falk, former chairman of philosophy at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, died Friday at the university's hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in Chapel Hill.
Dr. Falk died of heart failure, friends said.


Selection Process for Court Under Attack on All Sides
About the only point of agreement between supporters and opponents of Judge Clarence Thomas is that the distinctly American system of picking Supreme Court justices has gone awry.
At a photo session this morning, President Bush said there was general agreement that "the present process is simply not fair." He said he was working on "some suggestions to improve the process" and would eventually make his ideas public.


Carroll M. Williams, 74, Pioneer In Research on Insect Development
Carroll M. Williams, a biologist at Harvard University who worked out the fundamental principles of how insects develop from eggs through successive larval stages into adults, died last Friday in Watertown, Mass.
He was 74 years old.
Dr. Williams died of lymphoma, the university said.


Hill Says Little About Confirmation
Anita F. Hill said today that she never expected to be drawn into a brutal political battle when she first accused Judge Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment.
She insisted that by telling her story she had accomplished everything she had set out to do, despite Judge Thomas's confirmation Tuesday by the full Senate.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The Real Golden Oldies Are Popular Again
MOVE over, Paula Abdul, here comes Louis Armstrong.
Guns 'n' Roses, watch out for Benny Goodman.
More and more of the nation's advertising agencies are featuring the big band, swing and pop tunes of the 1930's, 1940's and 1950's in television commercials for their clients.
The reason for the golden-oldie gold rush, agency executives say, is that these distinctive sounds from previous decades help their spots stand out amid the cacophony of commercials scored to rap, rock and heavy-metal music.


Syria to Attend Most Phases of Middle East Talks
Syria said today that it was prepared to go to a Middle East peace conference that would involve direct talks with Israel, but would not take part in negotiations that would deal with regional problems like water and arms control until Israel agreed to give up occupied territories.
And Syria's Foreign Minister said that he would not shake the hand of Israel's Foreign Minister when such a conference begins.
The Syrian official, Farouk al-Sharaa, said that such a gesture of reconciliation could take place only after Israel vacates the territories it occupied in the 1967 Middle East war.


Philip Morris Climbed 20.6% in 3d Quarter
The Philip Morris Companies announced a 20.6 percent rise in third-quarter earnings yesterday, based on the strong growth of its cigarette sales abroad and the sound performance of its food products.
The results were marred only by a decline in its Miller Brewing Company.
The company spent heavily on marketing a number of its beer brands, including Miller Genuine Draft, Sharp's and Milwaukee's Best.


Author of Rose Book Is Corrected by Dowd
Pete Rose has served his prison time on income-tax charges and has basically been on his best behavior as he bides his time before petitioning for his reinstatement to baseball's good graces.
But more than two years after baseball's investigation of the career hit leader, the fallout from his case continues.
The publisher of a book about the Rose case has issued a "statement of clarification" about a series of statements the author, James Reston Jr., made in the book, "Collison at Home Plate." The publisher acted after "the receipt of comments" from John Dowd, the Washington lawyer, who headed the investigation.


Doctor Is Accused on Care of Kahane
Members of the New York City ambulance crew that treated Rabbi Meir Kahane after he was shot last year have accused a doctor of interfering with medical treatment of the rabbi, according to affidavits submitted yesterday by a lawyer for the man accused of killing Mr.
Kahane.
The affidavits, which were taken from the crew members, said that the physician, Dr.
Steven Stowe, a Bellevue anesthesiologist, acted "quite hysterical" and was "out of control" as paramedics tried to treat Mr.
Kahane.


'Baby Bells' Challenged By McCaw
A new cellular telephone network, announced yesterday by McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., is a significant step toward challenging the monopoly on local service enjoyed by the regional Bell operating companies and other operators, analysts say.
Cellular service, which is markedly more expensive than traditional service, could drop in price substantially in five years or so.


Roseanne Barr Sues Agency for $20 Million
Roseanne Barr Arnold has filed a multi-million-dollar complaint against her former talent agency, she said today, accusing it of having duped her out of half the money she should have earned from her television series.
Mrs.
Arnold filed a petition with the California Labor Commission against Triad Artists, which represented her until 1988, saying the agency took advantage of her "naivete" and "state of panic" to coerce her to sign seven illegal contracts at lunch one day in 1987.
She said the contracts gave Triad control over her career and an opportunity to exploit to its own advantage the terms of her agreement to star in the ABC series "Roseanne."


HOME IMPROVEMENT
CERAMIC tiles are prized for their durability and beauty, but they are not indestructible.
When cracked or broken, they can spoil the appearance of a room and cause further damage to walls.
If a whole or damaged tile is loose, it must be removed before it can be refastened, repaired or replaced.
First, try wiggling it by hand or gently prying it away from the surface with a flexible putty knife, a screwdriver or a cold chisel.
Tapping the tool lightly with a hammer might help, but be careful not to dislodge surrounding tiles that are firmly attached.


Pena Strikes A Big Blow
Andy Van Slyke said it was a strike. He also said it was shame.
"It was such a good at-bat," said the center fielder for the Pirates, "it's too bad it had to end with a called third strike."


D'Amato Says Fairness Dictated Thomas Vote
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the only Senator from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut to vote in favor of Judge Clarence Thomas's confirmation, said yesterday that fairness demanded that he vote as he did, even though most callers to his office from the New York City area opposed confirmation.
The sexual harassment charges against Judge Thomas, he said in a telephone interview, "were not sustained." His own experience, he said, showed him how difficult it was to shake an allegation once it had been reported.
"Even if you're cleared, you've lost your good name," he said


European Scientists Win Physics and Chemistry Nobel Prizes
The Nobel Prizes in Physics and Chemistry were awarded yesterday to a French specialist in liquid crystals and a Swiss pioneer in an important new technique of chemical analysis.
Both scientists were recognized for the complex mathematics they developed to further their fields.
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded the physics prize to Dr.
Pierre-Gilles de Gennes, a professor at the College de France, Paris, for his discoveries about the ordering of molecules in substances ranging from the "super" glue used in aircraft construction to an exotic form of liquid helium.


Rangers Snap 3-Game Slide As Devils Pay for Misplays
The Devils paid a severe penalty for their carelessness in protecting their zone last night at Madison Square Garden, giving the Rangers repeated breakaways.
Two of the breakaways were three-on-none and one-on-none and each resulted in a goal that helped the Rangers to a 4-2 triumph in the first meeting of the season between the rivals.


Lithuania Halts the Reversal Of War-Crimes Convictions
A Lithuanian Supreme Court justice said today that his newly independent Government had suspended the rehabilitation of thousands of people sentenced by Soviet courts after World War II on war crimes charges after discovering that several exonerations of people convicted of killing Jews were unjustified.
The Supreme Court justice, Genadijus Slauta, said the court would reverse the miscarriages of justice and review other cases in which exoneration was granted.


Merck Posts 18% Higher Profit for Quarter
In the latest in a string of strong quarterly results in the pharmaceutical industry, Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest drug maker, said yesterday that profits rose 18.8 percent.
Dr.
P.
Roy Vagelos, Merck's chairman, said the third-quarter earnings growth came from strong gains in unit sales of high-profit drugs, continued cost controls, productivity improvements and a lower tax rate.
The company recorded sizable gains, for instance, in unit sales of its cholesterol-lowering drug Mevacor and of Vasotec, a treatment for high blood pressure and congestive heart failure.


Tough Gun Control Is Near Approval in Canada
Canada, where crime and violence are on the rise and a quarter of all households contain firearms, is close to getting a new gun control law.
Kim Campbell, the Justice Minister in the Progressive Conservative Government, says the law will ease the "fear and vulnerability that people experience in today's society."
The battle for the bill, which has entered the final legislative phase before enactment, has been protracted, tumultuous and politically divisive, paralleling the story of the gun control legislation known as the Brady Bill in the United States.


Toys, Both Dated and Timeless, in Show
AT the turn of the century, children enjoyed toys that now seem quaint, exploitative, morbid, hazardous, naive and prescient of modern playthings.
A display of some 100 such artifacts of late-Victorian childhood will be on view at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers for about a year.
"Childhood Life, 1880-1910" portrays youthful pastimes that did not involve lounging before a television set but were nonetheless not always pretty.


A Shake-Up Of Licensees In British TV
The biggest shake-up in the 36-year history of British commercial television occurred today, when a Government-appointed commission announced that four leading companies had lost their licenses in the country's first auction of television franchises.
Three American companies -- Disney, NBC and Home Box Office -- were members of some of the 40 groups bidding for what is called here the national breakfast franchise and 15 regional franchises, whose advertising revenues last year totaled $:1.67 billion, or about $3.22 billion.
The breakfast slot is one of the most coveted franchises, presenting morning news and interviews.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Ann Hampton Callaway
The Ballroom 253 West 28th Street Through Nov. 2
In the decade that she has been performing in New York clubs and restaurants, Ann Hampton Callaway has gained a well-deserved reputation as a ballad interpreter whose soaring lyricism is comparable in its strength and sweetness to Barbra Streisand, Maureen McGovern and others who go in for grand romantic display.
But because she usually accompanies herself on the piano, her club dates have often found her constrained by having to play while singing.
Ms.
Callaway's new act at the Ballroom is an ambitious attempt to break out of the singing-pianist mold and become more of an all-around stage entertainer.
Accompanied by a five-member band, she is performing a mixture of original songs and familiar chestnuts while standing and facing the audience.
A concerted attempt to bring more contemporary rhythmic flavors into her music has prompted the arrangement of a significant portion of the material in a Latin-flavored pop-jazz style associated with singers like Angela Bofill.
Although the Latin-jazz elaboration of the songs succeeded to a degree at the opening-night show on Tuesday, Ms.
Callaway still seemed hesitant to follow the new rhythmic directions to their logical limits, abandon herself and let go and wail.
And not all of her original middle-of-the-road ballads lent themselves comfortably to the change of idiom that was forced upon them.
But when Ms.
Callaway relaxed and poured her heart into "Close as Pages in a Book" (by Dorothy Fields and Sigmund Romberg) or "Time After Time" (by Jule Styne and Sammy Cahn), she made music of undiluted beauty.


Events: Apartment Tour, Bonsai and Antiques
Separate Scenarios
United Cerebral Palsy of New York City, 105 Madison Avenue (30th Street); (212) 683-6700.
A self-guided tour of six apartments designed by Craig Raywood, Connie Beale and others, is from 12:30 to 4:30 P.M.
Tuesday.
Proceeds help United Cerebral Palsy.
Tickets, $60, must be bought in advance.
Festivals of Harvest and Mums
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park, the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.
The garden harvest festival will be held from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday, with sales of farm produce and crafts, demonstrations and guided tours of the garden.
Garden hours: 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Tuesday through Friday; 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday.
Suggested contribution: $3; $2 for those 62 and older, students, and children 6 to 16.
Thousands of chrysanthemum blooms will be on display in the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory from Saturday through Nov. 17.
Conservatory admission: $2; $1 for those 62 and older, students, and children 6 to 16.
Antiques at the Armory
Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue and 66th Street; (212) 382-0969.
The International Antique Dealers Show opens tomorrow at 5 P.M. with a party to benefit Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
Tickets start at $200; call (212) 355-6110.
The show has 77 dealers from the United States and Europe.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Saturday through Wednesday; 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. next Thursday.
Admission, including catalogue, $15.
Small Oaks, Maples, More
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue off Eastern Parkway,
Crown Heights; (718) 622-4433.
The garden and the Bonsai Society of Greater New York are sponsoring a nine-day show in the Steinhardt Conservatory starting Saturday.
An auction of bonsai on Sunday, Oct. 27, at 1 P.M. will benefit the garden.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Saturday through Oct. 27 (closed Monday).
Admission: $2; $1 for those 62 and older, and children 3 to 12.


Dance in Review
Martha Graham Dance Company  City Center 131 West 55th Street
"Embattled Garden" is one of Martha Graham's most ingenious but difficult works, resonant with multiple meanings.
When danced to the hilt, as it was by the Martha Graham Dance Company on Tuesday night, and with somewhat different nuances on Sunday afternoon, these various levels become apparent.


New Radio-Tape Player, Old-Car Style
REMEMBER the Ford Thunderbird, the Dodge Royal, the Buick Roadmaster?
Cicena Inc., which specializes in retro-inspired products, is offering the Hip Hugger, a portable AM/FM radio and cassette player that borrows from 50's car styling.
The streamlined Hip Hugger, with its three space age-looking chrome graphic equalizers, comes in three nostalgic color combinations: teal and cream, red and cream, black and cream.
The cassette player has automatic reverse, a bass sound system, a constant speed circuit and stereo headphones.
It weighs about one pound.


White Man Seized in Bias Attack On Black Teen-Ager in Brooklyn
A 21-year-old white man was arrested yesterday in what the police said was a bias attack Saturday night on a black teen-ager in the Gravesend section of Brooklyn.
The man, Joseph Dorino of 2563 East Sixth Street in Brooklyn, was charged with second-degree assault.
He is the first suspect to be arrested in the case, though the police believe that Mr.
Dorino was part of a band of as many as 20 white youths who carried out the attack.


F.A.A. May Revise Air Routes To Control Noise From Planes
The Federal Aviation Administration said today that it would explore establishing new air routes for the skies over New York, New Jersey and Connecticut in an effort to control airplane noise.
The agency's move seemed intended in part to respond to recently announced plans by the Port Authority to write new noise regulations governing flights at the area's three main airports, Kennedy, La Guardia and Newark.
The F.A.A. and the Port Authority disagree over whether local authorities should be allowed to write regulations stricter than those established by the Federal Government.
Changing Flight Patterns


Commissioner Of Labor Quits Post in Albany
The State Labor Commissioner, Thomas F. Hartnett, is resigning to work as an arbitrator for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Mr.
Hartnett and other Cuomo administration officials announced today.
Mr.
Hartnett, who has been commissioner since 1987, plans to leave at the end of next week.
His successor has yet to be chosen, but the officials said that John F. Hudacs, the State General Services Commissioner, is under consideration.


Schwab Profit Nearly Doubles
The Charles Schwab Corporation, the parent of the nation's leading discount stock brokerage, said yesterday that third-quarter earnings nearly doubled, to $13.2 million.
The profit, equal to 51 cents a share, compared with a profit of $7.2 million, or 27 cents a share, in the period a year ago.
Revenue climbed 22 percent, to $202 million from $165 million.


Profit at American Airlines' Parent Up 7.2%
American Airlines' parent company reported a 7.2 percent rise in earnings yesterday, providing evidence that the industry is continuing to put many of the hardships of the Persian Gulf crisis behind it.
Robert L. Crandall, chairman of the AMR Corporation, said: "The third quarter was the second consecutive quarter in which we have been able to report modest earnings. While we are encouraged by this trend, earnings remain inadequate, the rate of improvement is frustratingly slow and the underlying fundamentals of the airline business are not yet promising."


Seidman Takes Television Job
L.
William Seidman, the nation's top banking regulator, said today that he had decided to become a television commentator.
Mr.
Seidman, who stepped down today as head of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Resolution Trust Corporation, said he would begin his new career next week as chief commentator for two business programs on CNBC, the cable network owned by NBC.
The two programs are "Business View" and "Market Wrap."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Otis Clay
Tramps
Willie Mitchell isn't a name that usually sends concert audiences cheering, but at Tramps on Friday, as part of the Benson and Hedges Blues Festival, a cognoscenti-littered audience gave the name a firm round of applause.
Mr.
Mitchell, who wasn't around, was a trumpeter and arranger and the architect of the soul sound of Hi Records, the Memphis-based label that recorded Al Green and Ann Peebles among others.
And the man paying tribute to Mr.
Mitchell on stage was the singer Otis Clay.
The fanaticism of soul audiences is such that Mr.
Clay could have won the adoration of his fans simply by showing up.
He's virtually the only performer working with the late-1960's and early-70's soul sound of Hi, where the bass drum sounds as if a hammer had just been dropped on a felt cushion and the brass erupts coolly.
It's a clogged, thick texture, but not busy, a sound that implies intensity and grace simultaneously, a Southern mixture.
Mr.
Clay isn't a great singer; he doesn't have a voice that's immediately identifiable.
But he's better than adequate, and he's able to move easily between the smooth in-between song patter of a salesman and the acting that's necessary to convey passion during a song.
He has the rhetoric of passion all sealed up: hand gestures and arched back show a man torn by lost love.
The voice is dry and dusty, his falsetto notes rising only to disintegrate at their limit.
It's the emotional power of an amateur -- an average person putting out feeling without too much professionalism.
It's also a type of realism that isn't true, rationally, but at the moment when Mr.
Clay is lost in the role of spurned lover, heart aching, his singing seems like the only adequate response to his troubles.


McCarver and Buck Need Time
Working 16 regular-season games a year on CBS cannot produce a symbiotic broadcast duo, even if the talent is Tim McCarver and Jack Buck.
Blending McCarver's new-wave wit and analysis with Buck's old-shoe, radio-on-TV baritone into a distinctive booth marriage has taken time.
It will take more time.
But McCarver and Buck's Wednesday night call of the Braves' 1-0 victory over the Pirates in Game 6 of the National League Championship Series accentuated their growing on-air confidence as a team.


How Can Jane Fonda Be a Part of the Chop?
In this week of in-your-face television confrontations, only one question was resolved for me last night: We will have to suffer the Tomahawk Chop through the World Series?
"What I couldn't understand," said Tonya Gonella Frichner, president of the American Indian Law Alliance, "was how Miss Progressive Jane Fonda could sit there doing the Tomahawk Chop."


At the Bar; Monday Morning Quarterbacks Dissect the Failed Plays in the Thomas Hearings
Albert Krieger of Miami, who represents John Gotti, would have tried to show that Clarence Thomas handled sexual harassment complaints lackadaisically while heading the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Hugh Keefe of New Haven would have dissected the Judge's purported interest in pornography.
Jack Litman of New York would have canvassed every video store near Judge Thomas's home, the E.E.O.C., and Yale Law School for signs that he had rented certain pornographic films.
Alan M. Dershowitz would have let a trained lawyer, not eight lapsed ones, do the questioning.
To the millions who watched it, the televised confrontation between Judge Thomas and Professor Anita F. Hill was engrossing, embarrassing, excruciating.
But for the nation's lawyers, particularly those who opposed the Judge or were inclined to believe his accuser or who simply found the Republican senators to be far superior strategists, the hearings were one more thing: frustrating.
With each missed opportunity, with each failed follow-through, these lawyers grew convinced that the firm of Biden, Metzenbaum, Heflin &amp; Kennedy had fools for clients.


No Cars or Fees for This Fifth Avenue Mile
It's a month or so late and a few hundred thousand dollars short, but the Fifth Avenue Mile, formerly the Mercedes Mile, formerly the Fifth Avenue Mile, formerly the Pepsi Mile, will be held for the 11th time tomorrow afternoon.
The field is decidedly weakened, but still seems surprisingly strong considering that there are no appearance fees, no cars for the winners and not very much prize money, for that matter.
"It's the mother of all road miles," Matthew Yates of Britain said yesterday in explaining why he and 23 other runners representing 11 countries had entered the elite men's and women's divisions of the eight-race event despite a paltry top prize of just $5,000.


Nominee for C.I.A. Is Expected to Win Approval of Panel
A majority of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence is expected on Friday to approve the nomination of Robert M. Gates as the next Director of Central Intelligence.
The vote, which comes more than five months after President Bush named his deputy national security adviser to serve as the country's espionage chief, will move the nomination to the full Senate, where an intense debate is expected over Mr.
Gates's fitness for a job he was denied in 1987.


Hormones Linked to Bacteria Growth
In a surprising and significant discovery, scientists have found that bacteria can get a boost from the very hormones the body uses to prime the immune system for counterattack.
The bacteria use the hormones to spur their own growth.
The finding, which is being published today in the journal Science, could explain the puzzling fact that otherwise harmless bacteria invading the body can turn lethal.
It also raises questions about the usefulness of certain cancer treatments that depend on immune system hormones, since even if these work against cancer they may also imperil the patient by encouraging the growth of bacteria.


Comex Chief Declines To Seek Re-election
Martin Greenberg, the chairman of the Commodity Exchange Inc., or Comex, said yesterday that he would step down rather than seek re-election when his term expires next March.
Mr.
Greenberg, 51 years old, will have the distinction of being the last unpaid chairman of Comex, the country's leading metals futures exchange.
The exchange members voted earlier this year to pay its next chairman a salary.
But like true traders, the membership is haggling over the amount.
Members rejected a proposed $150,000 annual salary, and will soon vote on $125,000.


Firefighter Again Makes Her Harassment Charge
Her tires have been slashed, she said.
Trash was dumped on her bed.
A mousetrap was placed in her boots, and the boots were slashed.
And the words of abuse have never let up since Katrina Cannon joined the New York City Fire Department nine years ago, she charged yesterday -- all because she is a woman and black.
"Sometimes they say it's sex," Firefighter Cannon said at a news conference yesterday.
"I believe it is color as well. It's vindictive, malicious and cowardly."


TRANSACTIONS
FOOTBALL National Football League
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Waived Wes Pritchett, linebacker. Signed Kevin Robbins, tackle.
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Released James Dixon, wide receiver, and Donald Smith, defensive back.
Signed Stan Smagala, defensive back.
HOCKEY National Hockey League
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Assigned Greg Millen, goaltender, to San Diego of the International Hockey League.


New Memorial Honors Slain Police Officers


Economic Scene; 2 Key Statistics Are Due to Shift
IS the American economy in a recovery, a recession or a no man's land?
The answer is not easy to come by because economic statistics lag behind current events and because data on past growth or contraction are complex, crude and continually being revised.
For instance, the first estimate by the Commerce Department of real gross national product -- total output adjusted for inflation -- for the second quarter had the economy growing at an annual rate of four-tenths of 1 percent.
Hats went off to hail the recovery.
The second estimate moved that figure down to one-tenth of 1 percent, and some economists, including Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve Board's chairman, said the recession was over but the recovery had not yet begun.


Around Grand Central, Nothing Ran but Water
One of New York City's busiest spots -- the crowded, hectic blocks around Grand Central Terminal -- was plunged into waterlogged chaos yesterday as the flood from the 42d Street water main break left it a nightmare of traffic jams and impassable streets.
For the office worker, it resembled a battle zone.


'Neutral' vs. Aggressive Premature Baby Care; Unchained Egos
To the Editor:
I read with profound shame for my own profession of medicine your series on damaged newborns (front pages, Sept. 29 to Oct. 1).
The routine treatment of doubting mothers of severely damaged infants by arrogant physicians is a travesty of the term "humane profession."


25 News Employees Cut At Time Inc. Magazines
The Time Inc.
Magazine Company informed about 25 news department employees at six of its magazines this week that they would be laid off as part of staff reductions announced in September.
Sixty-one employees have already volunteered to leave.
On Sept. 19, citing declining advertising pages, the company said it would lay off 105 news employees, the most drastic staff cuts in almost two decades.
Time Inc. has since reduced the number to 98.


CHRONICLE
The poster for this year's CARE World Hunger Crusade, unveiled yesterday, shows "a robust, healthy, happy, smiling baby sitting amid huge healthy radiant sunflowers," said its artist, MAURICE SENDAK, the author and illustrator of children's books.


New York's Recycling Is Up From Last Year
To the Editor:
Your recent news article on the Mayor's Management Report stated that the percentage of New York City's waste recycled declined from fiscal 1990 to fiscal 1991.
While the numbers reported do appear in the report, the conclusion reached is inaccurate.


BankAmerica Net Higher Than Expected
The BankAmerica Corporation today reported third-quarter earnings above what Wall Street analysts had expected, despite the recession.
The bank also said its merger with the Security Pacific Corporation was proceeding according to plan in spite of that bank's higher- than-expected losses for the quarter.
For the quarter, BankAmerica said it earned $285 million, or $1.20 a share, up 1 percent from $283 million, or $1.26 a share, in the period a year ago.
The 5 percent decrease in per share figures primarily reflects a 3 percent gain in the number of common shares outstanding, to 221.7 million.


TV Weekend; Mystery (but No Spies) From a Young le Carre
Pre-empted last week by the Senate hearings starring Judge Clarence Thomas, Prof.
Anita F. Hill and a mixed roster of bit players, the premiere of the 21st season of "Masterpiece Theater" on Channel 13 is instead taking place tonight at 9, with a repeat at midnight.
The chosen production is "A Murder of Quality," a two-part version of a 1962 John le Carre novel, his second published work, adapted for television by the author himself.
The second hour will be broadcast, as originally scheduled, on Sunday at 9 P.M.
"A Murder of Quality," a rare le Carre novel not about spies, is a mystery story, and a slight one at that.
In a foreword to a published edition, the author calls the work a "flawed thriller," albeit one that is "redeemed by ferocious and quite funny social comment." The writer has never been especially enthusiastic about British institutions, most notably the boarding schools ("I found them monstrous and still do").
The fictional one in this story is called Carne, but it could be easily mistaken for Sherborne, once attended by Mr. le Carre.
In fact, the filming was done on location at Sherborne.


The Thomas Confirmation; Governor of Virginia Is Critical of Thomas Over Racism Charge
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia, one of five major Democratic Presidential candidates, has criticized Judge Clarence Thomas for saying he was a victim of racism in Senate hearings but has declined to say whether the judge should have been confirmed to the Supreme Court.
Speaking to reporters after an antidrug luncheon on Wednesday, Mr.
Wilder also said the woman who accused Judge Thomas of sexual harassment, Prof.
Anita F. Hill of the University of Oklahoma law school, was "treated like dirt" when she testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee last week.


Art in Review
Jonathan Lasker  Sperone Westwater  142 Greene Street  SoHo  Through Oct. 26
Jonathan Lasker's growing use of painterly effects is beginning to contradict the conceptual premise behind his work, which is to quote those same effects ironically.
Typically Mr.
Lasker paints tangled squiggles of black lines on pastel backgrounds.
These squiggles recall the grand gestural marks of the Abstract Expressionists, but Mr.
Lasker paints them flat, producing smooth surfaces that, along with the pinks and pale blues he tends to use for his backgrounds, suggest high-tone decor.
Onto these inexpressive surfaces he superimposes gigantic knotlike marks of the same sort, impossibly thick, as if he'd squeezed a trail of paint straight from the tube.


Review/Film; A Satiric Horror Tale, At the Appropriate Hour
Opening tonight at the Angelika Film Center as a special midnight show (Fridays and Saturdays only) is "The Borrower," a satiric horror film directed by John McNaughton, an independent film maker on his way up in the American cinema establishment.
Mr.
McNaughton's first film, the icily accomplished "Henry: Portrait of a Serial Killer," was completed in 1985 but released only last year.
The director is currently represented by "Sex, Drugs, Rock &amp; Roll," the excellent adaptation of Eric Bogosian's one-man stage piece.
He is now about to direct his first big-budget Hollywood movie, "Mad Dog and Glory," starring Robert De Niro and Bill Murray, produced by Martin Scorsese.


CHRONICLE
LENA HORNE hopes she does not have to sing for her supper Monday evening as the guest of honor at the Lenox Hill Hospital Autumn Ball at the Waldorf-Astoria.
"If someone asks me to sing 'Stormy Weather,' it's sure to rain," she said.
"It always does, so I hope they don't ask."
She does not mind saying a few kind words about the hospital, where she has had a pacemaker implanted and has recuperated from a broken shoulder.
"Nonsenses like that," she said.
"I've been there often enough so that somebody from every floor knows me."


Twins Pitchers Await the Chop by Taking Cuts
Workers put the finishing touches on the painted World Series emblems at the Metrodome, fans hung five-year-old banners off downtown buildings and the Twins hit breaking balls from a pitching machine today.
The preparation for the first game of the World Series here Saturday touched all corners of the Twin Cities with the Mayor of Minneapolis scurrying to secure tickets, players trying to stay relaxed and banners galore lining the walls outside the Twins' clubhouse.


The Once and Future C.I.A.
These have not been stellar years for the Central Intelligence Agency.
Even with the distinguished outsider Judge William Webster in charge, the once-proud agency has, at least to public perception, flunked.
Who there anticipated the fall of the Berlin wall, the aggression of Saddam Hussein, the implosion of the Soviet Union?
Nevertheless, President Bush contends he needs an experienced insider and has nominated Robert Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence, a choice the Senate Intelligence Committee votes on today.
There are strong reasons to vote no.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 568 money market mutual funds decreased by $4.5 billion, to $462.57 billion, in the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 208 institutional funds decreased by $4.31 billion, to $141.1 billion.
The assets of the 268 general-purpose funds were down by $199.9 million, to $174.14 billion.
The 92 broker-dealer funds decreased by $4.6 million, to $147.33 billion, the institute said.


How to Talk Baseball Though Indifferent
Here's what I know about baseball: the hot dogs you get at the stand are always better than the ones you get at the seats; nine innings are a lie since each has two parts, which really make 18, but everyone pretends not to notice; the Mets have a full-time shrink they can see for free -- even though they're all resistant -- and of those Mets, Dave Magadan is one good-looking guy.
What I don't know about baseball is everything else.
Batting average, r.b.i. and any of those numbers that flash across the television screen might just as well be in Mandarin.


Tennessee Ernie Ford Dies at 72; Folksy Singer Recorded '16 Tons'
Tennessee Ernie Ford, the homespun television host and country and Western crooner whose 1955 recording of "16 Tons" became one of the biggest-selling records of all time, died yesterday at H. C. A. Reston (Va.) Hospital Center.
He was 72 years old and lived in Portola Valley, near Palo Alto, Calif.
Mr.
Ford became ill at Dulles International Airport on Sept. 28 and was taken to Reston Hospital.
A hospital spokeswoman, Claudia Smith, attributed his death to a longstanding liver ailment.


No. 7,000 or No. 7,253?
ANGEL CORDERO reached a milestone yesterday when he rode Don't Cross the Law to victory in the Beau Purple Purse at Belmont Park.
The 48-year-old jockey had ridden a horse to victory 6,999 other times since beginning his career on the American mainland in 1962.


The Thomas Confirmation: Washington Memo; High Court's Aloofness Pierced by Thomas Fight
Viewed from the air, the Supreme Court is just another marble building in the cluster of such landmarks on Capitol Hill.
The Capitol itself is a few hundred yards across First Street, and down the block sits the Russell Senate Office Building, scene of the Clarence Thomas confirmation hearings.
The view from the ground is different.
Despite the Court's physical proximity to the other centers of power in Washington, about the place there is an aura of a world apart.
A glance at the Court's docket, which reflects just about every issue roiling the political landscape, is sufficient to show that this seeming isolation is an illusion.


The Spoken Word
WALKING TOURS AND LECTURE, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Streets Where We Lived" walking tour, Sunday at noon, followed at 1 P.M. by "La Dolce Via," a walk through Little Italy, and at 2 P.M. by "Tenements in Focus," an examination of the photojournalism of Arnold Eagle, carried out for the Works Progress Administration.
Fee for each walking tour: $12 ($10 for the elderly and students); lecture, $4.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"American Life in American Art," by Vivien Bobka, tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "John Baldessari," by Ms.
Bobka, tomorrow at 3:30 P.M.
"American Life in American Art," by Leslie Heiner, Sunday at 2 P.M.; "John Baldessari," by Ms.
Heiner, Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.
GALLERY TALKS, Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street.
"Primitivism in Modern Art," by Gail Stavitsky, today at noon; "Looking at Modern Art: Marcel Duchamp," by Ms.
Stavitsky, today at 1 P.M.; "Futurism and the Art of the Past," by Amelia Arenas, today at 3 P.M.; "Sculpture in the Garden," by Susan Cooke, tomorrow at 1 P.M.; "Abstract Expressionism," by Ms.
Cooke, tomorrow at 3 P.M.; "American Art After World War II," by Julie Reiss, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "The 1960's: Art and Rebellion," by Ms.
Reiss, Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free under age 16).
Information: (212) 708-9480.


NATO to Cut Aircraft A-Bombs by 50%
NATO announced today that it was following up on President Bush's nuclear arms initiative by slashing the Western alliance's nuclear arsenal in Europe by a further 700 warheads from a total of 3,600.
The stage was set for the move last month when Mr.
Bush announced that the United States would remove or destroy all ground-based tactical nuclear weapons, including artillery shells and short-range missiles, which have long served as Western Europe's first line of nuclear defense.


On My Mind; The Solitary Voyager
After the hearings, what this country needs in a hurry is a good antacid for the mind.
Not a sedative, because the tens of millions of us who woke up to how deeply sexual harassment bites into the lives and minds of women should not go back to sleep.


Pork Belly Prices Decline On Prospect of High Supply
Pork belly futures prices fell the maximum 2 cents a pound yesterday on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange because of seasonal factors and prospects for increased hog slaughters.
Frozen pork bellies for February delivery settled at 42.57 cents a pound, 2 cents below Wednesday's settlement.
Other pork belly futures were 1.42 cents to 1.88 cents lower.


Some Victims in Texas: A Colonel, an Ex-Teacher and 'Dr. G.'
Steven Charles Dody was an Army lieutenant colonel stationed at Fort Hood, just two weeks from retirement.
Zona Lynn was already retired, a former schoolteacher in her 60's, who came to Killeen on Wednesday to help plan a Baptist state convention.


Judge Upholds Results of Council Race in Harlem
A Manhattan judge yesterday upheld William Del Toro's slim City Council primary victory in Harlem, throwing out the challenge of Adam Clayton Powell 4th on a legal technicality, officials of the Board of Elections said.
Justice Martin Evans of State Supreme Court in Manhattan ruled that Mr.
Del Toro's 34-vote victory in the Sept. 12 Democratic primary for the Eighth District seat in eastern Harlem should stand because Mr.
Powell had failed to post the legal papers challenging the election on the correct door at the Del Toro family brownstone on East 106th Street.
Mr.
Del Toro argued that because the papers were affixed to the street-level door and he lives in the basement, he was not served with the papers.


At the Movies
A 'Dodsworth' Remake
With Gregory Peck as the film's executive producer and Broadway's Martin Richards ("The Will Rogers Follies," "Grand Hotel") as producer, plans for a remake of "Dodsworth," based on the Sinclair Lewis novel, are once again afoot.


Our Towns
You better put the car in neutral to read this.
It's about simmering frustrations, seething emotions and highway lawlessness in the intensely competitive world of suburban roadways.
And it's about a realistic man with a simple plan to help out and crack down.


For Children
'The Art of Babar'  'Watercolors and Drawings by Jean and Laurent de Brunhoff'
National Academy of Design  1083 Fifth Avenue (between 89th and 90th Streets)  (212) 369-4880  All ages  Through Nov. 3
One rite of childhood is to get to know at least one Babar book familiarly, if not by heart.
In this colorful, whimsical show of 145 original Jean and Laurent de Brunhoff watercolors and sketches, families can see Babar on skis, in an air balloon, being wed, crying when he remembers his mother, and in a lifeboat.
Celeste, Babar's wife, and their three children, Pom, Flora and Alexander, are frolicking in many of the illustrations, too, in settings so detailed, vivid and natural that the Babar clan seems far more lifelike in these three galleries than it does on the pages of the reproduced books.
As one caption from a Babar book says, "They look like elephants, but yet they were not elephants." The show is split between the academy's third and fourth floors (the funnier paintings are on the fourth floor), and the artworks are hung at the eye level of an older child, so younger children will have to be lifted up to see, for example, "The Camp of the Elephants," a scene where bull's-eyes are being painted on elephants' backsides.
Many of the paintings bear the original French captions, so those schooled in that language can try out their skills.
The academy has painted the woodwork in bright Babar colors and the bookstore sells Babar books and T-shirts ($11.95 for children, $14.95 for adults) that were designed for the show by Laurent de Brunhoff.
The academy also has a free Babar arts-and-crafts drop-in workshop from 1 to 3 P.M. on the weekends.
The galleries are open Tuesdays from noon to 8 P.M., Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3.50 for adults and $2 for children. (Free on Tuesdays from 5 to 8 P.M.) 'Bronze Casting'  Metropolitan Museum of Art  (212) 879-5500  Recommended ages: 7 and up  Through Nov. 3
Have you ever wondered how a bronze sculpture is created from start to finish?
This current exhibition, "Bronze Casting," coincides with another show, "The Art of Paul Manship"; both explore sculpture casting techniques.
Sculptors who use this form spend most of their time on such labor-intensive tasks as chasing (filing and grinding) the metal.
In this clear show, cross-sectional, adult's eye-level displays of the many stages of creating a bronze sculpture examine the lost-wax, French-sand and ceramic-shell casting methods.
Viewers will discover that casting is itself an art; many sculptors rely on foundries to handle this complex, technical work.
The final stage of a bronze sculpture is the application of color, using a patina.
Children also can admire an assortment of serious-looking foundry tools.
A short video adds another visual aid to understanding the various techniques.
The show is in the Henry R. Luce Center for the Study of American Art, at the mezzanine level below the American Wing.
Afterward, families can look at Paul Manship's bronze "Group of Bears" in the Charles Engelhard Court.
The Met is open Sundays and Tuesdays through Thursdays from 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M. and on Fridays and Saturdays from 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.
Suggested admission for adults, $6; students, $3; children under 12, free.
Art Workshop: 'Puerto Rican Discovery and Heritage'  Museum of the City of New York  Fifth Avenue at 103d Street  (212) 534-1672  Recommended ages: 8 to 12  Tomorrow
The painter Armando Soto is an old hand at "helping children tell a story on paper." He has worked extensively with New York City children on murals; for tomorrow's art workshop, he will have children use themes from their neighborhoods to create a collage mural.
"They can use the tools -- like musical instruments -- that are in the neighborhood," Mr.
Soto explained.
As an example, the artist cited the tambourine, an instrument one finds frequently in East Harlem.
Children will draw such images with crayons and Magic Markers on paper, cut them out and paste them up on the mural paper.
Mr.
Soto will also take children and accompanying adults on a tour of "A New Season: Art From Taller Boricua," an exhibition in the museum in which Mr.
Soto has a still-life drawing.
Taller Boricua is a longstanding arts group that organizes art classes for young East Harlem residents.
For the 2 P.M. workshop tomorrow, art supplies will be provided at no charge.
The workshop is free for members and $3 for nonmembers (includes museum admission) and lasts about 90 minutes.
Suggested museum admission is $4 for adults and $2 for children.
The No. 6 subway train stops at 103d Street, three blocks east of the museum. 'Con To' Los Hierros: A Retrospective of the Work of Pepon Osorio'  El Museo del Barrio  104th Street, at Fifth Avenue  (212) 831-7272  Recommended ages: 2 and up  Through Dec. 1
Upon opening the exhibition's aqua screen door, visitors to this cheerful and open museum will be struck by Pepon Osorio's tropically colored and lavishly decorated artwork.
What children might notice after that is the elaborately festooned chandelier in the first gallery.
Draped in beads and enlivened with miniature plastic palm trees, baby dolls, spiders, squirt guns, among other eclectic items, the chandelier seems to dance more than just hang.
Children should take great delight in pointing out the dozens of tchotchkes.
They probably will also notice the mauve velvet couch hanging on the wall.
This work, entitled "A Mis Adorables Hijas" (1990), has a solemn message (as do some of the other works) scrolled, in gold lettering, across the cushions. (The message, in Spanish, refers to a mother bidding farewell to her daughters.) "La Bicicleta," 1985, is fantasy with a purpose: when the artist was a youngster, he liked to put cards and half-blown-up balloons on his bike so it would sound like a motorcycle.
This bicycle has Mass cards glued to its pedals, orange and purple tires, and chrome covered in plastic cupids and palm trees.
The piece de resistance is "La Cama," 1987, a bed that, as the placard says, "breaks the boundaries of good taste." But who can resist it?
With a bedspread covered with ribbons, the bed suggests dreams of angels and heaven.
The one-floor museum has no eating area but is conducive to strollers.
It is open Wednesdays through Sundays from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission is $2 for adults and free for children under 12 when accompanied by an adult. 'Columbus'  Theaterworks/USA  Promenade Theater  2162 Broadway, at 76th Street  (212) 677-5959  Recommended ages: 8 to 12  Through Oct. 26
Theaterworks/USA begins its eighth season with the story of Columbus's forays into the New World.
This musical -- with songs that show off the male cast's voices -- travels back to Columbus as a teen-age upstart in Genoa, where he is eager to become a mariner, and then onward to Lisbon, where he owns a map shop and is even more eager to sail west, thereby opening a new route to the Orient.
He is then depicted in Spain, where his pleas for money from Queen Isabella and King Ferdinand are met with rebuffs for about six years.
Finally, the Queen finances the Nina, Pinta and Santa Maria, and Columbus, dressed in blue crushed velvet, departss.
The play's tension and pace reach their peak during the voyage, when Columbus and his wary crew are hungry for the sight of land.
Once they come upon a flat, green island (which he names San Salvador), the tension unravels.
Columbus returns to Spain and subsequently sails to the New World several more times, but never finds the East.
The 75-minute play has no intermission and it follows closely the explorer's decline.
Columbus, played energetically by Michael Bartoli, is portrayed as slightly foolish at times.
Some younger children grow restless toward the play's end, but overall "Columbus" is educational, historically current and introduces Bartholomew, Columbus's naysayer brother.
Performances are tomorrow and Sunday (and Oct. 26) at 12:30 P.M.
Tickets are $15 and $13.
KEEP IN MIND
"JOYOUS DRAGON SHADOW THEATER," where children can watch a shadow-theater performance and then learn to make their own shadow figures (for children 8 and over only).
Tomorrow from 10 A.M. to noon at the China Institute in America, 125 East 65th Street, Manhattan.
Performance, $5 a person; performance and workshop, $25 a child (no charge for accompanying adults).
Registration: (212) 744-8181.
"HARMONY CASTLE," a new, original puppet show with Prince Tune, Princess Melody and King Stentor, all of whom have adventures with an evil magician.
From the Puppet Company, the creators of "Franklin the Wizard," Sundays at 1 and 3 P.M. through April 26.
At Metropolis Cafe, 31 Union Square West, at 16th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets, $7.
Information: (212) 741-1646.
TENNIS LESSONS, classes and matches for children 3 years old and up, starting Monday.
At Prospect Park Tennis Center, 305 Coney Island Avenue, at Parkside Avenue, Brooklyn.
Ten-week sessions, $125 a week.
Registration: (718) 438-1200.
FRONT-ROW KIDS' CONCERT, featuring Joanie Bartels, the soprano in the "Discovery Music" recordings for children.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M. at the Ethical Culture School, Central Park West at 64th Street, Manhattan; and Sunday at 3 P.M. at the First Presbyterian Church, 124 Henry Street, Brooklyn Heights.
Tickets, $10 in advance, $12 at the door.
Information: (212) 307-7171 or (718) 858-8926.
NEW POND FARM APPLE HARVEST FESTIVAL, where children can see a blacksmith creating candles and tools; watch a cooper make barrels and spoons; decorate pumpkins; make cornhusk dolls and mobiles; dip candles, and play old-fashioned games.
At the New Pond Farm Education Center, 101 Marchant Road, at Umpawaug Road, West Redding, Conn. (off Route 53).
Tomorrow from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. (rain date Sunday).
Fee, $1.50 per adult; $1 per child (maximum $6 a family).
Information: (203) 938-2117.
"KING ARTHUR DAY," on which children can listen to medieval minstrels, watch the Morris dance troupe and a re-enactment of a sword battle, create their own coats of arms, become playing pieces in a giant King Arthur board game, see a display of heraldry and watch live falcons.
Sunday from noon to 4 P.M. at the New York Public Library, Fifth Avenue at 42d Street, Manhattan.
Adults, $4, children 12 and under, $2.
Information: (212) 221-7676.
"ANDROCLES AND THE LION," an original story featuring some Shakespeare, Chinese folk theater and Charlie Brown, written by Lee Frank.
With audience participation.
Saturdays and Sundays through Nov. 17 at 1 and 3:30 P.M. at the Hartley House Theater, 413 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets, $6.
Reservations: (212) 666-1716.
"EAGLE OR SUN," a return engagement of an adaptation of "The Broken Spears," a book written by the Aztecs about the Spanish conquest of Mexico in the early 1500's.
Saturdays at 8 P.M. and Sundays at 2 P.M. through Dec. 29 at the Open Eye Theater, 270 West 89th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets are $10 for adults, $6 for children.
Information: (212) 769-4143.


Biggest Increase For Price Index In Eight Months
In an inflation report that many investors and analysts found disturbing, the Consumer Price Index climbed four-tenths of 1 percent in September, the biggest increase since January.
Prices for food and energy, which have been restraining the inflation rate for much of 1991, were two of the main factors pushing it up last month.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL SPECIAL CEREMONY TO MARK WORLD FOOD DAY 1991 -- 10:30 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Review/Fortepiano; Starting a Cycle of Schubert Sonatas
The ambition seemed to guarantee something unusual: the performance of all of Schubert's piano sonatas on a fortepiano in five concerts.
Using an instrument of the composer's time, these quirky works, mixing lyricism, sudden exclamations, thrusting rhythms and languid meditation, would be cleansed of their pianistic mannerisms, stripped of their lush pedalings and revealed anew.
And there is, in fact, much to be discovered in "authentic" renderings of these works (I have been admiring, for example, how a Dutch pianist, Trudelies Leonhardt, has disclosed their almost Baroque affects in her performances on an early-19th-century instrument, recorded on the Jecklin label).
But after hearing the first recital in this series by Seth Carlin at Merkin Concert Hall on Wednesday night, I am not sure why he undertook this project.
Mr.
Carlin is accomplished enough as a technician (though he tends to tighten up after a few pages of strenuous patter).
He is sensitive enough in using the instrument to shape vocal lines.
He even has a genteel respect for the material.
Moreover, Mr.
Carlin, who is a professor of music at Washington University in St.
Louis, has a background that would raise expectations: degrees from Harvard and Juilliard, lessons with Rosina Lhevinne and Wilhelm Kempff, assorted prizes and grants.


Report Faults M.T.A. on Pace of Capital Repair Program
Despite major improvements in transit and rail service, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's 10-year, $16.5 billion program to upgrade New York's long-neglected subways, buses and commuter railroads has fallen short of many of its original goals, the agency's Inspector General declared yesterday.
As a result of poor planning, design errors, shifting priorities and cost overruns, the Inspector General, John S. Pritchard 3d, said that the M.T.A.'s capital improvements program will require billions of dollars more, and many projects will not be completed for years, some well into the 21st Century.
But he said the program was vital and should go forward.


Digital Net Up as Apple Posts Decline
The Digital Equipment Corporation, still suffering from the prolonged economic woes of the computer industry, said yesterday that profits rose 9.2 percent in the first fiscal quarter.
And Apple Computer reported an 18 percent earnings decline even as sales grew almost 12 percent.
The mixed results reflect Apple's shift to products with higher volume but lower profit margin, which has not yet been offset by internal cost-cutting efforts.


The Water Main Break; Water Main Break Engulfs Grand Central's Subways
An 87-year-old water main ruptured outside Grand Central Terminal just before the morning rush hour yesterday, unleashing a deluge that ruined a newly renovated subway station and plunged commuters into a snarl of flooded subway lines and pulverized asphalt.
The 20-inch main, which runs east and west along 42d Street between Park and Lexington Avenues, broke at about 5:45 A.M.
Water surged upward, heaving 42d Street into a small mountain range, then cascaded down staircases and ventilation grates like so many waterfalls, flooding the subway tracks below.
The repair process was delayed for hours because the city's Environmental Protection Department misidentified the site of the rupture and shut off the wrong main.


Corrections
The television ratings chart in the Word and Image pages on Wednesday misstated the standings of two networks so far this season.
CBS's season rating is a 13.4 with a 22 share.
ABC has an 11.9 rating and a 20 share.
The rating is the percentage of all homes with television; the share is the percentage of homes with television in use.


Quotations of the Day
"This city is crumbling right before our very eyes, and no one is doing a blessed thing to stop it." -- Judith McDonald, turned away from the flooded Grand Central subway station.  [ B4:1. ]
"Every year we have several breaks of this nature and everybody says: 'Oh, the city is falling apart.' The city is not falling apart. Water main breaks are a fact of life." -- Richard Gainer of the Bureau of Water Supply and Waste Water Collection.  [ B4:3. ]


D'Amato's Rating Falls to Low in Poll
A statewide poll released today shows that Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's job-performance rating has dropped to its lowest level ever, despite the Senator's efforts to advertise the Senate Ethics Committee's decision to clear him of charges of improper conduct.
The poll by the Marist Institute for Public Opinion, taken from Oct. 7 to 10, also showed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo with his lowest rating ever and Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan with his lowest rating since early 1984.
Recession's Impact Cited
The results led the Institute's director, Lee M. Miringoff, to speculate that anti-incumbent sentiment is being fueled by the recession and by disillusionment with government.


Analysts Ask if All the News Is Out And Rumors Fly on Reed's Future
In 1987, John S. Reed, Citicorp's chairman, stunned the banking world when he conceded that the loans to less-developed countries made during the tenure of his predecessor and mentor, Walter Wriston, would never be repaid in full.
That resulted in a $1.18 billion annual loss for Citicorp and applause from analysts for Mr.
Reed's forthright recognition of nagging problems.
Today, Citicorp is again burdened by a mountain of bad loans, only this time the loans were made on Mr.
Reed's watch, and there is some question as to whether the bank has recognized all its problems this time.


House Resoundingly Defeats Ban on Semiautomatic Arms
The House today overwhelmingly rejected a ban on the sale and ownership of semiautomatic weapons and the multiple-bullet gun clips like those used in Wednesday's rampage in Texas in which 23 people were killed.
The amendment to strike the ban from the House anticrime bill passed by a vote of 247 to 177 on arguments that it would not insure prevention of the kind of massacre that occurred in Texas.


Atlanta Court Bars Efforts to End Life Support for Stricken Girl, 13
A Superior Court judge here ruled today that a hospital, which considered its life-sustaining efforts for a near-comatose 13-year-old girl to be "abusive and inhumane," could not end the child's life support unless it obtained her parents' permission.
The judge, Leah Sears-Collins, added that when parents disagreed on the treatment, as they do in this case, the hospital must continue to keep the child on life support.


CHRONICLE
The visit of JOHN H. SUNUNU, PRESIDENT BUSH's Chief of Staff, to the Alfred E. Smith dinner at the Waldorf Astoria last night generated a lot of interest -- not so much in his message, but in his means of transportation.


With Two Shows, It's High Season for Antiques
By splendid coincidence, two of this country's most prestigious antiques bazaars are on view in Manhattan this weekend.
The Fall Antiques Show, the most extensive Americana fair of the year, has been installed at the Hudson River Pier at 52d Street, where it remains through Sunday.
And the International Antique Dealers Show, decidedly the more important fair because of its global scope, opens today in previews and tomorrow to the public for a six-day run at the Seventh Regiment Armory.
Indeed, the wares shown by the 77 dealers participating in this International show rival what is presented at the best of the European shows, including the Biennale Internationale des Antiquaires in Paris and the Grosvenor House Antiques Fair in London.


Riley Wants McDaniel to Shoot More
The Knicks did not acquire Xavier McDaniel for his shaved head or for his sense of humor.
The Knicks pay McDaniel to score.
So after just four exhibition games, Coach Pat Riley has emphasized that he wants McDaniel to begin thinking more like a scorer.
In Wednesday's 111-101 victory over the Boston Celtics, McDaniel did not take a shot in the first half, and he finished with just 8 points in 21 minutes.
As the saying goes: You can't score if you don't shoot.
Riley has given McDaniel a directive to become more aggressive.


Ex-Spymaster Has Germans Curious
Markus Wolf, the East German master spy who remained for decades a faceless shadow even to the keenest Western intelligence services, has returned to Germany from a one-year exile in Moscow, leaving Germans wondering just what secrets he may reveal and at what price.
The secrets may begin to flow if Mr.
Wolf is brought to trial before a German court for espionage and high treason for his 34 years' service as head of the highly regarded East German spy network.
He bedeviled the West with scores of agents planted in sensitive positions in Western capitals and NATO headquarters.
The unmasking of an East German agent in the office of the West German Chancellor, Willy Brandt, led to the resignation of Mr.
Brandt in 1974.


Sounds Around Town
Butch Morris and Company
Butch Morris, Performance Space 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, Manhattan, (212) 477-5288.
It's never clear what Butch Morris, one of the most imposing composers of his generation, is going to come up with.
The music is always worth thinking about; at this show he'll be featuring a 13-piece orchestra, an actor and a couple of vocalists.
The show tonight is at 9; tickets are $10.
Harlem Be-Bop
Jackie McLean, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street, Manhattan, (212) 255-4037.
He's an acidic, burning soloist.
A Harlem raised be-bopper, Jackie McLean grew up with Sonny Rollins, Bud Powell and others who have remade jazz history in their own names.
Mr.
McLean's shows are filled with a sense of exploration and adventure; he'll be joined by his son, Rene, and a trio.
Shows tonight through Sunday are at 9:30, 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.
There is a $15 cover and a $10 minimum.


Durocher Had Help on 'Nice Guys' Wisecrack
To the Editor:
Your obituary on the passing of Leo Durocher (Oct. 8) recalled fond memories of my childhood growing up in Brooklyn.
Each year from April to October, we would cheer our "beloved Bums" and jeer the hated "Jints."


Books of The Times; A Whodunit in Which the Murderer Is a Mosquito
The Malaria Capers More Tales of Parasites and People, Research and Reality By Robert S. Desowitz 288 pages.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company. $21.95.
"The Malaria Capers" sounds like the title of a detective novel, and while Robert S. Desowitz's new book is actually a serious-minded study of malaria -- and the centuries-long search for its causes and a cure -- it reads like a murder mystery, full of colorful characters, red herrings and thrilling chase sequences.
In the end, the killer is identified and unmasked, but not apprehended.


'Neutral' vs. Aggressive Premature Baby Care
To the Editor:
Your series on the "Smallest Survivors: Dilemmas of Prematurity" (front pages, Sept. 29 to Oct. 1) was very timely.
Many disturbing ethical and economic questions about this subject need to be widely and vigorously debated.


Free Speech And the Role Of Sponsors
IN theory, Americans should be able to watch or read whatever they want in the media.
But in practice, such freedom is often curtailed by advertisers who are reluctant to sponsor something that pressure groups find offensive.
The tension surrounding that issue and others related to the touchy topic of commercial free speech made for lively debate at a symposium in New York on Wednesday evening.
Participants in the discussion, co-sponsored by the Playboy Foundation and the Nation Institute, differed most on this question: Does commercial free speech, in the form of advertising, actually fulfill its role as the patron of other forms of free speech in the media, or do advertisers abandon that role at the drop of a note from a pressure group complaining about a controversial program or article?


Hazing Is Upheld
Cadet emptor.
That seemed to be the message from The Citadel as the all-male military academy in Charleston, S.C., refused to grant athletic releases to four freshmen who left school complaining that they had been hazed by upperclassmen.


What to See and When
"Chiefly Feasts: The Enduring Kwakiutl Potlatch" opens today and runs through Feb. 23 at the American Museum of Natural History.
The exhibition celebrates the potlatches of the Kwakiutl Indians of British Columbia.
A public performance of traditional songs and dances by the Kwakiutl will open the exhibition today at 11:30 A.M. at the museum, on Central Park West at 79th Street in Manhattan.
Hours are 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
Mondays through Thursdays and Sundays, and 10 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.
Fridays and Saturdays.
Suggested admission: adults, $5; children, $2.50.
Information: (212) 769-5000.
Here is a sampling of "Chiefly Feasts" events at the museum.
Tomorrow and Sunday
PUBLIC SYMPOSIUM, with Native American artists, anthropologists, art historians and museum administrators discussing Northwest Coast Indian art.
Both days from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. at the Henry Kaufmann Theater of the Charles A. Dana Education Wing.
Admission is free.
Thursday
LECTURE SERIES, on the "Arts of the Kwakiutl Indians," featuring the "Chiefly Feasts" curator Dr.
Aldona Jonaitis, the contemporary Kwakiutl artist Tony Hunt and the anthropologist Peter Macnair of the Royal British Columbia Museum.
The lectures take place on three consecutive Thursdays, at 7 P.M., beginning next week, in the Henry Kaufman Theater.
The fee for the entire series is $25; advance registration is required.
Information: (212) 769-5310.
Nov. 9
NORTHWEST COAST FILM CELEBRATION, will show nine films, produced from 1914 to the present, on the culture and lives of the Northwest Coast Indians. 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. in the Harold Linder Theater of the Charles A. Dana Education Wing.
Admission is free.
Nov. 29
DEMONSTRATION, in which the Kwakiutl artist Kevin Cranmer will carve the traditional masks for which the Kwakiutl are famous and answer questions about carving techniques and Kwakiutl art.
Daily through Dec. 7; 10:15 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. in the Hall of Northwest Coast Indians.
Admission is free.
"DANCE AND MYTHS OF THE NORTHWEST COAST INDIANS," with Kwakiutl dancers, wearing elaborate masks and costumes, performing a series of traditional dances and enactments of myths.
At 7 P.M. in the Henry Kaufman Theater.
Also Nov. 30, 2 and 6 P.M.; Dec. 1, 2 P.M.; Dec. 6, 7 P.M.
Admission is $15.
Dec. 7-8
KWAKIUTL CULTURE PROGRAMS, in which Kwakiutl performers will demonstrate Kwakiutl arts, music and dance.
Both days from 1 to 4:30 P.M. in the Frederick H. Leonhardt People Center of the Charles A. Dana Education Wing.
Admission is free.
Jan. 9
LECTURE SERIES, featuring the Kwakiutl guest curator Gloria Cranmer Webster and the "Chiefly Feasts" curator Dr.
Aldona Jonaitis.
The lectures are on Jan. 9 and 16 at 7 P.M. in the Henry Kaufman Theater.
The fee for the series is $20; advance registration is required.
Information: (212) 769-5310.
Jan. 11
DEMONSTRATION, in which the Kwakiutl artist Richard Hunt will carve a 12-foot totem pole while discussing the social and cultural content of his art.
Daily through Jan. 31, 10:15 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. in the Hall of Northwest Coast Indians.
Admission is free.


What to See and When


Reviews/Film; Everybody Believed He Had to Be Somebody
Jonathan Nossiter's "Resident Alien" presents a wistful, rambling, somewhat repetitive portrait of Quentin Crisp, the octogenarian English-born man about town who has been living in New York since 1976.
"I know you. You're famous!" several actors feigning ordinary-guy status say to Mr.
Crisp as the film begins.
In fact, he is largely famous for being famous, and he is the first to acknowledge that.
"In America, the minute I was on television, everybody felt I must be somebody," he says.
In addition to watching Mr.
Crisp as he wanders from art gallery to dinner party to nightclub and to various other haunts, the film considers his prominence as a prominent gay figure, in a capacity that at its best suggests Oscar Wilde.
Mr.
Crisp, whose painful personal history made his autobiography, "The Naked Civil Servant," so successful, delights in affecting the manner of a sly wounded dowager (not to mention the bluish hair).
And he says things like "You see, the English don't like effeminate
women
" in casting his sense of persecution as a gay man in dryly comic terms. But the film raises the question of whether Mr. Crisp has been helpful or hurtful to the gay rights movement in presenting his air of helplessness and victimization. "I've come to represent a sad person's view of a gay person," he says at one point. At another he observes, "I have no opinions, no voice of any kind, except the desire to please."


School's Closing Puts Parents in a Quandary
The hint came in a Federal Express letter to parents on Monday, inviting them to a meeting the next day.
The hard facts came on Tuesday: The Fleming School, a small private elementary school on the Upper West Side, would shut down in 48 hours.
As the last classes were conducted yesterday, many parents were in a quandary about where their children would go to school.
The nearby Calhoun School had said it could take many of them, but it did not have room for everyone and some parents knew little about the school.


Times Co. Says Its Income Dropped 79% in 3d Quarter
The New York Times Company reported yesterday that net income in the third quarter fell 79 percent, to $1.9 million, or 3 cents a share, from $9.2 million, or 12 cents a share, for the third quarter of 1990.
Revenue for the quarter dropped 6.5 percent, to $393.4 million from $420.7 million.


The Founder's Grandson Gives to Rockefeller U.
Rockefeller University has received $20 million from David Rockefeller, who said the gift reflected his "absolute confidence" in Dr.
David Baltimore, the university president whose appointment last year created turmoil on campus when some faculty members opposed it.
Mr.
Rockefeller's gift, the largest ever received by the university, was announced yesterday to trustees and members of the University Council.
It was among several gifts announced, bringing to $40.4 million the total given or pledged since Dr.
Baltimore became president on July 1, 1990.


Review/Fashion; In Paris, a Look of Adventure
The frills of brazen saloon girls in the American Wild West, the full-blown glamour of 1940's Hollywood and the sensual heat of the Caribbean were among the approaches taken by adventurous French designers in the early showings here for spring.


Study Calls for Effort to Limit Rockets' Pollution
Rocket exhaust poses a real but relatively small threat to atmospheric quality and the ozone layer, and an international effort should be undertaken to reduce their environmental impact, a new study has found.
The study, made public today, was the result of a workshop last summer that brought together scientists, environmentalists, regulators and aerospace industry representatives.
It concluded that rockets blasting into space generate pollutants that deplete stratospheric ozone, increase acid rain, contribute to global warming and reduce air quality.


Men's Wear Executives Promoted at Hartmarx
The Hartmarx Corporation this week promoted Homi Patel to chairman of its men's apparel group from president, and Kenneth Hoffman to president of the group from executive vice president.
The group contains the company's men's apparel manufacturing and marketing subsidiaries.
Hartmarx, based in Chicago, operates specialty stores nationwide, including Wallachs in New York, Frank Brothers in Texas and 136 Kuppenheimer Men's Clothiers in 29 states.
It makes men's and women's apparel for its own stores and for other stores.


Review/Theater; A One-Man Chronicle Of Columbus's Discovery
As a writer and performance artist, Guillermo Gomez-Pena seeks to identify and correct injustices committed against Hispanic people since the time of Christopher Columbus.
In his play "1991 (A Performance Chronicle of the Rediscovery of America by the Warrior for Gringo stroika)," he says that Columbus "arrived in America without papers" and should have been deported.
This is one of the sharper comments in his show, part of the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
In keeping with his self-characterization, Mr.
Gomez-Pena takes a militant stance on a variety of ethnocentric issues.
He is filled with attitude but proves to be a wavering communicator of his own grievances.
Even on its own kaleidoscopic terms, his play is fragmentary.
It is a series of broad impersonations, played against an eclectic background of recorded Spanish music.
As a performer of his own work, he seems to have a limited range, in contrast to such monologuists as Eric Bogosian and John Leguizamo, who can populate an entire stage with their chameleonesque personalities.


Barnard Dorm Is Dedicated To Iphigene Ochs Sulzberger
A residence for Barnard College students was dedicated yesterday to the late Iphigene Ochs Sulzberger, who had a 75-year attachment to the college as an undergraduate, alumna, trustee and benefactor.
"Barnard was her first love and it is here her memories should rest," said her son, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the publisher of The New York Times, at the dedication of the 17-story red brick residence hall designed by James Stewart Polshek.


Groups Are Critical Of Honda Commercial
A new Honda television commercial, which uses time-lapse photography to show a rain forest sprouting around a Honda Civic VX, has been criticized by advocacy groups for supposedly presenting a misleading pro-environmental statement.


Collision of Jets While Taxiing Is Called Puzzle
Investigators said yesterday that it might take months to determine why two jetliners brushed into each other on Wednesday night at Newark international Airport.
Twenty-three people suffered minor injuries in the accident, in which the wing of one plane became embedded in the fuselage of the other.
Frank J. Loprano, deputy chief of operations for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, said the accident involved two planes that had just landed: an American Airlines MD-80 from Raleigh-Durham, N.C., and a Continental 737 from Pittsburgh.
A total of 169 people were on the planes.


Market Place; Brokerage Stocks Signal Caution
AFTER almost five years of recession, life appears to be returning to Wall Street.
The flood of job cutbacks has slowed to a trickle.
Bouncing off one of their worst years ever, many investment houses are reporting record earnings.
And the stocks of virtually all of the publicly traded brokerages have climbed in recent weeks.
And that's why some people are worried.


Critic's Notebook; In Celebrity Biographies, More Is Less
WHAT did Madonna
really
have for breakfast on the morning after her marriage to Sean Penn?
According to "Madonna Revealed" by Douglas Thompson (Birch Lane Press), it was strawberries and cream.
Mr.
Thompson bases this upon the testimony of a hotel chambermaid who claims the Penns offered her a beer and they all shared a nuptial toast.
But Christopher Andersen, author of "Madonna Unauthorized" (Simon &amp; Schuster), says it was raspberries.
And his witness is the room-service waiter, one of several who drew lots for the privilege of delivering Madonna's meal.
Upon entering her room, the waiter noticed that Madonna was reading a book.
When he congratulated her on her marriage, he reports, she said "Thank you." By the bottom-scraping standards of today's celebrity biography genre, this passes for news.


Dinkins, in a Shift, Is Paying His Own Way to South Africa
Reversing his earlier position that he would not contribute to the cost of his trip to South Africa next month, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he had donated $5,000 to pay his own way.
But because money for the trip is being raised by a nonprofit city-controlled entity, the New York City Business Assistance Corporation, Mr.
Dinkins will be able to claim a tax deduction, as will the city commissioners, business people and news organizations paying to join him on the trip Nov. 10.


Luby's Delay On Earnings
The earnings report for the 1991 fiscal year and fourth quarter for Luby's Cafeterias Inc. has been delayed because of the shooting deaths of 22 patrons on Wednesday in a crowded Luby's restaurant here, the company said today.
The company, based in San Antonio, had planned to announce the financial results after a directors meeting at the company on Wednesday.
But the gathering dissolved after Ralph (Pete) Erben, the president and chief executive, was told of the shootings.


Critic's Choice/Dance


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the California economy misstated Wells Fargo &amp; Company's earnings and provision for loan losses in the third quarter.
Earnings totaled $86 million, down 47 percent from $163 million, and the provision was $200 million, not $350 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
In a disturbing inflation report, consumer prices climbed 0.4 percent in September, the biggest increase since January, the Government reported.
Prices for food and energy, which have been restraining the inflation rate for much of 1991, were two of the main factors pushing the index up.  [ Page A1. ]  Americans who receive Social Security benefits will get a 3.7 percent increase.  [ A10. ]
The U.S. trade deficit swelled in August, after shrinking sharply in the first half of 1991.  [ D1. ]


High Season for Antiques
This weekend in Manhattan is for those who now yearn for then.
Bibelots from Britain?
Those are at an international dealers show, on Park Avenue.
And there is Americana on the Hudson, at a fair on Pier 92.
Details, C28.


German Lawmakers Back Steps to End Spy Taint
Germany's principal political parties, faced with evidence that some of their active members had collaborated with the former East German secret police for years, have agreed that the backgrounds of all 662 members of Parliament should be checked.
The background checks will be voluntary, and one official guessed that about 550 of the members would submit to them.


2d Arrest in Bias Attack
A second man was arrested yesterday in what the police said was a bias attack last Saturday night on a black teen-ager in the Gravesend section of Brooklyn.
The suspect was identified as Frank Zollo, 21 years old, of 1937 East 14th Street, Brooklyn.
Another suspect, Joseph Dorino, of 2563 East Sixth Street, Brooklyn, was arrested on Wednesday.
The men, who are both white, were charged with assault.
The police said as many as 20 white youths attacked four black youths.
One victim was hospitalized with a razor wound.


Long-Term Rates Are Up Sharply
Long-term interest rates rose sharply yesterday, as investors dumped large amounts of Treasury securities after an unexpectedly bad inflation report was released by the Government.
In fact, the selloff began minutes before consumer price data were released by the Bureau of Labor Statistics at 8:30 A.M., Eastern daylight time.
That led some traders to voice suspicions that the contents of the report had been leaked.


Traffic Alert
Broadway Street Fair: The west side of Broadway will be closed tomorrow between 86th and 96th Streets from 8 A.M. to 8 P.M.


The Water Main Break; Venice-on-42d-Street Maroons New Yorkers
The fragile, unspoken bargain that New Yorkers make with their environment -- that getting around town has its share of headaches, that the quickest way between two places is not necessarily a straight line, that roadblocks and reroutings can be endured with stoicism and a stiff upper lip -- was tested beyond all reason yesterday.
Even by the sardine-can standards of New York, yesterday was a disaster.
Dr.
Irwin Weisbuch knew it was not going to be easy the moment that he and his 11-year-old daughter, Tammy, walked out of their apartment building on East End Avenue at 83d Street.
It was 7:10 A.M.
He had a 7:30 meeting at Beth Israel Medical Center, at First Avenue and 16th Street.
She was due at school shortly after 8.
It was slow going.
It took them 45 minutes to go four blocks on the 86th Street bus.
Dr.
Weisbuch gave up on his meeting.
On subway lines that were running, it was standing-room only.
On lines that were not, confused-looking commuters emerged from the underground, clutching transfer slips for already overloaded buses that limped up and down avenues, shock absorbers straining under all that weight.
"Let them in," commanded the driver of an M16 bus on Lexington Avenue.
"The more, the merrier."
The people on the bus, crushed together shoulder to shoulder and wet from the afternoon rain, had had it.
"Tell the bus driver not to let anyone else in," one passenger pleaded.
"We can't fit."
It was a day when people who think they have it easy, who boast about their speedy trips at cocktail parties, found things nasty, brutish and anything but short.
At noon on Central Park West and on Columbus Avenue, where taxis usually whiz along, converging in twos or threes when someone tries to hail just one, the traffic was going nowhere fast.
"It's bumper-to-bumper everywhere," said Thanh Thach, a taxi driver whose cab was creeping along Fifth Avenue at noon.
"East Side, West Side, it's like we're having rush hour all day." Crowds and Confusion
The tie-ups and the anguish soon spread beyond the flooded, buckled pavement of East 42d Street.
Subway platforms in Queens and Brooklyn jammed as commuters were forced to find new ways into Manhattan.
Moshe Politis, a system sales representative at the Computer Factory, on Lexington Avenue at 47th Street, ended up on an A train from Queens and had to switch to an F train at West Fourth Street.
He rode that one to Rockefeller Center and then walked across town.
"I was only 45 minutes late," he said.
Confusion complicated other odysseys.
"The problem with the subway service is that they don't give you much information," said Berry O'Donovan, a 36-year-old property manager from Park Slope who was trying to get to her East 86th Street office, "and it's not understandable when they do."
Things were not much better in the suburbs: the backups backed up far beyond where they usually do.
The Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive clogged up, clogging roads that feed into it.
That left drivers on the Cross Westchester Expressway, who pride themselves on knowing how to beat any backup, with no choice: there were delays on the Major Deegan Expressway and the Saw Mill River Parkway.
And what about going the other way, from Manhattan to Queens?
"I don't know how I'm going to get there -- I may have to walk," said Al Tripoli, an engineering manager who arrived at Grand Central on a train from Brewster, N.Y., and was headed across the East River to Long Island City, Queens.
Innocence Proclaimed
In the Times Square subway station, people lined up at pay phones.
They spoke many languages -- English, Spanish, Korean and Hindi -- but everything they said was a variation on a single theme: this time they really did have a good excuse.
One woman with a briefcase explained her situation in English: "I'm going to be late. There's been a water main break."
Transit Authority workers in orange vests directed the larger-than-usual crowds.
"It's not us this time," the station manager, Kevin Berry, told one woman.
And then, shouting into his bullhorn, he offered a bit of advice as straightforward as any that Ann Landers or Dear Abby ever proffered.
"Bus service is horrendous at this time," he said.
"It is best to walk across town."


Abroad at Home; Slash And Burn
There is a lot of talk, from President Bush among others, about the need to reform the Senate confirmation process for nominees to the Supreme Court.
But there is not likely to be any reform.
The reason is not hard to understand.
The conservatives who dominate the Republican Party today like the process as it is.
They have made it a test of ruthlessness, and at that they win.
They are masters of attack and smear, of slash and burn, and they have utterly intimidated the Democratic majority in the Senate.
Why should they change?


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Clark Oil and Refining Corp., 60 percent of which is owned by the Horsham Corp. of Toronto, has filed for $200 million of debt, including $100 million in senior unsecured fixed-rate notes and $100 million in senior unsecured floating-rate notes, both due 2001, through Goldman, Sachs.


Portrait of Texas Killer: Impatient and Troubled
At 5:30 Wednesday morning, the last day of his troubled life, George J. Hennard walked into a convenience store here and bought a sausage and biscuit sandwich, orange juice, a candy bar, a newspaper and a pack of Old Fashioned Dunkers doughnuts.
He had been buying breakfast at the store six mornings a week for months, but Wednesday there was something different about the darkly handsome son of a former Army doctor.


Humphrey Decides To Suit Up Anyway
After two 1,000-yard seasons, Denver Broncos running back BOBBY HUMPHREY figured he was worth more than the $315,000 he was scheduled to make this year under the third year of his four-year contract.
When he pointed this out to Denver officials on the first day of training camp, they pointed out that the club had a policy against renegotiating contracts under pressure and Humphrey pointed out that if they didn't believe he was leaving they could count the days he was gone.


The Thomas Confirmation; Bush Says He Would Have Favored Closed Sessions
President Bush said today that he thought the Senate Judiciary Committee should have met privately to examine sexual harassment accusations against Judge Clarence Thomas rather than have the "graphic detail" of the charges broadcast around the country.
The President also predicted that Judge Thomas would prove to be an "independent Justice" on the Supreme Court who "is going to surprise some who think they know exactly where he stands on every single social issue."


Davis Pratt, 68, Dies; Photography Curator
Davis Pratt, the associate curator of photographs at the Fogg Art Museum of Harvard University and a senior lecturer on fine arts at the university, died on Monday in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 68 years old.
He died of cancer, said his son, Samuel.


Spurs Center Ailing
A case of the shingles, a painful skin irritation caused by a flare-up of a dormant chicken pox virus, has sidelined San Antonio Spurs center DAVID ROBINSON.
Team officials said they didn't know if Robinson would play in tonight's exhibition game against Detroit. (AP)


Canyon de Chelly Journal; Putting Up an Exit Sign for Vehicles in Wonderland
A two-and-a-half-ton truck bounces along a dry riverbed, its insistent engine shattering the morning calm.
The military-style vehicle is carrying tourists through Canyon de Chelly National Monument, a wonderland of soaring red rock canyons dotted with ruins of prehistoric Indian dwellings.
Visitors have long explored the deepest reaches of this majestic park in tour trucks or in their own four-wheel-drive vehicles.
It is a rich journey that includes close-up views of Mummy Cave, ancient ruins tucked beneath a 1,000-foot-high canyon wall.
The site, which gets its name from two mummified bodies that were found in the cave, is attributed to the Anasazi Indians, who lived here until the late 13th century.


Promising Courtship in the Pacific
Tokyo and Moscow are moving ever so gingerly to settle their longstanding territorial dispute, and that should suit Washington just fine.
The territory at issue, inhospitable islands in the Kurile chain north of Japan, were seized by the Soviets at the end of World War II.
Their return would do much to thaw Japanese-Soviet relations, still frozen in cold war antagonism.
Deft diplomacy by both sides has removed some stumbling blocks.
Japan has astutely offered the Soviets $2.5 billion in aid and credits, even though Moscow has not finally agreed to return the islands.
That unlinks the issues of territory and aid, and spares Moscow the embarrassment of appearing to conduct a fire sale of the Soviet Union's assets.


Dollar Falls in U.S. Trading After Some Gains Abroad
The dollar finished lower against most leading currencies in domestic trading yesterday after posting some gains overseas.
Gold prices rose, with gold for current delivery gaining $1.80 an ounce to close at $360 on the Commodity Exchange in New York.
Later, the Republic National Bank of New York quoted an after-hours bid of $360 an ounce, up $2.30 from Wednesday.


Pirates Get 8 Innings to Wonder What Went Wrong
The top of the first inning decided Game 7.
The bottom of the first inning capsulized the entire National League Championship Series.
And so the subsequent eight innings served more than anything else as a kind of decompression chamber for the Pirates, a couple of hours during which they could reflect on what once more had gone wrong in their bid to reach the World Series.


After 87 Years of Change, Some Water Mains Remain
When work crews laid a 20-inch cast-iron water main into 42d Street between Park and Lexington Avenues in 1904, New York was a very different place.
Horse-drawn carriages shuttled the well-to-do around town.
The city's first subway line was about to open.
Then everything changed. Except the pipe.
Steam pipes, telegraph wires, sewers, telephone wires and electrical and television cables elbowed their way under the street and around the water main.


Vladimir Viardo Cancels
The pianist Horacio Gutierrez will replace Vladimir Viardo as soloist with the Pittsburgh Symphony on Sunday at 3 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The program remains unchanged: Mussorgsky's "Night on Bald Mountain," Tchaikovsky's Piano Concerto No. 1 in B flat minor, and Dvorak's Symphony No. 7, under the direction of Lorin Maazel.
Remaining tickets are $14 to $28.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Treasury Official Rebukes Japan
In a remarkable display of the strained relations between the United States and Japan, a senior American official today entered the Finance Ministry, the citadel of bureaucratic power, and delivered a slashing attack on Japan's financial regulation.
He charged the ministry with permitting a host of anticompetitive practices in the financial markets and of issuing regulations in obscure ways that made them opaque to outsiders.


Corrections
Because of an editing error a brief report in Business Day yesterday about the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation's third-quarter earnings misstated the revenues for the period and the percentage change.
Revenues fell 5.2 percent, to $1.1 billion from $1.16 billion, not 13 percent, to $1 billion from $1.15 billion.


Heavies Punching To Please
The last time Ray Mercer fought, back in January, Francesco Damiani, the World Boxing Organization heavyweight champion, gave him a boxing lesson through eight rounds.
Wherever Mercer turned, Damiani's punches landed.
Then in the ninth round, with one punch -- an uppercut that broke Damiani's nose -- Mercer turned the night upside down.
Damiani, who said the punch hit him on the tip of the nose, dropped to the canvas amid a puddle of blood and was counted out.


People
*
Joel Baumwoll, 51 years old, has been named president of Audits and Surveys Inc., New York, a marketing research firm.
He had previously been a managing partner at Baumwoll &amp; Tannen Associates, New York.


China Bars U.N. Warning to Khmer Rouge
China blocked the United States and the other permanent Security Council members today from issuing a statement warning the Khmer Rouge to stop trying to force Cambodian refugees back into areas of the country it controls to obtain their votes in planned elections.
The statement was also intended to encourage Thailand to do more to keep the Communist guerrilla group out of refugee camps that are located just inside its border with Cambodia, and to prevent the refugees from returning home without United Nations protection.


Solomon Simonson, Educator, 76; Founded Communications Center
Solomon S. Simonson, an educator whose diverse life included work as a rabbi, lawyer, actor and writer, died on Tuesday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, N.Y.
He was 76 years old.
Mr. Simonson, who lived in Suffern, died of cancer, his family said.


Review/Photography; Bolstering Narrative Qualities With Whimsy
The delightful if somewhat uneven exhibition of Duane Michals's recent images at the Sidney Janis Gallery offers further evidence, if any were needed, of Mr.
Michals's importance and singularity in contemporary photography.
For those who have not had the opportunity to smile at Mr.
Michals's brand of whimsy or to wince at his sometimes saccharine sentimentality, this show can serve as a worthy introduction to his work.
For more than 20 years, Mr.
Michals has tried to extend the narrative qualities of photography, and this exhibition includes examples of the various formats he has used to that end.
There are the narrative sequences of images, resembling movie storyboards or the image-cycles popular in Victorian photography, for which he first achieved renown in the late 1960's.
Also to be found here are the individual black-and-white photographs with quirky commentaries attached, which he has increasingly come to rely on.
In recent years, Mr.
Michals has also begun to paint more or less realistic images of fruits, flowers and the like on top of photographs, and several portraits done in this manner are included here as well.


Dow Slips 8.72, Ending 5-Day Rally
After scaling new peaks on Wednesday, stocks finished down yesterday, as falling bond prices and disappointing earnings halted the market's five-day rally.
The Dow Jones industrial average slipped 8.72 from Wednesday's record to 3,053, and the New York Stock Exchange composite was off by 0.25 to close at 215.80.


16 People Are Killed in Train Collision in France


Early-Music Ensembles
Two early-music ensembles, Medieval Strings and Anonymous 4, are to open the 17th season of the Music Before 1800 series on Sunday at 4 P.M. at Corpus Christi Church, 529 West 121st Street in Manhattan.
The concert, called "O Virgo Splendens: Iberian music of the High Middle Ages," is to include music from 12th- through 14th-century Spain and Portugal.
Tickets are $12.
Information: (212) 666-0675.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Home Section yesterday about efforts to give landmark status to tract houses in Levittown, L.I., referred incorrectly in some copies to the people shown outside 49 Hill Lane.
They were Lillian Leahy, right, owner of the house, and Lynne Matarrese and Joshua Soren of the Levittown Historical Society.


Hungarians Open Hearts and Homes to Yugoslavs
Ever since the shooting started across the border in the breakaway Yugoslav republic of Croatia, only a few miles away, there have been refugees living in Maria Szende's one-story house a block from the Danube River.
Once in August, when the fighting was particularly fierce, she had 19 in all, including one with a heart ailment who slept on the floor under the piano.


Diner's Journal
A New Sunday Gospel Brunch
Tatou, the restaurant and nightclub at 151 East 50th Street in Manhattan, has begun a Sunday gospel brunch.
The $19.50 brunch and show is put on by Lola Bell, who held rollicking gospel brunches at the Manhattan restaurant Lola, at 30 West 22d Street.
Miss Bell is no longer associated with Lola, although gospel brunches continue there.
Tatou reservations: (212) 753-1144.
Turnips and Cabbage for the Prudent
The frugality bug has bitten in the most unexpected place.
At the sumptuous Quilted Giraffe, in the A.T. &amp; T. arcade at Madison Avenue near 56th Street, a signature dish is beggar's purses, a tongue-in-cheek appetizer of crepes holding sevruga caviar, tied in bundles and garnished with gold leaf (a $50 supplement to the $75 dinner menu; $45 at lunch).
A new tidbit on the menu is called recession purses, the same crepes filled with turnips and cabbage, and no gold leaf.
They come with strips of marinated sirloin of beef, and no supplement.
Telephone: (212) 593-1221.
The Changing Scene
OPEN: Armando Orsini, a veteran of the restaurant scene in Manhattan, whose last establishment, Orsini, on East 63d Street, closed two years ago, is back in business.
His new venture, called Orsinini, at 227 East 50th Street, has only 18 tables and serves a blend of classic and contemporary Italian cuisine.
Telephone: (212) 750-5315 . . .
Four Winds, a Japanese restaurant at 135 East 62d Street in Manhattan, (212) 486-1664.
NEW HOURS: Le Madri, at 168 West 18th Street in Manhattan, (212) 727-8022, has begun Saturday and Sunday brunch from 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
The restaurant's new Sunday dinner hours are 5 to 10:30 P.M. for the regular menu, 10:30 to 11:30 P.M. for pizza. . . .
Starting Sunday, Union Square Cafe, 21 East 16th Street in Manhattan, (212) 243-4020, opens for Sunday dinner from 5 to 9:30 P.M.


Art in Review
Alex Katz Marlborough Gallery 40 West 57th Street Through Nov. 2
Alex Katz is best known for billboard-scaled portraits and figure paintings in which strong light, flat colors and robust yet unruffled paint surfaces have much to say.
Several of the new paintings at Marlborough continue this line of endeavor, most notably "Muna," a portrait of a woman who confronts the viewer, Sphinx-like, at several times life size, and "Chance," in which four women act out a beach scene with an air of artifice that is matched by a bright yellow background.


Jimmy Heath Comes Into His Own
Jimmy Heath is like a man who has just inherited a fortune.
After years of being overlooked, Mr.
Heath, who is 64 years old and one of jazz's finest saxophonists, is working more than he ever has.
And a concert tonight by the American Jazz Orchestra at Cooper Union, featuring a rare program of Mr.
Heath's orchestrations, should make clear to the uninitiated that the musician is one of the great arrangers of his generation, somebody familiar with be-bop, Gil Evans's translucent pieces and the beauty of Duke Ellington.
In addition, Mr.
Heath is happily ensconced at the Aaron Copland School of Music at Queens College, awaiting his tenure.
Things haven't always gone in his favor.
Mr.
Heath for a time was on the receiving end of a string of bad luck.
Though he had always been known among musicians and some critics as an immensely talented double threat, as both an improviser and composer, he narrowly missed the success he deserved, having fallen sick and dropped out of the music business at important points in his career.
Though it's 30 years too late, Mr.
Heath's reputation is now finally spreading out of the confines of the jazz world.


The Thomas Confirmation; Hill's Case Is Divisive To Women
Rebecca Moody, a 59-year-old retired secretary, watched the Anita F. Hill-Clarence Thomas drama on television and came away thinking "it's unbelievable that a woman couldn't stop something like that at its inception."
Tammie Lee, a 33-year-old worker at the House of Ruth, the shelter for battered women here, said: "I was harassed, and I nipped it in the bud; I stopped it right then and there. One guy said, 'I see you don't take any guff.' "


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 11
Oct. 4
Oct. 12
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
7.2
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
213.1
216.5
225.9
Distillate stocks
137.3
136.8
135.9
Crude imports, daily
5.8
5.4
5.0
Product imports, daily
1.7
2.5
1.3
Crude stocks
339.9
338.3
343.3
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
85.6
87.9
85.8
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Baker Fails to Get Israelis To End Peace-Talk Doubts
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d tried today to persuade Israel's leaders to drop their last remaining reservations about attending a proposed Middle East peace conference, but failed to reach a final agreement as Israel demanded tighter assurances that it will not end up in de facto negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
More talks were scheduled for Friday between Mr.
Baker and Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel, and between Mr.
Baker and Palestinian leaders from the Israeli-occupied territories.
The Secretary has decided to postpone his departure from Israel to Saturday, and did not rule out going back to Arab capitals.


Getting Smart About Sex
More than a million teen-agers get pregnant every year.
Sexually transmitted diseases are commonplace.
And the majority of Americans between 20 and 29 who have AIDS now were almost certainly infected in adolescence.
Educating children about sexuality and its implications is, quite literally, vital to their future.
Most parents support sex education.
But the gap between what they want and what schools deliver is wide, mainly because there's no agreement on what the curriculum should contain.


Nedda Casson Anders, Cookbook Writer, 70
Nedda Casson Anders, a publisher and writer who edited the first Weight Watchers cookbook, died on Wednesday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 70 years old, her family said, and lived in Manhattan and Tamarac, Fla.
Her son, Richard, said she died of cancer.


Smoltz Becomes The Young Reliable
There are not words, John Smoltz said, capable of capturing the depth of the depression he suffered from earlier in the season.
There was anxiety and anger, remorse and regret.
There were all sorts of words -- proper words, accurate words -- but no adequate words.
Worse, said the Atlanta Braves' right-hander, there was the worry that he might never find the words that could form an answer to his confusion and hurt.


Robinson Available
On the theory that former major league sluggers need former major league pitchers to keep them honest, Japanese teams might want to consider DON ROBINSON.
The 34-year-old right-hander, who had a 5-9 record with a 4.38 earned run average in 34 games with 16 starts for the San Francisco Giants this season, was released yesterday. (AP)


On Stage, and Off
Lining Up the Guys and Dolls
If you said Kevin Kline, you're wrong.
And it's not James Naughton, either.
Who will play the role of Sky Masterson in Jerry Zaks's Broadway revival of "Guys and Dolls" when it opens in the spring?
Bets are on Peter Gallagher, best known for his steamy bedroom scenes with Laura San Giacomo in "Sex, Lies and Videotape," and less well-remembered for his role in the ill-fated Harold Prince musical "A Doll's Life."


Art in Review
Jim Dine Pace Gallery 142 Greene Street SoHo Through Oct. 26
The exhibition of Jim Dine's newest paintings and sculptures displays, as usual, an impressive technical bravura.
Few artists proceed with the confidence of Mr.
Dine when it comes to laying paint on canvas or casting things in bronze, or when combining these two media, as when he paints on cast bronze heads or busts.
Mr.
Dine's technique is so developed that it amounts to the style that almost but not quite ties his disparate efforts together and obscures the basic hollowness of his art.


Art in Review
Rebecca Purdum Jack Tilton Gallery 24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Nov. 16
Rebecca Purdum has in recent years established herself as a painter to watch.
This show demonstrates her continued progress along the fine line between figuration and abstraction.
As before she pays great attention to qualities of light diffused through mists of color that recall the atmospheric scenes of Joseph Turner or the hovering forms of Mark Rothko.
Vague shapes appear beneath the rippling clouds of paint, recalling Monet's late images of the ponds at his home in Giverny.


Step Aside, Potvin: Coffey Breaks Two Records
This was the other game in town tonight, the National Hockey League instead of the baseball's National League, an early-season affair in counterpoint to the climactic finale of the playoff series for the pennant.
While the Pirates and the Braves played outdoors in nearby Three Rivers Stadium, the Penguins played host to the Islanders indoors at the Civic Arena.
On a team level, the Penguins took an 8-5 victory, their second in three nights over the Islanders.


'Neutral' vs. Aggressive Premature Baby Care; Parents Need Guidance
To the Editor:
As a mother of two premature children, I would like to comment on "Parents of Tiny Infants Find Care Choices Are Not Theirs" (Sept. 30).


No Rest for the Leery: Giants Focus on Skins
Ray Handley admitted today what every Giants fan has dared to contemplate:
"It becomes next to impossible to win the East Division if we don't win this game," the Giants' coach said.


Review/Art; At the Modern, Works Unafraid To Ignore Beauty
FOR those who still see art and the art museum as respite from the pressures and problems of everyday life, "Dis locations," the Museum of Modern Art's latest foray into the contemporary, is going to be hard to take, at least at first.
This exhibition, which is the first one organized by Robert Storr, the museum'snew curator of painting and sculpture, is devoted to challenging, discomforting installation pieces, created especially for the show.
The seven artists Mr.
Storr has selected represent a consciously varied mix of sex, race, generation and viewpoint, but are all well-known excavators of the substrata of late 20th-century life: the Americans Chris Burden, Louise Bourgeois, David Hammons, Bruce Nauman and Adrian Piper, the French artist Sophie Calle and the Russian Ilya Kabakov.


Let's Celebrate Our Trade Successes!
To the Editor:
"U.S. Tariff Appears to Backfire" (Business Day, Sept. 26) encourages me to express an opinion contrary to the perhaps unconscious bias of the article.


Mandelbaum Mooney Wins Shakey's Account
Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley, San Francisco, was awarded the $6 million advertising account of the Shakey's Inc. pizza chain of South San Francisco, Calif., after a review.
Ken Mandelbaum, the agency's president, said yesterday that the assignment reflected an attempt by Shakey's to keep from being buried by the advertising blitzes of its bigger rivals, Domino's and Pizza Hut.


Capital Cities' Net Off 24.7%
Capital Cities/ABC Inc., one of the nation's biggest media conglomerates, reported a 24.7 percent drop in third-quarter net income yesterday and attributed the poor results to weak advertising revenues.
The company earned $54 million, or $3.21 a share, for the period, down from $71.7 million, or $4.16 a share, a year earlier, Revenues were fairly steady at $1.209 billion, against $1.214 billion.


Nurses' Aides In Choke Case Get Jobs Back
Eight nurses' aides at Kings County Hospital who were suspended this month after the suffocation of a patient have been reinstated with pay at their union's request.
The aides were suspended on Oct. 3 after a state investigation found that Roger Wade, a 27-year-old prison inmate who had been taken to the Brooklyn hospital's psychiatric unit, was suffocated on the night of Sept. 1 while being restrained.
The aides have not been charged with a crime.


Auctions
Oriental Screens
Japanese and Korean screens are among the most important offerings in the auctions to be held next week at Christie's and Sotheby's in New York.
The escalation in value of Japanese screens began in the New York auctions in 1988 with a pair from the 16th century bringing $473,000 at Sotheby's.
That price eclipsed the previous auction record of $143,000, paid in 1985 for a 19th-century pair sold at Christie's.
Last year, a pair of 17th-century Japanese screens, depicting a panorama of Kyoto, rewrote the auction record when it brought $1.76 million.


What to See and When


Social Security Benefits to Go Up 3.7%
The 40 million Americans who receive Social Security benefits will get a 3.7 percent increase starting in January, the Government announced today.
That is the smallest cost-of-living adjustment in five years.
The increase, while smaller than those allowed from 1988 through this year, is larger than the increases from 1984 through 1987.


Wilkinson Fined Over False Ads
Wilkinson Sword Inc. was ordered to pay $953,000 in damages to its rival, the Gillette Company, because Wilkinson made false advertising claims about the superiority of its Ultra Glide razor.
The amount was decided by Federal District Judge Kimba M. Wood in Manhattan, who ruled in January that Wilkinson's Ultra Glide ads were false and misleading.
In her January decision, Judge Wood ordered Wilkinson to drop claims of "shaving smoothness superiority" of Ultra Glide compared with Gillette's Atra Plus system.


Administration Defends Mexico Trade Proposal
The Bush Administration said today that a North American free trade agreement would not lead significant numbers of American manufacturers to move operations across the Mexican border to escape environmental regulation.
In a draft report giving its first significant assessment of the environmental impact of a free trade accord, the Administration also argued that without a trade pact, air and water pollution might increase along the United States border with Mexico.


Eliot H. Benson, 62, A Securities Analyst
Eliot H. Benson, a securities analyst for 40 years, died on Tuesday at the Hospice of Northern Virginia in Arlington.
He was 62 years old and lived in Springfield, Va.
Mr. Benson died of cancer, his family said.


Restaurants
Hotel restaurants are capricious companions.
Often just as they reach their peaks something happens and the whole thing deflates, which is sort of like going to a terrific party where just as guests jump up to dance, the host feigns a headache and turns off the stereo.
The music has gone off (and on and then off again) at some of the better hotel dining rooms in town, among them the Peninsula, the Westbury, the Royalton and the Parker Meridien, to name a few.
And then there is Lafayette in the Swiss-owned Drake Swissotel on Park Avenue and 56th Street, which soared to four-star heights under its wunderkind chef Jean-Georges Vongerichten.
Mr.
Vongerichten remained a relatively long time -- four and a half years -- before leaving early this year to open his own restaurant in Manhattan, Jo Jo.
The hotel auditioned one replacement, but he lasted less than three months.
Then Lafayette closed for the summer.
Only hotels can afford to do that.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9
The Ukraine will not join a pact with other republics intended to create a free-market association in the Soviet Union.
Ukraine's opposition was not unexpected, but raised doubts about whether the separatist republics will ever be able to unify on economic matters.
Page A1
NATO announced nuclear arms cuts in response to President Bush's initiative.
The slashing of the alliance's nuclear arsenal in Europe by 80 percent means that in a few years, the NATO alliance will have only 700 nuclear warheads in Europe.
A3
Hungary is a haven for Yugoslavs fleeing the fighting in Croatia.
In one Hungarian border town, the Yugoslav refugees are one of a series of groups who have needed to take cover there during a flare-up in the region.
A1
Yugoslav army begins offensive and Croatians flee A8 East Germany's master spy, Markus Wolf, has returned to Germany after a one-year exile in Moscow.
Germans wonder just what secrets he will reveal and if he can be brought to trial for espionage and high treason.
A6
German lawmakers back steps to end spy taint A6
German study ties dioxin to cancer A7
Secretary Baker's talks with Israel failed to come to an agreement about whether Israel would attend a Middle East peace conference.
Israeli officials demanded tighter assurances that they would not end up in de facto negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
A8
Soviet Foreign Minister meets Israelis on peace conference A8
Two bombs kill 41 and injure 140 in India A3  National A10-18
The Consumer Price Index rose in September by four-tenths of a percent, the largest increase since January.
The rise was higher than generally expected and disturbed the markets and some analysts.
A1
A ban on semiautomatic guns and multiple-bullet gun clips was overwhelmingly rejected by the House.
The recent massacre in Texas hung over the debate, forcing those opposing the ban to point out that it would not have made the guns used in that massacre illegal.
A1
The man behind the Texas rampage that left 22 people dead in a cafeteria was described as an unfriendly loner.
Yet, the convenience store clerk who served George J. Hennard -- who killed himself after the killings -- said he seemed calm and almost friendly the day of the killings.
A14
Robert M. Gates's nomination is expected to receive support from a majority of the Senate Intelligence Committee.
The nomination as Director of Central Intelligence is then expected to be subject to intense debate by the full Senate.
A1
Washington Memo: Supreme Court aloofness from the political process is still prevalent although the many new appointments in the last decade -- as well as the recent confirmation battle of Judge Clarence Thomas -- have pierced this aura somewhat.
A12
Women divided over Anita F. Hill largely on the basis of class, interviews in Baltimore show.
Blue-collar women said they could not believe Professor Hill would not complain about the harassment at the time, while professional women said Professor Hill was believable.
A12
Bush says Senate should have met privately on Thomas A12
Social Security benefits will rise by 3.7 percent starting in January, the smallest cost-of-living adjustment in five years for the 40 million Americans receiving the payments.
A10
A hospital must continue life support for a near-comatose 13-year-old girl, even though it considers the treatment "abusive and inhumane," a judge in Atlanta ruled.
The judge said that because the parents disagree on the treatment, the hospital must keep the child alive.
A10
Hormones linked to bacteria growth A18
Genetics experts tell of possible abuse A18
Renewed Republican call for tax cut is led by Bush A18
Study calls for effort to limit rockets' pollution A18
Oklahoma school plan survives vote A10
A.T. &amp; T. loses $1.8 billion; other phone results mixed D1  Regional B1-5
Grand Central Terminal was flooded when an 87-year-old water main ruptured early in the morning and released several million gallons of water.
The water ruined a newly renovated subway station and plunged commuters into a snarl of flooded subway lines and pulverized asphalt.
A1
Much-abused New York commuters were packed into subway cars and transferred to already-overloaded buses as traffic slowed to halt in Manhattan and Queens.
Even by the sardine-can standards of New York City, the water main break was a disaster.
A1
Water mains suffer from expanding world underground B4
Around Grand Central, nothing ran but water B5
The capital improvements plan of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has fallen short of many goals because of poor planning and cost overruns, an Inspector General report says.
Still, the report says the 10-year, $16.5 billion program to upgrade New York's mass transit has led to major improvements.
B1
Eight suspended nurses' aides at Kings County Hospital were reinstated with pay at the request of their union.
The nurses' aides were suspended after the suffocation of a patient and have agreed to cooperate with an internal investigation, officials said.
B1
A suit against a fertility-drug maker was settled for an estimated $4.25 million.
The settlement paid by Eli Lilly &amp; Company to a woman who suffers from cancer and infertility because her mother took diethylstilbestrol, or DES, was believed to be the largest award in such a case.
B1
A private elementary school closed with 48 hours notice, leaving parents of children enrolled at the Fleming School on the Upper West Side in a quandary about where their children would finish their schooling.
B1
Barnard dorm is dedicated to Iphigene Ochs Sulzberger B2
Foreboding in Connecticut as state employees depart B2
Collision of jets while taxiing is called puzzling B2
D'Amato's rating falls to low in poll B2
Rockefeller University recieved a $20 million gift B3
Firefighter again makes her harassment charge B3
Mayor Dinkins to donate $5,000 to his trip to South Africa B3  Business Digest D1
Weekend
Who needs celebrity biographies?  C1
How to talk baseball C30
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
"The Baby Dance" C5
"1991," a Columbus chronicle C14
Film: At the Movies C8
Dance: Graham's Kabuki hommage C5
Art: Art without beauty C1
Duane Michals's photographs C32
Restaurants C22
Word and Image: "The Malaria Capers" C29
Law Page B16
Curb on trial lawyers' talk raises fairness issue
A question of ethics for a new judge  Obituaries B6
Tennessee Ernie Ford, singer
Emily Rosenthal, ex-director Of nursery School at 92d Street Y
Solomon Simonson, educator  Sports B7-13
Baseball: Twins pitchers pick up bats B7
Column: Vecsey on N.L. pennant finish B7
Football: Rutgers getting Jersey recruits B8
N.F.L. match-ups B13
Hockey: Messier says Nemchinov will be a key man B11  Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A30
The once and future C.I.A.
Courtship in the Pacific
Getting smart about sex
The Navy learns humility Letters A30
Anthony Lewis: Slash and burn A31
A. M. Rosenthal: The solitary voyager A31
Fay Weldon: Sex and paradox across the Atlantic A31
Floyd Abrams: A cleansing disclosure A31
Igor Malashenko: Behind Gorbachev's arms cutback A31


Oklahoma School Plan Survives Vote
An Oklahoma referendum to repeal a $574 million education improvement plan produced the state's largest turnout ever for a special election, but after months of nasty debate, the result of Tuesday's vote surprised many: the referendum was defeated.
The plan, which voters retained by a tally of 428,204 to 361,293, was seen by education analysts as a national litmus test of states' resolve to finance education improvements in a weak economy.
Although the plan survived the referendum, it created a maelstrom of debate.
A month before the vote, the offices of the Oklahoma Taxpayers Union, one of two statewide citizens' groups opposed to the education plan, was firebombed.


I.B.M. Introduces 'Multimedia' PC
I.B.M. showed its first "multimedia" personal computer, powered by an I.B.M.-made microprocessor that is faster than the Intel Corporation chip it replaces.
The International Business Machines Corporation introduced other products designed to mix video, sound and text on computers, including one that allows computer users to watch television in a small window on their screen.


Braves on Top of World and in the Series
Capping their rise from the trash heap of the National League, the Atlanta Braves tonight completed a unique World Series matchup of the first two teams to go from worst to first in one incredible season.
The Braves, who finished last in the Western Division for three successive seasons, knocked off the Pittsburgh Pirates, 4-0, in the seventh and final game of the championship series behind the six-hit pitching of John Smoltz.
The methodical victory catapulted them into the World Series against the Minnesota Twins, who finished last in the American League West last year.


Destrade Keeps Belting
Maybe it's something about the food or perhaps the manners of the opposing pitchers, but ORESTES DESTRADE, who didn't hit a single home run in 9 games with the Yankees in 1987 and 36 games with the Pirates in 1988, has fared a bit better in Japan.
When his season with the Seibu Lions ended yesterday, Destrade had won the Pacific League home run title for the second successive year, this time with 39.
He and another former major leaguer, JIM TRABER of the Kintetsu Buffaloes, tied for the runs batted in title with 92 each. (AP)


The Navy Learns Humility, and Doubt
Two and a half years after the explosion aboard the battleship Iowa that killed 47 sailors, the event remains a tragic mystery.
What changed dramatically on Wednesday was that the Navy acknowledged it could live with the mystery.
No closer to a definitive explanation, it announced that it had repudiated its original charge that one of the crewmen who died was responsible.
The evidence, some of it washed overboard as survivors cleaned up and attended to the dead and injured, remains bafflingly incomplete.
But Adm.
Frank Kelso, the Chief of Naval Operations, explained that the Navy now had more rigorous procedures for investigating and judging a disaster of that scope.


Wesley Hennessy, 77, Ex-Dean at Columbia
Wesley J. Hennessy, a former dean of the Columbia University School of Engineering and Applied Science, died on Oct. 8 at North Broward Medical Center in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He was 77 years old.
Mr.
Hennessy, a resident of Deerfield Beach, Fla., died of heart failure, his family said.


Sounds Around Town
Manhattan's Musical Past
Susannah McCorkle, Oak Room, Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-6800.
"Autumn in New York: A Celebration of the Great Singers and Songs of Manhattan," the sultry pop-jazz singer Susannah McCorkle's new show, is a meticulously researched history of pre-rock popular music in Manhattan that is as rich with historical lore as it is with good music.
Ms.
McCorkle pays tributes to singers ranging from Fanny Brice to Mabel Mercer, and the material runs from Rodgers and Hart ("Give It Back to the Indians") to Dave Frishberg ("Do You Miss New York?").
Shows are at 9:30 and 11:30 tonight and tomorrow.
There is a music charge of $25 and a $10 beverage minimum.
Freeman as Levant
"At Wit's End," Stan Freeman as Oscar Levant, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
George Gershwin's sidekick and champion Oscar Levant was a pungent wit and professional neurotic as well as a fine pianist.
As portrayed by Stan Freeman in his one-man show, written by Joel Kimmel and directed by Barbara Karp, Levant emerges as a funny if tormented misanthrope with few kind words for anyone except Gershwin.
Interwoven with the barrage of epigrams are performances of Gershwin pieces (including a superb "Rhapsody in Blue") and Levant's own songs (among them "Blame It on My Youth").
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 8:00 and 11, and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets are $35 tonight and tomorrow and $30 on Sunday, and there is a two-drink minimum.
Off the Bench
Ann Hampton Callaway, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Manhattan, (212) 244-3005.
In her new show, the singer, pianist and songwriter Ann Hampton Callaway, who has one of the richest and rangiest voices in cabaret, steps away from the piano to sing with a five-member band.
Half the show is devoted to original songs -- including her amusing showstopper "Too White to Sing the Blues Blues" -- and the other half to popular standards.
Shows are at 9 and 11 tonight and tomorrow.
Tickets are $15 ($25 ringside), and there is a two-drink minimum.


Fires in Northwest Destroy Homes and Kill 5 People


Alas, Braves' Smith Gets A Nick From Champagne
Clubhouse celebrations can be downright dangerous, and Lonnie Smith had the five stitches over his right eye to prove it.
Smith, the outfielder who will now play in the World Series for a fourth different team, was cut during the traditional melee to see how many bottles of champagne can be dumped over how many heads in the shortest period of time.


A Sketchy Portrait Of a Mass Murderer
As investigators tried to piece together a motive for the killing of 22 people in a Texas town, former acquaintances of the gunman described him in similar terms: "loner," "combative," "rude," "impatient," "troubled."


UKRAINE REFUSING TO JOIN AGREEMENT ON SOVIET ECONOMY
Demanding unhampered sovereignty, officials of the Ukraine announced today that they would not join other republics on Friday in signing a proposed new economic pact intended to create a free-market association from the shambles of the Soviet Union.
The resistance of the Ukraine, a critically important republic of 52 million people, had been clear for months.
But the warning from Kiev officials that the proposed agreement constitutes a threat to Ukrainian independence deepened the already considerable doubts that the separatist republics might ever be able to muster enough unity to forge a new economic association.


Corrections
Articles on Sept. 15 and Sept. 19 about Robert Helmick's resignation as president of the United States Olympic Committee misstated his public position on the Goodwill Games in Moscow in 1986.
Mr.
Helmick has recently pointed out in a letter to The Times that around the time the games were held, he made several public statements supporting them.


GERMAN STUDY TIES DIOXIN TO CANCER
Exposure to high levels of dioxin-laced herbicides substantially increased the rate of cancer deaths among workers at a German chemical plant, a new study has found.
The study, being published in tomorrow's issue of The Lancet, a British medical journal, is the latest round in a continuing debate about the relative toxicity of dioxin, an environmental contaminant.
Research has indicated that even small doses cause cancer in laboratory animals.
The issue of dioxin toxicity for humans, however, has been hotly contested amid ambiguous or conflicting research results.


U.S. Pressed By Business Over S.E.C.
One of the nation's most powerful corporate interest groups, the Business Roundtable, has been meeting with senior Administration officials to bypass the Securities and Exchange Commission in trying to prevent new rules for corporate shareholder battles.
The meetings, which were disclosed today by H. Brewster Atwater Jr., chairman and chief executive of General Mills Inc. and the head of a key Business Roundtable task force, showed how high the stakes have become in the battle over the new rules.


SOVIET AIDE MEETS ISRAELIS ON TALKS
Like a junior partner in a multinational business deal, the Soviet Foreign Minister, Boris D. Pankin, met with Israeli officials today to express Moscow's interest in having a Middle East peace conference convened.
Mr.
Pankin did not hand the Israelis the one carrot he has to lure them to the peace table: restoration of diplomatic relations that were severed during the 1967 Middle East war.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Barnett Banks Inc., Jacksonville, Fla., will acquire CSX Commercial Services Inc., the education finance servicing business of CSX Corp., Richmond.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Fries Entertainment Inc., Los Angeles, a producer of television movies and other programming, has filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.


Honors
*
The Art Directors Club, New York, will induct four more members into its Hall of Fame tonight: Bob Gill, a graphic designer; Bob Giraldi, a creative director and film director; the late Bea Feitler, a graphic designer, and the late Richard Hess, a graphic designer and illustrator.
The late Jim Henson, creator of the Muppets, will be honored with a special award.


CHRONICLE
NAOMI B. LEVINE thought something was going to happen Wednesday evening when she was summoned to the apartment of L. JAY OLIVA, president-elect of New York University.
But she had no idea that 100 people would be there to celebrate the publication by New York University Press of her book, "Politics, Religion &amp; Love." Ms.
Levine worked on the book for seven years.


Emily Rosenthal, 98, Ex-Director Of Nursery School at 92d Street Y
Emily M. Rosenthal, the director of the 92d Street Y nursery school from 1946 to 1966, died yesterday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 98 years old.
Miss Rosenthal, who lived in the Salvation Army Williams Residence in Manhattan, died of respiratory failure, her family said.


Sports of The Times; Pirates Crossing Sad Bridge
Just outside Three Rivers Stadium is the stone base of an old bridge, now long gone.
When the New York Mets first came out here in 1962, the bridge had already been abruptly terminated over the Ohio River; Casey Stengel called it "the Bridge to Nowhere" and said it was a symbol of his team.


U.S. Says Milken Admitted At Least One Other Crime
Michael R. Milken, the former financier who pleaded guilty last year to six felonies related to illegal trading activities, has admitted committing at least one additional crime and having knowledge of several other instances of wrongdoing, a Government document disclosed yesterday.
The Government's disclosure came as Mr.
Milken's lawyers filed a motion yesterday seeking a reduction in his prison sentence.
Portions of the documents filed by both sides were under seal, with the Government arguing that the information was part of continuing investigations.


Foreboding in Connecticut As State Employees Depart
About 1 percent of the state's public employees turned off the lights and walked out the door today, laid off from jobs to which they may never return.
It was the single largest exodus since Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. announced the first of more than 3,700 layoffs in late September, and by far the most departures in one day since the state's budget troubles began several years ago.
By the close of business on Friday, at least 545 people who had jobs when the week began will be facing unemployment, out of a work force of about 45,000.
Most are secretaries, clerks and typists, including the entire four-member secretarial pool at the University of Connecticut School of Nursing, which formally disbanded as of 4 P.M.


Braves, Twins in Series


Fujisankei of Japan Sets A Hollywood Film Unit
The Fujisankei Communications Group said today that it would follow other large Japanese companies into the movie business, but with a twist.
Fujisankei, which owns Japan's most-watched television network and publishes newspapers, books and magazines, said it would become the first major Japanese company to establish its own Hollywood production company and directly manage the creative and financial aspects of making movies for the United States and foreign markets.


Corrections
Two picture captions in Business Day yesterday with an article about Rolls-Royce P.L.C. were reversed in some copies.
The picture on the front page of Business Day, of a man not wearing a suit jacket, was Charles J. Cuddington, the head of marketing at Rolls-Royce's civil aircraft engine unit; the man pictured on the continued portion of the article was Sir Ralph Robins, the company's chief executive.


A.T.&amp;T. Loses $1.8 Billion; Other Phone Results Mixed
A.T.&amp; T. and MCI, the nation's top long-distance companies, yesterday reported slow third-quarter revenue growth, with a huge loss at A.T.&amp; T. because of one-time charges and an earnings gain at MCI.
Three of the regional Bell operating companies reported mixed results, with profits off at Nynex and up at BellSouth and Southwestern Bell.
Analysts said A.T.&amp; T.'s performance was surprisingly strong, despite the reported net loss of $1.8 billion.
The loss was entirely attributable to previously reported one-time charges, mostly related to its acquistion of the NCR Corporation.
MCI apparently gained a small amount of market share in the quarter, analysts said, but at the expense of smaller competitors.
The weak economy was apparent in both the volume of calling and the rate of new line installation reported by the three "Baby Bells." "From a telephone industry perspective, the recession is still with us," said Joel Gross, who follows the companies for Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Following are the details of the companies' results: A.T.&amp; T.
One-time charges resulting from the takeover of NCR reduced net income for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in the quarterby nearly $2.65 billion, producing a net loss of $1.8 billion, compared with combined profits for the two companies of $803 million, or 62 cents a share, a year ago.
Combined revenues rose 1.2 percent, to more than $11.04 billion, from $10.91 billion in the third quarter of 1990.
Nearly all of A.T.&amp; T.'s operating profits for the quarter came from the telephone business.
The company's third-quarter net profits from what it owned before acquiring NCR rose 13.5 percent, to $808 million, from $712 million a year ago.
About a fourth of that improvement was attributable to a one-time gain on the sale of Sun Microsystems stock.
The rest came from strong operating revenues, including improved product and service margins.
By contrast, NCR's operating earnings were just $40 million on revenues of $1.38 billion, compared with $91 million on sales of $1.53 billion a year ago.
A.T.&amp; T. attributed the decline to "general softness" in computer markets and the negative impact of a stronger dollar.
"The good news in all these numbers is the continuing strength of A.T.&amp; T.'s long-distance business and the strong actions we're taking for future earnings growth," said Robert E. Allen, A.T.&amp; T.'s chairman and chief executive.
Phone service sales rose 5.1 percent, to $5.24 billion, on volume growth of 6.5 percent.
The company said that "800" numbers, WATS services and international and residential calling led the growth.
Product and systems sales declined 5.5 percent, to $3.81 billion, from 1990's third quarter, mostly because of a 17.3 percent decline in computer sales to $818 million.
Analysts believe A.T.&amp; T., which is estimated to have between 63 and 65 percent of the long-distance market, has maintained that share.
A.T.&amp; T.'s write-off will include the severance costs for 14,000 employees to be laid off by the beginning of 1994.
A.T.&amp; T. shares fell 12.5 cents yesterday, to $39, on the New York Stock Exchange.
MCI
The MCI Communications Corporation earned $133 million, or 51 cents a share, in the third quarter, compared with a loss of $176 million in the 1990 period, when the company took a one-time charge of $550 million for modernization of its network.
The Washington-based long-distance company's revenues were $2.15 billion, up 7.5 percent from $2 billion a year ago.
The revenue gains came on a 12.4 percent increase in calling volume in the last year.
Excluding the impact of last year's special charge, MCI's third-quarter operating earnings in 1990 would have been $334 million, nearly 22 percent higher than the $274 million reported yesterday for the recently completed quarter.
That gap highlights how heavily MCI has been spending on programs to build market share, particularly a promotion gives 20 percent discounts to customers who create a personal circle of telephone contacts, all using MCI.
Marketing and operations expenses for the recent quarter were $645 million, up 21 percent from a year ago.
MCI's shares lost $3, to $27.125, in over-the-counter trading.
The trading reflected, in addition to earnings, a report that I.B.M. was exploring the potential private sale of its $400 million in MCI preferred stock.
I.B.M. said last night that the possible sale does not represent a loss of confidence in MCI.
Nynex
The Nynex Corporation said that it earned $291.8 million, or $1.44 a share, in the quarter, down 1.7 percent from $296.7 million, or $1.50 a share, last year.
Revenues for the White Plains, N.Y.-based parent of New York Telephone and New England Telephone fell 3.5 percent, to $3.27 billion, from $3.39 billion a year ago.
Nynex's operating income actually rose 3.3 percent, to $600.2 million, from $580.9 million a year ago, but that increase did not compensate for a $24 million rise in taxes and interest expenses.
Operating expenses were $2.67 billion, down nearly 5 percent from $2.81 billion a year ago.
Nynex is currently in the midst of a program to reduce both its hourly and managerial work forces.
A one-time charge for the cost of the program will be estimated and taken against earnings in the current quarter, the company said yesterday.
Nynex's shares rose 12.5 cents, closing at $75.875 on the New York Stock Exchange.
BellSouth
The BellSouth Corporation, based in Atlanta, said net income fell 12.5 percent, to $352.4 million, or 73 cents a share, from $402.9 million, or 84 cents a share, a year ago.
But the current quarter included $42.9 million in one-time charges for an early-retirement program and another $11.4 million charge stemming from accounting changes in the company's cellular telephone operations.
Without the one-time charges, earnings were essentially unchanged from a year ago.
Revenues rose 2.3 percent, to $3.63 billion, from $3.55 billion a year ago.
The number of access lines rose 2.9 percent, to 513,000, in the the last year.
BellSouth said that continuing rate reductions, a weak economy, competition and the costs of its rapidly expanding investment in cellular and paging services affected its earnings.
On the Big Board, BellSouth stock fell 37.5 cents, to $46.875.  Southwestern Bell
The Southwestern Bell Corporation said that net income for the quarter rose 12.2 percent, to $363.1 million, or $1.21 a share, from $323.6 million, or $1.08 a share, a year ago.
The strong income gain came despite an increase of just more than 2 percent in revenues, to $2.42 billion, from $2.37 billion in the 1990 period.
"Strengthened performance by our cellular and Yellow Pages subsidiaries contributed substantially to our growth," said Edward E. Whitacre Jr., the St.
Louis-based company's chairman and chief executive.
Analysts said the figures represented a mildly pleasant surprise.
Southwestern Bell stock rose 37.5 cents, to $56.375, on the Big Board.


EXECUTIVES
*
Ballistivet Inc., Minneapolis, which makes products for the cattle health-care market, named Lester C. Krogh chairman and chief executive.
He succeeds Donald L. Sturtevant as chairman and Fred R. Paul Jr. as chief executive.
Both men resigned. *
Claire's Stores Inc., Pembroke Pines, Fla., announced that Charlotte G. Fisher had been terminated as president and chief executive of its subsidiary Claire's Boutiques Inc.


Jets May Add to Misery Of Colts' Offensive Line
The Jets' defensive linemen and linebackers aren't exactly rubbing their hands together with glee in anticipation of facing an Indianapolis Colts' offensive line that, because of injuries, has gone through a lot of changes during their 0-7 start.
The Colts' offensive line has gone through seven reconfigurations since the season began.
The number rises to 11 if preseason games are included.


DES Victim to Get $4 Million; Jury Wanted to Give More
Had she held out just a little longer, Margaret Perrotte might be $8.5 million richer.
But for Mrs.
Perrotte, yesterday was still a day to celebrate.
In a court case that had its roots in actions taken 29 years ago, Mrs.
Perrotte's lawyer agreed yesterday to accept an estimated $4.25 million in damages for the cancer and infertility Mrs.
Perrotte suffered because her mother took the pregnancy drug diethylstilbestrol, or DES.


Trade Gap Widened In August
After shrinking sharply in the first half of 1991, the merchandise trade deficit swelled in August as foreigners unexpectedly slowed their buying of American goods.
The deficit widened by $1 billion, to $6.8 billion, its highest level in seven months.
It had dropped as low as $3.8 billion in June.


Renewed Republican Call For Tax Cut Is Led by Bush
President Bush and Republican Congressional leaders argued today that the way to reduce unemployment was through a capital gains tax cut that would create more jobs, while Democrats renewed their effort to pass legislation extending unemployment benefits for the long-term jobless.
Politics dominated both arguments in the aftermath of Wednesday's Senate vote to sustain Mr.
Bush's veto of a $6.5 billion Democratic bill to provide up to 20 weeks of additional benefits for people out of work for at least half a year.


Pfizer Earnings Are 13% Higher
Pfizer Inc. said yesterday that its third-quarter net income rose 13 percent, to $274.7 million, or 81 cents a share, compared with $243.3 million, or 72 cents a share, in the period last year.
Revenue advanced 8 percent, to $1.77 billion from $1.64 billion.


Recruits From All Exits Are Coming to Rutgers Now
No matter what you hear from the loyal followers in scarlet, the exodus of New Jersey football talent to campuses far from Rutgers University cannot be traced to the beginning of time.
It was not until some time after 25 Rutgers students in 1869 helped invent what would become the billion-dollar college football industry that other universities thought so much of this clever use of leisure time that they began to put their pipelines in place.
Strong, talented prospective Rutgers students were summoned north, south and west, and only an ocean prevented them from going east.


Quake's Death Toll Lowered
The toll of people killed in the earthquake that hit Northern California in October 1989 has been lowered to 63 from 67.
The figure was changed after county coroners decided that four deaths for which the earthquake was at first blamed would have happened anyway, said Nancy Hardaker, a spokeswoman for the California Office of Emergency Services.
She said the four deaths had involved conditions like heart attacks or existing illnesses..


Gannett Profit Declines 25.1%
The Gannett Company, publisher of 87 daily newspapers including USA Today, said yesterday that its net income dropped 25.1 percent in the third quarter.
The Arlington, Va., company said it earned $59.5 million, or 42 cents a share, in the quarter, down from $79.4 million, or 50 cents, a year earlier.


Bid at Compromise On Abortion Rule Fails, Officials Say
Congress and the Bush Administration have failed to reach a compromise that would have allowed doctors and counselors at federally supported family planning clinics to mention to pregnant women that one of their alternatives was abortion, White House officials said today.
Government-financed clinics' mention of abortion, even in response to patients' questions, is now barred by a regulation adopted by the Reagan Administration in 1988.
But Bush Administration officials had said earlier this week that the White House and a Senate-House conference committee were negotiating toward a compromise that might overturn the rule while maintaining some restrictions on abortion-related advice.


Review/Film; DeVito as a Corporate Raider With Cuddly Charm
The late-1980's morality play "Other People's Money" is made cuddlier by the presence of Danny DeVito, who plays the corporate raider known as Larry the Liquidator in Norman Jewison's glossy, big-hearted, determinedly Capraesque screen adaptation.
Larry may say things like "I love money even more than the things it can buy," but he has a deep-down wholesomeness that makes him soft around the edges, no matter how devilish he means to be.


Beijing Journal; For Chinese Spies, the Enemies Are Everywhere
With "counterrevolutionaries" said to be afoot at home and abroad, the task of keeping China safe for Communism is giving new prestige to a Government ministry so mysterious that even its official address is phony.
Known as the State Security Ministry, it represents the acme of secrecy in an already secretive bureaucracy.
While the ministry says it is situated in a compound next to Tiananmen Square, Chinese say its headquarters are really in a large walled compound in northwest Beijing.


Review/Theater; A Couple Try to Buy What They Can't Make
Any chronic theatergoer is sooner or later asked, "What is the worst play you've ever seen?" There is no answer, of course, but if pressed to the wall, I might be tempted to start such a discussion with "The Wayward Stork," a short-lived farce of 25 years ago in which the late, great comedian Bob Cummings, his hair all but aflame with red dye, played a husband caught up in a botched effort at artificial insemination.
There were, if memory serves, many jokes about chicken basters.
Loved that Bob.
"The Baby Dance," the new play at the Lucille Lortel Theater, is nothing if not a "Wayward Stork" for the 1990's.
Though the quality of the writing is a couple of rungs above rock bottom and though the tone is lugubrious rather than antic, it takes the same sad situation, that of an infertile couple eager to have children, and exploits and trivializes it to equally numbing effect.
Reflecting its own time, "The Baby Dance" is much more pretentious than "The Wayward Stork," and, instead of being cooked up by a Broadway schlockmeister, it has been nurtured by three nonprofit theater companies that list themselves in a wayward honor roll in the Playbill: the Pasadena Playhouse, the Long Wharf Theater and the Williamstown Theater Festival.


Nonnuclear Pretoria
To the Editor:
In A. M. Rosenthal's "If Not Now, When?" (column, Oct. 4), the statement is made that South Africa is a customer of Communist China in the "nuclear, chemical and missile business." There is no evidence for this allegation and my Government disputes such unsubstantiated allegations.
South Africa has no need for nuclear weapons.
In fact, South Africa has acceded to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
H.
H.
SCHWARZ  Ambassador of South Africa to the United States Washington, Oct. 7, 1991


Review/Film; Clouzot's 'Wages of Fear,' Version Complete
Seldom have the exquisite pain and pleasure of motion-picture suspense been mixed with quite the intoxicating effects that Henri-Georges Clouzot achieves in his 1953 classic, "The Wages of Fear" ("Le Salaire de la Peur").
The film, being released in this country for the first time in its entirety, opens today at Film Forum 2, where it may well run forever.


'Neutral' vs. Aggressive Premature Baby Care; Prenatal Care Lacking
To the Editor:
Your description of the high-tech neonatal intensive-care unit (front pages, Sept. 29-Oct. 1) provides one more example of the misplaced priorities of our health care system, which continues to insist a ton of cure is better than an ounce of prevention.


INSIDE
David Rockefeller said a $20 million donation to Rockefeller University shows his confidence in the university president, who was linked to a case of scientific misconduct.
Page B3.
NATO Plans Nuclear Cuts
NATO said it would eliminate half of the 1,400 nuclear bombs that are stockpiled in Europe for use on allied aircraft.
Page A3.


Art in Review
Suzanne McClelland Stephanie Theodore Gallery 580 Broadway (near Houston Street) SoHo Through Oct. 26
Suzanne McClelland's first solo exhibition introduces an artist who is trying to make paint do things it hasn't done before.
She specializes in a kind of hallucinatory surge in which language, material and emotion join together for results that are random and primitive and that avoid the traditional niceties of paint.
Ms.
McClelland's fluid surfaces are more spilled than painted, and some of their scattered marks gradually reveal themselves to be fragmented letters of the works' titles, but only after a good bit of looking.
As words like "Now," "Forever" and "Till" emerge from these unaccommodating surfaces, the paintings convey a sensibility that is both feminine and feminist, that obliquely recounts suffering and patience while adamantly refusing to suffer or be patient any longer.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF O'Meara Leads by 2 Mark O'Meara turned in his second successive six-under-par 66 yesterday and took a two-shot lead over rookie Jeff Maggert after two rounds of the $1 million Walt Disney World Golf Classic in Lake Buena, Fla.
O'Meara, who has not won a tour event this year, had seven birdies before taking his only bogey at the 18th hole on the 6,957-yard Palm course, one of three courses being used for the tournament.
Maggert, last year's Ben Hogan Tour Player of the Year, shot his second successive 67. (AP) Calcavecchia Loses: Playing in a cold, swirling wind, Colin Montgomerie of Scotland defeated Mark Calcavecchia, 5 and 4, yesterday in the opening round of the world match play tournament in Virginia Water, England. (AP) N.H.L.
Flyers Down Nordiques Andrei Lomakin had two goals as the Flyers scored five consecutive goals to defeat the Quebec Nordiques, 5-3, in Philadelphia.
The Flyers extended their home unbeaten streak against the Nordiques to nine games.
The loss extended the Nordiques' streak without a victory to five games (0-4-1). (AP) Blackhawks 4, Oilers 2: Jeremy Roenick scored two goals in the third period as Chicago downed Edmonton in Chicago Stadium.
The victory was the fourth in a row for the Blackhawks. (AP) Red Wings 7, Blues 3: Rookie defensemen Nicklas Lidstrom and Vladimir Konstantinov scored their first National Hockey League goals in a five-goal second period to lead Detroit to a home-ice victory over St.
Louis. (AP) TENNIS Fernandez Advances Mary Joe Fernandez, the defending champion, was a 6-1, 6-1 winner over Radka Zrubakova yesterday and moved into the quarterfinals of the Women's Tennis Association tournament in Filderstadt, Germany.
Nathalie Tauziat advanced because of a default by Manon Bollegraf, who has a foot injury.
Tauziat, who celebrated her 24th birthday yesterday, will play Martina Navratilova today, when the top-seeded American turns 35. (AP)


Review/Dance; Kabuki a la Graham In 'Cave of the Heart'
"Cave of the Heart" is Martha Graham's big Kabuki number.
Just as the dance at the end of a Kabuki performance distills the story that has been told up to that point, Graham's distillation of the legend of Medea is embodied in the ferocious solo that dominates the choreographer's classic of 1946.
The current engagement by the Martha Graham Dance Company at the City Center (131 West 55th Street), which closes Sunday night, has been marked by a number of debuts.
Wednesday night's were among the most interesting, as an all-new cast led by Maxine Sherman presented the season's first performance of "Cave of the Heart."
It was by no means the work's best rendering, but these first attempts were very well danced, if not as intense as expected, and revealed the method behind the work.


Art in Review
Mel Bochner SteinGladstone 99 Wooster Street SoHo Through tomorrow
This elegantly ephemeral exhibition recalls a moment in the late 1960's when younger artists, stopped in their tracks by the absolute simplicity of Minimal sculpture, attempted to go it one better.
One solution, evident in this installation piece that Mel Bochner created in Munich in 1969, was to dispense with Minimalism's high-cost metal forms and deal directly with the "real space" that was at the heart of the Minimalist enterprise.


Harvard President Sworn In
Neil L. Rudenstine was sworn in as the 26th president of Harvard University today.
In his inaugural address, he said the high cost of tuition and the protection of free speech are two of the main challenges universities face.
"We must encourage and fully protect genuine freedom of inquiry and speech, even speech that may be offensive to some," he told a crowd of 15,000.


Kurt Masur to Answer the Public
Kurt Masur, the music director of the New York Philharmonic, plans to have a series of open discussions with the public at Avery Fisher Hall, and the first is to be on Nov. 19 at 6 P.M.
The discussions, called Philharmonic Forums, are to be free and are to last an hour.
The conductor is to answer questions from the audience on topics of the questioners' choice.


Ex-Klan Chief Has Even Odds in Governor's Race
As the Louisiana governor's race drew near a close today, the politics of this state seemed at first glance to be as murky and meandering as the waters of a delta bayou.
But one factor seems most likely to dictate the outcome: David Duke, a former neo-Nazi and grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, has become a major contender in Saturday's open primary by running a campaign that has used code words and symbols like "the rising welfare underclass" to blame blacks for unemployment, crime, government bureaucracy and almost anything else he can identify as a threat to what he calls "our treasured Christian life style."


Tougher Campaign Is Vowed Against Homeless in Subway
Faced with another winter migration of homeless people into the subways, the New York City Transit Police Chief said yesterday that his force will move aggressively to evict anyone found violating subway rules of conduct, even in freezing weather.
Led by a strengthened and expanded Homeless Outreach Unit, Chief William J. Bratton said, the transit police will strictly enforce subway rules, such as begging or fare evasion or sleeping, but also offer help for homeless people to find alternative shelter.
The plans provoked an outcry from homeless advocates who called them a simplistic response to a complex problem.
Mayoral aides said the Dinkins administration supports the move.
Beginning Nov. 15
Chief Bratton's statements, made in an interview, came three days after the police destroyed three shantytowns near Tompkins Square Park in the East Village, sending hundreds of homeless people from the tents and shacks they set up.
Toughening the policy in subways appears to reflect a more aggressive approach by the Dinkins administration in dealing with the visible presence of the homeless.


Experts Explore Rise in Mass Murder
The killing of 22 people at a Texas cafeteria Wednesday is only the latest incident showing a rapid increase in mass murder in the past decade, both in frequency and in the number of victims murdered in individual attacks.
In the view of experts, mass murder is a peculiarly American phenomenon that has grown out of the proliferation of guns in this country, the disintegration of traditional American society and, more recently, the decline in the standard of living in recent years as millions of relatively high-paying jobs have been lost.


More Losses at Texas Instruments
Reflecting broad and deepening problems in the global market for semiconductors used in computers, Texas Instruments Inc. said today that it lost $113 million in the third quarter.
It was the fifth consecutive quarterly loss for the company, and analysts saw no immediate end to the losses.
Texas Instruments seems headed toward the worst financial year in its history, as it struggles to keep pace with Japanese rivals that dominate world chip sales.
The company has lost $324 million in the first nine months this year, mainly because of slumping sales to computer makers, weak prices for semiconductors and, as new plants come on line, an abundance of idle manufacturing equipment.
Operating Losses Grow
Richard Whittington, a semiconductor analyst at Kidder, Peabody in New York, said Texas Instruments executives indicated in remarks to Wall Street analysts today that operating losses would be greater in the fourth quarter.


Rival Buys Arkansas Gazette, Stilling State's Liberal Voice
The Arkansas Gazette, which claimed to be the oldest newspaper west of the Mississippi and was unquestionably one of the state's most powerful institutions, ceased publication yesterday after several unprofitable years.
The paper, founded in 1819, was best known nationally for its liberal political orientation and its spirited editorial leadership and news coverage during the school desegregation crisis in Little Rock in the mid-1950's.
The Gazette won two Pulitzer Prizes in that period, and was the target of a boycott that cost it thousands of subscribers.


Corning's Net Plunges 22.9%
The Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation reported a sharp drop in profits yesterday, and its stock plunged on worries of increased costs from asbestos lawsuits.
The Toledo, Ohio, glass and resins maker said its earnings dropped 22.9 percent to $27 million, or 64 cents a share, in the third quarter, from $35 million, or 83 cents a share, a year ago.
Revenues were $759 million, down nearly 8 percent from $823 million in the 1990 period.


I.B.M. to Sell Stake in MCI
The International Business Machines Corporation plans to sell its $400 million stake in the MCI Communications Corporation, the nation's second-largest long-distance phone company, an I.B.M. spokesman said today.
I.B.M. obtained the MCI stake in 1986 when Satellite Business Systems, another long-distance phone company, was sold to MCI.
I.B.M. held a majority stake in S.B.S.


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about a bombing in India located the site incorrectly.
It was northeast of New Delhi, in the Himalayan foothills, not in the Ganges Valley.


Corrections
A correction in this space yesterday about Robert Helmick, who resigned last month as president of the United States Olympic Committee, misstated the contents of a letter he recently wrote to The Times.
Mr.
Helmick pointed out that he had consistently supported the Goodwill Games in Moscow -- both in 1985, when planning for the games began, and in 1986, when they were held.


A Byte of Trouble
Tell it to the computer.
That, in effect, is what Colts linebacker CHIP BANKS did yesterday after spending eight hours in custody in Indianapolis.
During a traffic identification check, he was arrested on a Georgia warrant charging possession of a controlled substance.
After a flurry of telephone calls between Banks's lawyer and authorities in Atlanta and Indianapolis, it was determined that the January 1990 charge had been resolved the next month but that nobody had bothered to inform the computer.


Troupe From Tashkent
An eight-member music and dance group from Central Asia is to present a program of music and dance from Tashkent this weekend at the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, in Manhattan.
Performances are today and tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets are $20, $16 for members.
Information: (212) 517-2742.


Traffic Alert
Broadway Street Fair: The west side of Broadway will be closed today between 86th and 96th Streets from 8 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Fifth Avenue Mile Run: Fifth Avenue will be closed today between 62d and 82d Streets from 10 A.M. to noon.
Autumn Jubilee: Second Avenue will be closed tomorrow between 14th and 34th Streets from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Child Falls Ill in Tainting of Baby Food
New York City and Federal health authorities said yesterday that an infant girl had been poisoned on Wednesday after being fed baby food from a jar that had been tampered with at a Manhattan grocery store.
The child, 5-month-old Linda Lin, who was fed the apparently contaminated Beech-Nut bananas from a jar by her father while riding a subway in Manhattan, was reported in extremely critical condition last night at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.


Jury Convicts Garcia in Partial Verdict
Former Bronx Congressman Robert Garcia, on trial a second time for his role in the Wedtech scandal, was convicted of a single count of extortion yesterday.
But as a result of a misunderstanding between the judge and the jury, the jury was dismissed without reaching a verdict on two other felony counts.
Prosecutors, who had objected to the dismissal, immediately said they would seek a new trial on the remaining charges.


Lausanne Loses Out to Madrid
Officials in Lausanne, which was mentioned as a possible venue for the Middle East peace conference, were disappointed today when the site was announced.
Soon after Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d announced in Jerusalem that the conference would be held in Madrid at the end of the month, hotels here received a flood of cancellations.


K Mart in Deal With Walt Disney
The K Mart Corporation is relying on a well-known figure to give its Christmas sales a lift this year -- Mickey Mouse.
Joseph Antonini, company chairman, said that the nation's second-largest retailer was teaming up with the Walt Disney Company in a holiday promotional campaign to start Nov. 17.
At a news conference to introduce the plan, Mr.
Antonini predicted a rise of 4 percent to 5 percent in Christmas sales at stores open at least a year during the season, compared with levels a year ago.


Picture Accompanies Invitation to Hostage's Wife


Fight's Off: Tyson Suffers An Injury to Rib Cage
Mike Tyson has an injured rib cage and his big fight against undisputed heavyweight champion Evander Holyfield in three weeks has been postponed.
Greg Fritz, a spokesman for Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev., site of the match, said by telephone tonight that Tyson had suffered a noncontact cartilage injury to his left rib cage on Oct. 8 and reinjured it while training on Oct. 15.


A First Seeks No. 1
When the San Diego Padres named REGGIE WALLER as their director of scouting, they got more than a sharp talent evaluator who had spent 10 years in the Houston and Seattle organizations, most recently as assistant to the Mariners' vice president for baseball operations.
They also got their first black executive.


News Summary
International 3-5
The Middle East peace conference was announced by the United States and the Soviet Union, who invited Israel, its Arab neighbors and the Palestinians to convene in Madrid.
Although the parties have yet to formally accept, Washington and Moscow were confindent that the conference would take place.
Page 1


Sports of The Times; That Ill Feeling for This Series
MAYBE it's World Series fever that does it, or maybe it's the fall foliage, or maybe there's some other recondite reason that might be explained with a sampling of Freud or Jung or fried egg foo yong, but people seem to get a little sappy at this time of year.
For one thing, a big deal is being made of each team in the Series performing the remarkable feat of coming from last place in their respective divisions the year before to win the pennant.
It's true that no team in this century had done this.
But that's not the whole story; numerous teams have in fact equaled the jump over teams ahead of them, and some have even done better, or worse, depending on your psychological vantage point.


Comments By Baker and Pankin
Following are excerpts from remarks today by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Foreign Minister Boris D. Pankin of the Soviet Union on invitations to a Middle East peace conference
: MR. BAKER
An American Secretary of State and a Soviet Foreign Minister are together in Jerusalem for the first time in history.


A Game in Capital of 'Enemy' For Team From North Korea
Li Myong Song remembered his thoughts as the plane approached Dulles airport on Tuesday night: "Washington, the capital of the United States, the enemy of our people."
For Li, the 53-year-old vice president of North Korea's national soccer federation, and the national team traveling with him for an exhibition match against the United States on Saturday at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium, it was hard to imagine a more alien place for a game.


CHRONICLE
Nine college basketball players and coaches of the 1940's and 50's plan to line up before NAT HOLMAN tomorrow in the Harmonie Club in Manhattan and say, "Thank you Nat, for everything you've done for basketball and for all our lives."
"l'm always excited and thrilled to be around Nat," said Dr.
IRVING DAMBROT, who is to be part of that adulatory chorus at a lunch celebrating Mr.
Holman's 95th birthday, which occurs today.
"He was one of the best players of all time and represents a perfect gentleman." Dr.
Dambrot, now a dentist, was co-captain of Mr.
Holman's 1949-50 team at City College of New York and most valuable player in the National Collegiate Athletic Association that season.


Classical Music in Review
Peter Hurford  Organist St. Thomas Church


Blues for Wings
The St.
Louis Blues were looking for some defensive help after losing SCOTT STEVENS as compensation to the Devils.
The Detroit Red Wings were looking for some goaltending depth.
The Blues had a spare goaltender.
The Wings had a defenseman they were willing to part with.
A swap seemed in order.
Yesterday it happened: St.
Louis goaltender VINCENT RIENDEAU (29-9-6 with a 3.01 goals against average last season) to Detroit; Red Wing defenseman RICK ZOMBO (4 goals, 19 assists, 55 penalty minutes in 77 games) to St.
Louis. (AP)


7 Frantic Workers Drown in Murky Canal
Seven migrant workers from Guatemala, riding to jobs at a sugar cane field, drowned after their station wagon swerved out of control and flipped into a canal at dawn today.
One man survived the accident by swimming out of the shattered back window of the vehicle as it sank in eight feet of murky water, said Lieut.
Jim Howell of the Florida Highway Patrol.


Getting a Handle on the Homeless
During the 1980's, New York City barely kept up with demand for emergency shelter as a growing army of homeless people began to take over the streets.
Mayor David Dinkins's new five-year plan would eventually give the city more control over the problem, thereby improving the quality of life for all New Yorkers.
In the early 1980's the Koch administration responded hastily to court pressure with a network of primitive shelters, apparently hoping that a minimal response would suffice until the homeless went away.
They didn't.
In 1981, only 2,998 bedded down in city shelters on the busiest night; by 1989 the number had grown to 11,061.
Today, the shelter population remains above 9,000.


Israel and the Soviet Union Restore Relations


Review/Music; Delta Blues in an Unlikely Setting
There's probably no place less like a Mississippi Delta juke joint than the stone-and-glass atrium of the Philip Morris building in midtown Manhattan.
But intermittently during a weeklong series of noon blues concerts, and for one incandescent hour on Wednesday when R. L. Burnside held the stage, raw Delta blues sliced through the corporate sterility.
The series was presented by the Benson and Hedges Blues Festival, which booked performers from Mississippi (Mr. Burnside and Lonnie Pitchford) and around the Mississippi River (Henry Townsend from St. Louis and Tabby Thomas from Baton Rouge, who was making his New York debut).


BRIEFS
*
Altos Hornos de Mexico, a state-owned steel company, has sold three subsidiaries to Groupo Industrial Alfa S.A., Monterrey, Mexico, a steel company, for about $44 million. *
Bombardier Inc., Montreal, a maker of trains, aircraft and engines, said its Canadair unit would decide within the next 18 months whether to build a 70-seat version of its regional jet.


Review/Film; Vanilla Ice, Hiphopping After Elvis
"If you ain't true to yourself, you ain't true to nobody," mumbles Johnny, a blank-faced young motorcyclist with outlaw pretensions to Kathy (Kristin Minter), his sweetheart from the right side of the tracks.
Playing Johnny in "Cool as Ice," his first starring feature, the rap star Vanilla Ice wears just two expressions.
One is a squinting mask upon which the right eyebrow periodically arches upward for no apparent reason.
The other is the nervous, glittering smile of a shy young man who has been posed in front of the camera and told to grin and say "cheese."
When Johnny inquires about the repair of a dismembered motorcyle, he does it in hiphop grammar.
"Can you put back it together with quickness?" he asks in a monotone that suggests James Dean under heavy sedation.
Since the star lacks a speaking voice that carries any expression, one is left contemplating his get-up, which includes a leather jacket with "Down by Law" emblazoned on the back, black-and-white striped shorts, oversized shades, two earrings, and hair sculptured like a contour map of the Hollywood hills.


McCurdy Will Forgo a Race for Presidency
United States Representative Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma, who had been considering a race for the White House, said today that he had decided against it.
"I am announcing today that I will not seek the 1992 Democratic Presidential nomination," Mr.
McCurdy said at a news conference at the State Capitol here.


Scorsese Film Premiere
The premiere of "Cape Fear," a Martin Scorsese film starring Robert De Niro, Nick Nolte and Jessica Lange, is to take place at the Ziegfeld Theater on Nov. 6 as a benefit for the Film Society of Lincoln Center's new movie house.
The Walter Reade Theater in the Rose Building, 165 West 65th Street, is scheduled to open in late November.
The screening will be followed by a dinner-dance in the ballroom of the New York Hilton Hotel.
Tickets, from $250 to $2,500, also include a new film during one of the inaugural evenings of the Reade theater.
Information: (212) 875-5610.


Researchers Halt Ripening of Tomato
Scientists have genetically altered tomatoes so they no longer produce a gas causing them to ripen, a move that they said could lead to less spoilage and fresher fruits, vegetables and even cut flowers on the market.
Researchers in California said the experimental tomatoes stay on the vine and continue growing for weeks longer than normal, but do not ripen or age.
When the tomatoes are later exposed to the ripening gas, ethylene, they redden and soften and appear to have all the characteristics of the vine-ripened variety, according to a report today in the journal Science.


Oil Prices at Highest Level Since the Persian Gulf War
The price of oil soared yesterday to its highest level since the Persian Gulf war, wrapping up a week when traders decided that just about every bit of news or rumor was a good reason to buy.
Crude oil for delivery in November settled at $24.14 a barrel, up 21 cents, at the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Oil had not closed that high since Jan. 22, in the early days of the gulf war, when the price was $24.18.


About New York
Hilda Newman sits in a straight-back chair, her eyes focused on things no one else can see.
She is 83 years old and has stories to tell.
One involves a man named Mr.
Selbach, a high-ranking civil servant in pre-Hitler Germany.
Because he was married to a Jew, he lost his job and became proprietor of a small newspaper kiosk in a Berlin suburb.
He was old and frail but never complained.


Lisbon Journal; Renewing African Ties, Portugal Finds Partners
The Creole language of Guinea-Bissau echoes across construction sites throughout Lisbon, the pungent aromas of Angolan stews waft out of dozens of small restaurants and, on weekends, immigrants from Cape Verde head for clubs where they dance to their own music until dawn.
And while exiled opposition leaders from Guinea-Bissau and Mozambique still make their home here, officials from these and other Portuguese-speaking African countries routinely turn to Lisbon for advice and assistance.


Patents; A Casino Computer To Raise Jackpots
An inventor of toys and games in New York City has patented a new form of gambling that he said gives casinos a means of competing with the multimillion-dollar jackpots offered by state lotteries.
Invented by Stewart M. Lamle, president of Amuse Inc., the system consists of a computer that would link hundreds or even thousands of slot machines, creating a game that pools money from each player into a huge jackpot with very long odds.


Arabs And Israelis Invited to Begin Peace Talks Oct. 30 With Bush and Gorbachev
The United States and the Soviet Union issued invitations today to Israel, its Arab neighbors and the Palestinians for a Middle East peace conference to convene on Oct. 30 in Madrid.
Although the parties to the negotiations have yet to formally accept, Washington and Moscow were so confident that the conference would take place that they announced that President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev would be present to begin the first phase of the peace effort, in which the sponsors and the principal parties will sit down together.


Classical Music in Review
Vineyard Musicke Vineyard Theater


Year After Tax Leap, New Jersey Faces Budget Gap


Garcia Convicted as Jury Returns With a Partial Verdict


Religion Notes
A Call to Action
At a time when polls show that many Americans are unhappy with their Government, the nation's Roman Catholic bishops told Catholics and other citizens this week that they had the power and the responsibility to change what they did not like.


New Chief and Name For Office Automation
Nolan Bushnell, the video game and personal computer pioneer who founded the Atari Corporation, was named chairman of Office Automation Systems Inc., the company said yesterday.
Office Automation, which is based in San Diego, also announced that it was changing its name to Octus Inc.
"Octus is an entirely new kind of company," Mr.
Bushnell, 49, said in a statement.
"We are, in fact, a start-up being built upon the solid operational foundation of O.A.S., an 8-year-old company with more than 70 employees." Octus is privately held.


Quotation of the Day
"We take strong exception to those who argue that people should be allowed to live in the subways." -- Chief William J. Bratton of the New York City Transit Police.  [ 27:3. ]


Weiser Journal; For Small-Town Doctor, A Big Banner Welcome
On the menu at this weekend's Weiser Wolverine homecoming feast is a tub of potato salad, piles of hot barbecue beef sandwiches and a mountainous cake, which is inscribed, "Welcome, Dr. Barr."
If that doesn't make Dr.
Deland Barr of Wellington, Kan., feel at home in Weiser -- "call us Weezerites, that's what we are," says the town grocer, Tom Anderson -- there is more.
Much more.


President of Kellogg Is Getting Top Posts
Arnold G. Langbo, who has been with the Kellogg Company for 35 years, will take over as chairman and chief executive of the Battle Creek, Mich., cereal company next year.
The appointment of Mr.
Langbo, 54 years old, who is president and chief operating officer, was widely anticipated by analysts; the current chairman, William E. LaMothe, 64, has announced plans to retire in December.


Dart Family Interests Acquire a 5.74% Stake in Salomon
An investor group has purchased 5.74 percent of the outstanding common shares in the parent of Salomon Brothers, according to a document filed yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The filing made by executives of the Dart Financial Corporation, a Flordia-based cup maker, and related entities is the first indication that any group of investors has made a concerted effort to buy a large stake in the Wall Street investment house as it struggles to recover from its role in the Treasuries market scandal.


INSIDE
Split Verdict in Mob Trial A jury acquitted five men and convicted three of taking part in a scheme to control window-installation work in New York City.
Page 25.
A No to Nintendo Lottery
Under fire from its lawmakers, Minnesota has dropped its plan to let Nintendo video games be used to play the state lottery from home.
Page 35.
Sentence in Pentagon Fraud
Melvyn R. Paisley, a former Assistant Navy Secretary, was sentenced to four years in prison for taking bribes from military contractors.
Page 35.


New Jersey Bars Project in Way Of Skyline View
Hundreds of thousands of motorists and bus drivers move down the ramp to the Lincoln Tunnel each day, taking in a sweeping view of the Hudson River and the Manhattan skyline before they plunge into the tube that takes them from New Jersey to Manhattan.
New Jersey environmental officials have decided that the view is worth preserving, and they announced yesterday that a developer could not block it by building two high-rise office buildings on the Hudson River waterfront in Weehawken.


Suggestion on Housing for the Homeless in Brooklyn Draws Anger
In the first round of what promises to be a long debate, a Federal agency has recommended that Andrew Cuomo's HELP for the Homeless group be chosen to build housing for hundreds of homeless people on the site of the old Brooklyn Navy Yard, angering some local groups who have other ideas.
As word of the recommendation seeped out yesterday, the Brooklyn Borough President, Howard Golden -- already irate at the Dinkins administration's recent plan for scattering up to two dozen new shelters for homeless single people around the city -- denounced it as "inhumane dumping."


A Valuable Government Document! Free!
Whenever Donald W. Kellerman, a specialist in retirement planning for Dean Witter Reynolds, meets with new clients he recommends that they obtain a free Government document describing the benefits on which two-thirds of retirees rely for at least half their income: Social Security.
"I always hold up one of these forms and tell them to send it in," said Mr.
Kellerman, referring to the application for a Personal Earnings and Benefit Estimate Statement.
The Social Security Administration began offering the statement in 1988.
This, along with information about one's company pension, is the starting point, he said, for anybody planning for retirement.


C.I.A. NOMINEE WINS SENATE PANEL VOTE BY A WIDE MARGIN
Robert M. Gates won easy approval of the Senate Intelligence Committee as the country's next intelligence chief today, after exhaustive hearings that questioned his candor with Congress, his pessimistic view of Moscow, his stern management style and his intellectual integrity.
After statements that either praised the 48-year-old nominee as the best-qualified person or criticized him as the wrong candidate for the era after the cold war, the committee of eight Democrats and seven Republicans voted, 11 to 4, to approve him as Director of Central Intelligence, a job he was denied once before.


The 3 Aarghs: Bonds, Van Slyke and Bonilla
The Atlanta Braves rushed onward to the World Series today, leaving the Pittsburgh Pirates to ponder how such a good team could play so ineptly.
The Braves, who won Atlanta's first National League pennant with a 4-0 victory Thursday night, did not look back.
Instead, they had to look ahead to the Minnesota Twins, their soulmates in baseball's first worst-to-first space shot this century.


Washburn Sentenced To 3 Years in Prison
CHRIS WASHBURN, a former center for North Carolina State, the Golden State Warriors and the Atlanta Hawks, was banned from the National Basketball Association after a third drug infraction in 1989.
On Thursday in Houston, things got worse as he was convicted of cocaine possession and sentenced to three years in prison.
Washburn played last season in the Continental Basketball Association. (AP)


Dollar Posts Steep Decline On Weak Economic Report
The dollar fell sharply against most currencies yesterday as traders took profits after another bearish report on the United States economy.
Gold prices advanced.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery gained $2.20, to $362.20 an ounce.
The Republic National Bank said gold rose $2.30, to a late bid of $360.


Extension on Bank Deal
The Federal Reserve Board said today that it was providing an additional 30-day comment period on the merger of the Chemical Banking Corporation and the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Urban Memo; An Underground Burp Makes Midtown Quake
There is a breakdown at a telephone switching station.
Half the long-distance phone circuits into and out of New York City are cut off.
Airports are thrown into chaos because the air traffic controllers who guide takeoffs and landings at local airports are disconnected.
There is a lovers' quarrel.
A homeless woman raging at her companion sets fire to a shack under the West Side Highway.
Traffic is tied up for miles and for hours as officials assess the damage to the elevated roadway.


Baring Brothers Reported in Talks for Dillon Stake
Baring Brothers, one of Britain's oldest investment banking firms, is negotiating with Dillon, Read &amp; Company to purchase a large stake in the American investment banking firm from the Travelers Corporation, financial industry executives said yesterday.
The Baring negotiations come after almost a year of effort by Dillon executives to interest potential investors in many countries, including Japan, in purchasing part of the Travelers stake.
The Baring negotiations were said to have begun, however, after Baring approached Dillon to express the firm's interest in a possible deal.


On Winning Big In Small Claims Court
When anyone has a dispute involving minor damages -- irreparable damage to a suede coat at the dry cleaners, a bungled job by a carpenter, an unpaid bill by a client -- the customary advice is to take the conflict to Small Claims Court.
Established in this country during the Depression and based upon a concept originally set forth in ancient Greece, Small Claims Court permits the lay person to bring a relatively minor dispute directly before a judge for an immediate decision.
This saves lawyers' fees (although you can hire a lawyer if you wish) and the long wait in the regular court system.
The only cost is the filing fee, usually under $25.


Alfred H. Joslin, 77; A Rhode Island Justice
Former Justice Alfred H. Joslin, who served on Rhode Island's highest court for 16 years and wrote more than 600 opinions, died Wednesday at his home in Bristol, R.I.
He was 77 years old and died of Parkinson's disease and pancreatic cancer, his family said.


The Secretary of State Who Could
Yesterday's U.S.-Soviet summons to an Arab-Israeli peace conference marks America's biggest Mideast breakthrough since Jimmy Carter convened the Camp David talks in 1978.
Much credit goes to Secretary of State James Baker.
Through eight exhausting shuttle missions, he worked creatively to crown the Bush Administration's victory in war with a victory in peace.
When Mr.
Baker began his efforts in March, conventional wisdom held that he was doomed to failure.
Cynics suggested he was just walking through the motions.
Well, in 11 days Israel and all its immediate Arab neighbors are likely to join Presidents Bush and Gorbachev in Madrid for the conference's ceremonial opening.
Days later the parties are to begin direct bilateral talks.
It's an astonishing achievement.


Classical Music in Review
The New York Virtuoso Singers  Merkin Concert Hall


Faulk Is Out of Hospital
MARSHALL FAULK, a freshman running back at San Diego State, was discharged from Mercy Hospital in San Diego yesterday, six days after suffering a collapsed lung and fractured ribs in a game against New Mexico last Saturday.
Faulk, who set the N.C.A.A. single-game rushing record with 386 yards against Pacific last month, will miss the Aztecs' game tonight at Texas-El Paso, and will be evaluated on a week-to-week basis. (AP)


U.N. Should Strive for Peace in Liberia
To the Editor:
The role played by the United Nations in helping to break the deadlock in the Salvadoran peace talks illustrates the kind of constructive intervention that the international community is capable of once a situation is deemed worthy of attention.


CHRONICLE
When ABDULLAH IBRAHIM, a jazz composer-pianist, heard about the difficulty Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS was having financing a trip to South Africa next month, he decided to step in with music.
Tomorrow he will give a benefit concert at the New York Society for Ethical Culture at 2 West 64th Street because he believes the trip is important for his homeland.
"It is an incredible feeling when you sit in South Africa and someone from here visits," he said yesterday.
"Our people have been cut off from the rest of the world for so long. These visits could help to heal and to move the country forward." He and his wife, SATHIMA BEA BENJAMIN, a jazz vocalist, have lived here for 14 years, barred until last year from returning to South Africa.
"I had the traditional response of hospitality," he said.
"The city and its people have extended it to us, so now we would like to do something for the Mayor and his people."


A Catch on the Surface Is a Thing of Beauty
Maybe it's the voyeur in us (or at least in me), but there is something about seeing the take of a fish on the surface that surpasses any other excitement that the sport of angling offers.
A trout sipping at a dry fly, a tailing bonefish turning at the twitch of a Hungry Charlie, a pike rocketing from cover for a deer hair mouse, a largemouth shattering the mirror of a lily pond as it slams a popping bug -- these are all visual joys that have signaled the beginnings of some of my favorite contests of man versus fish.
It was only a few weeks ago, though, that I had the pleasure of taking both bluefish and striped bass with a flyrod and a surface plug.


Serbian Chief Rejects Peace Plan At Yugoslav Parley in The Hague
The Yugoslav peace conference sponsored by the European Community presented a draft of a settlement today to the opposing sides meeting here, but the document was immediately rejected by the Serbian leader.
"In its present form, we cannot accept the proposed paper," the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, told the leaders of the other Yugoslav regions.


Cox Adds Another Surprise to Surprising Series
One day before the opening of the World Series with the most unexpected matchup ever, Manager Bobby Cox of Atlanta pulled off the first surprise today.
He named left-hander Charlie Leibrandt to start Game 1 for the Braves on Saturday night against Minnesota's right-hander Jack Morris.
Tom Glavine, the Cy Young Award candidate who pitched last Monday, was passed over and will start Game 2 for Atlanta here Sunday night against Kevin Tapani.


Ripples of Near-Sainthood Reach From Brazil to Pennsylvania
The story of how Albert Visintainer got from his motel, restaurant and bar in Mount Carmel, Pa., to receive a finger of his second cousin as a relic of her beatification and to stand among thousands today as Pope John Paul II conferred the near-saintly status on her was -- well, not short.
But it reaffirmed the mystic draw of saints and miracles for many people, and the deep belief of many Roman Catholics in divine intercession when all else fails.


Fetisov Takes Night Off and So Does the Rest of the Devils' Defense
A familiar fixture was missing from the Devils' defense tonight in their game against Washington and his absence was apparent from the outset.
Without Slava Fetisov, the New Jersey defense committed several mistakes and fell behind by four goals in the first 21 minutes en route to a 6-5 loss at Capital Centre.
Fetisov, the Soviet defenseman, whose performances in the first six games this season had been the most effective in terms of consistency, was rested by Coach Tom McVie and the decision may turn out to haunt him.


Burns Is a Free Agent
Right-hander TODD BURNS, a member of the Oakland Athletics' American League championship clubs from 1988-90, opted for free agency rather than accept assignment to Class AAA Tacoma, the A's said yesterday.
Burns was 1-0 in 9 games for the A's in 1991 and 0-2 with 3 saves in 13 games at Tacoma.


Trump's Stake in Lifschultz
Penn Yards Associates, a New York limited partnership and affiliate of Donald J. Trump, has acquired 10 percent of Lifschultz Industries' common stock on a fully diluted basis, Lifschultz said yesterday.
Penn Yards received the stock in exchange for amending a lease agreement with Lifschultz.
The amendment allows Lifschultz to sublet its New York trucking terminal to generate revenue to pay legal costs in Lifschultz's antitrust and RICO lawsuit against Consolidated Freightways, Yellow Freight System and Roadway Express.


Brandeis Plan to Sell Art Is Criticized
The Rose Art Museum of Brandeis University is planning to sell 14 works of art, including three paintings by Renoir, two by Daumier, two by Vuillard and one by Toulouse-Lautrec, and the Association of Art Museum Directors has attacked the plan, calling it "a terrible precedent."
Christie's, which has been asked to auction the paintings at sales beginning on Nov. 5, estimates their value at $4 million to $6 million.


Nestor MacDonald, 95, Electronics Executive
Nestor J. MacDonald, a retired electrical industry executive, died Thursday at Sloop Memorial Hospital in Crossnore, N.C.
He was 95 years old and lived in Linville, N.C., and Short Hills, N.J.
The cause of death was not disclosed, but his family said he had had heart disease and other ailments.


Money Doesn't Walk
Racewalkers, those smooth-striding speedsters who tend to regard runners as self-destructive, injury-prone maniacs, have long been a part of the New York City Marathon, even though their marathon walk is not an official race but an exhibition.
While many racewalkers will take part in the marathon on Nov. 3, three international notables will be missing because HELENE BRITON hasn't found a sponsor to underwrite their transportation expenses.


Life Imitating Art


Observer; The Process Baloney
The Thomas confirmation was a wonderfully obscene spectacle and kept all civilized people glued to their television sets lapping it up while grumbling that it was a disgrace.
The grumbling is not to be taken seriously.
People enjoying themselves in such debauches always feel compelled to intersperse their yelps of joy with pious lament about the decline of decency.
The children may be watching.
The truth is that millions of upright, loyal, patriotic Americans enjoyed such an exhilarating wallow in soap-opera melodrama, emotional outrage and political farce as they are not likely to taste again for a decade or two.


British Air, KLM in Talks
KLM Royal Dutch Airlines confirmed today that it had begun talks with British Airways on cooperative ventures.
KLM said the talks covered "a range of possible areas of cooperation" but cautioned that "it is impossble to say what the outcome of these discussions will be." Peter Wellhunter, a spokesman for KLM, declined to comment further.
British Airways also declined comment.


Editorial Notebook; On Denouncing Racism
Boris Pasternak's wife wept in terror when, in 1937, her husband refused to denounce Russians whom Stalin had executed for his own maniacal reasons.
Her terror was warranted.
Stalin's purges ran on a grimly effective formula: Kill people when someone denounces them; kill people who fail to denounce someone else.
A rhetoric not dissimilar to Stalin's has gripped the discourse about race in America.
It has become common to impugn the honor of people who are accused of
failing to denounce
the objectionable conduct of others.
In theory the impulse is principled, stemming as it does from the desire to build consensus against bigotry.
In practice this denunciation, recklessly employed, obstructs meaningful discourse about race.


After the Oath, a Hug


Giant Coaches Admit Mistake In Handling of Thompson
The Giants' coaches, apparently not knowing the seriousness of his shoulder injury, mistakenly sent Reyna Thompson back into the game against the Steelers on Monday night for the final play.
"We didn't realize he had seen the trainer," Coach Ray Handley said today.
The Giants' special-teams coach, Mike Sweatman, said Thompson did not aggravate the injury to his left shoulder on that last play.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.88
5.00
7.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.03
5.03
7.23
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.05
5.06
7.19
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.20
7.26
8.47
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.94
8.01
8.74
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.06
9.11
9.83
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.85
6.86
7.77
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Strikeout Clubmen
To the Editor:
Your list of pitchers who have struck out 18 or more batters in a nine-inning baseball game (Sports, Box Scores, Oct. 7) was unfortunately not a complete listing.


Accord on Foreigners Splits Germans
The German Parliament angrily debated the explosive question of immigration for several hours today but failed even to come close to reaching a consensus.
The insults and accusations that echoed through the chamber reflected the frustration of many Germans in the face of surging immigration and daily attacks on foreigners.


Review/Dance; Program of Choreographic Showcases
The choreographic showcases that Movement Research is presenting at Judson Memorial Church on Washington Square are proving to be some of this autumn's most stimulating events.
There was once again much to look at and think about on Monday night when the program featured solos by Jennifer Lacey and Marisa.
Most of their offerings could be called vanishing acts, for both choreographers devised movements that were always on the verge of fading into nothingness.


Classical Music in Review
Gail Niwa  Pianist Alice Tully Hall


Power Station Fire Reported In Crowded Moscow Sector
Fire broke out at a power station in a densely populated section of the Soviet capital overnight, and the blaze "may have serious consequences," the Tass news agency said today.
The state news agency said the fire was under control.
It occurred in the northwestern part of the capital, on Tretya Khoroshevskaya Street, according to Radio Russia in a report monitored in London.


Twilight Agenda Edges Scan at the Meadowlands
More confusion was heaped onto the competition for the year's racing honors tonight when Twilight Agenda came out of California and outran Scan by a head in the Meadowlands Cup in a furious duel that left several championships wide open two weeks before the Breeders' Cup.
Twilight Agenda, one of the herd of horses trained on both coasts by D. Wayne Lukas, outraced both Scan and Sea Cadet to the wire and won for the fifth time in nine races this year and also won a trip to Louisville for the Breeders' Cup Classic.
But Twilight Agenda is likely to tangle there with several of the horses he raced tonight, in addition to his own stablemate, Farma Way, in the main event of the racing season.


Patents; A No-Skill Approach To Putting Down Brick
Bill and Randy Colen, a father and son who own a brick-making company in Lancaster, Tex., obtained a patent this week for a new brick and a brick-laying system that is easy enough for unskilled homeowners to master.
"People are afraid to lay their own brick, because they don't know how," said Randy Colen, vice president of the Bilco Corporation.
"They're afraid the wall will crumble or fall down,"


Patents; A Vitamin Mixture To Treat Hangovers
David H. Blass, an inventor in Shropshire, England, has patented a compound he says can help prevent hangovers.
Made by combining vitamin B, a variant of vitamin B-2, and a pain reliever like aspirin or ibuprofen, the compound could prevent nausea, headaches and other hangover ailments far more effectively than any product now available, the inventor said.
Those who took the mixture before the onset of a hangover experienced far milder symptoms than those who took placebos in experiments involving 40 people who each drank two bottles of champagne in champagne-and-cognac cocktails, according to Walter Blass of Warren, N.J., the inventor's cousin and his American licensing representative.


VIETNAMESE RESIST REPATRIATION PLAN
Vietnamese refugees who fear they may be forcibly returned to Vietnam from Hong Kong have been staging demonstrations inside the largest of this British colony's detention camps and have been making plans for armed resistance should Britain and Hanoi conclude an agreement on the repatriations.
Officials here had confidently expected an agreement on the mandatory return of tens of thousands of Vietnamese to be signed in Hanoi this week.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.  Sabres Get Their Second Victory


Futures Trader Admits Guilt
Preston Semel, majority partner of Semel &amp; Company, once a leading New York commodities trading firm, pleaded guilty yesterday to Federal charges of conspiracy and commodities fraud.
He had been indicted earlier with the firm's president, Charles Federbush, and Michael Renner, a floor broker employed by Semel, in the theft of trading profits from customers and on charges of making secret and illegal trades.


Marine Reservist Wants His College 'A'
James Lloyd, a 22-year-old English major and Marine reservist at Montclair State College, spent eight months in Japan and Okinawa during the Persian Gulf war, mostly training with his artillery battery and occasionally scuba-diving for fun.
Now he has come back to campus and found real conflict -- with asociology professor, over a grade.
Mr.
Lloyd says he had an "A" in Dr.
Barbara H. Chasin's course, "The Sociology of Rich and Poor Nations," when hisunit was activated in early December, forcing him to miss his final exam.


Judges' Ruling Casts Doubt On House Redistricting Plan
The redrawing of the nation's Congressional districts was thrown into doubt today, at least temporarily, when a panel of three Federal judges in Montana declared that the method of allocating House seats was unconstitutional and issued an injunction forbidding reapportionment based on that method.
But redistricting specialists for both political parties predicted that the ruling would be stayed, and ultimately reversed, by the Supreme Court.


G. L. Joughin, 85, Author and Fighter For Civil Liberties
G.
Louis Joughin, who was a professor, literary critic and author and a leading advocate for civil liberties and academic freedom, died Tuesday at home in Woodlands, Tex.
He was 85 years old.
Mr. Joughin died of complications from several strokes, his family said.


William Dinkins, Mayor's Father And Real Estate Agent, Dies at 85
William Harvey Dinkins Jr., the father of New York's Mayor, David N. Dinkins, and a retired real estate broker in Trenton, died last night at the Delaware Valley Medical Center in Langhorne, Pa.
He was 85 years old and was a longtime resident of Trenton.
Mr.
Dinkins died of cardio-pulmonary arrest, said Leland T. Jones, the Mayor's press secretary.
The Mayor, who went to the hospital last night, canceled his appearances that were scheduled for today.


Schlumberger Profits Up 33%
Schlumberger Ltd. yesterday reported a 33 percent rise in earnings for the third quarter, when the oilfield services company increased drilling outside North America and reduced operations in the United States, where oil exploration is in decline.
For the July-September quarter, Schlumberger earned $196.3 million, or 82 cents a share, on revenues of $1.47 billion.
That compared with earnings of $147.4 million, or 62 cents a share, on revenues of $1.32 billion for the corresponding period in 1990.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the House rejection of a ban on semiautomatic weapons misstated a view expressed by Representative Charles E. Schu mer, Democrat of New York.
He said he was not optimistic that the proposed ban, stricken from a comprehensive anticrime bill, would be restored in a House-Senate conference committee.


Corrections
An answer in the Q&amp;A column of Science Times on Oct. 1 about poisonous spiders described the black widow incorrectly.
It is the United States' most poisonous spider, not the world's.
The spiders most poisonous to humans are about 30 species of Australian funnel-net mygalomorph spiders belonging to two genera, Atrax and Hadronyche.


Review/Music; Playing Mozart Sonatas With 2 Opposing Styles
It sometimes seems that where Mozart's piano sonatas are concerned, the composer gets too much credit.
These works surely contain moments of infectious energy and subtle introspection, but generally they convey little more than a sense of charm, innocent pleasures innocently taken.
At his recital in Carnegie Hall on Thursday night, Murray Perahia, who has become one of the premiere Mozart interpreters of our time, may have sensed this, for he deliberately tried to make something more ambitious of these works.
He tried to make the case that Mozart was a grand master of the piano repertory: profound, vigorous, tirelessly inventive and rarely simply charming.
But so peculiar was Mr.
Perahia's presentation that it reinforced my recurrent suspicions that many of these works are overrated.


Thomas Hearings as Testimony to the Power of Race in American Politics
It was billed as a watershed drama about sexual harassment, but in the end, as has been the case so often in the past, the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court turned on something else -- race.
The particulars were new -- a black conservative defended by Southern white Senators.
But in its imagery, in the emotions it engendered and in the way both blacks and whites reacted, the fight over Judge Thomas's nomination was a stark evocation of the eerie continuity and the startling power of race in American life and politics.


Most Oil Fires Are Out in Kuwait, But Its Environment Is Devastated
Less than eight months after most of its oil wells were set ablaze by withdrawing Iraqi troops, causing one of the world's great environmental and economic catastrophes, Kuwait has put out most of the fires.
Oil-industry officials in the region said this week that all the blazes would be extinguished sometime in November.
More than 700 wells were sabotaged.
Yet the speed with which they have been brought under control, and the $1 billion cost so far, have surprised many industry experts.
Back in February, most of these experts had predicted that it would take two years and several billion dollars to restore the country's once-thriving oil industry.


The Sincerest Form of Rivalry
One of the nation's fastest-growing cosmetics chains calls itself "dedicated to preserving the earth." Its brochure, printed on recycled paper, says, "Our packaging is earth friendly." And customers are assured that potions like pineapple mango bubble bath are made from natural ingredients and are not tested on animals.
The pitch seemed familiar -- too familiar, in fact -- to the Body Shop, a British company that has taken Europe by storm by liberally mixing social consciousness with the cosmetics business.
The Body Shop sued the supposed copycat, called Bath and Body Works, a division of the Limited Inc., the retailing powerhouse based in Columbus, Ohio.
The two companies reached an out-of-court settlement in July.


5 Bidders Increase Offers for Executive Life
Five of the eight groups seeking to acquire the failed Executive Life Insurance Company raised their offers for the insurer today, just before the deadline for final bids.
The California Department of Insurance and its financial advisers will spend the next week analyzing the final offers, which are complex and vary greatly in structure.
John Garamendi, the State Insurance Commissioner, is scheduled to recommend a winner on Friday to the state court overseeing the company's sale.


Town in Texas Quietly Gathers For a Memorial
Two days after a gunman killed 22 people in this working class central Texas town, 200 people gathered today for a memorial service at First Baptist Church, a low-key affair in which people quietly meditated.
"I don't have an answer to the question, 'why?' " said the Rev.
Jimmy Towers, the pastor of First Baptist Church.
"Some people are still in shock. Others are angry. There are no answers."


For Campers, It's Time to Lighten Up
Lightness and compactness are the watchwords for outdoor equipment for cool and cold weather.
Tent makers, for example, are straining their technical ingenuity to come up with tents that withstand snow and ice and weigh only a few pounds.
Clothing makers are using synthetic materials like microfibers to make winter apparel warm without being bulky.
Some new products are real improvements over the heavier gear of the past.
Here is a roundup of some of the better outdoor and camping products, some of them new this year.
Lighting
Miniature flashlights are not new, but they once were hopeless.
Now there are flashlights that throw powerful beams and are small enough to slip into a pocket.


EXECUTIVES
*
CPC International, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., the food company, named two new senior vice presidents: Robert J. Gillespie, who remains president of its Best Foods subsidiary, and Alan Labergere, who remains president of its CPC Europe subsidiary. *
Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., New York, a Sony Corp. subsidiary, appointed Barry Josephson senior vice president for production.


Today's Students Don't Meet 70's Standard
To the Editor:
I cannot imagine from what sources the Federal report on education gets its impression that American students are doing as well as students did 20 years ago (front page, Oct. 1).


Dow Up 24.15, to a High of 3,077.15
For the second time this week, the Dow Jones industrial average reached a record high.
It closed yesterday at 3,077.15, up 24.15 for the day and 93.47 for the week.
After a one-day pause, the momentum from previous sessions sparked by an improving outlook on corporate earnings and by a strong bond market again moved blue-chip stocks to higher levels.
On Wednesday, the Dow had reached its previous high of 3,061.72.


California Groups Rebuff AIDS-Risk List Request
California's major medical organizations say they will ignore a request from the Centers for Disease Control to develop a list of medical procedures too risky for doctors and nurses infected with the AIDS virus to perform.
The groups, which include the 38,000-member California Medical Association and the 26,000-member California Nurses Association, said on Thursday that there was no scientific evidence that such guidelines would prevent the spread of acquired immune deficiency syndrome.


McNeil, Put on Injured Reserve, To Miss the Jets' Next 3 Games
The Jets placed Freeman McNeil on injured reserve today and promoted A. B. Brown to the active roster for Sunday's game against the Indianapolis Colts.
The 32-year-old McNeil, the Jets' career rushing leader with 7,770 yards over 11 seasons, underwent arthroscopic surgery on his left knee on Thursday morning.
No cartilage damage was found, but there was a sprain of the medial collateral ligament.


Patents; A Chemical To Enhance Vaccines
By refining a soaplike material extracted from the bark of trees, a biotechnology company in Massachusetts has developed a chemical that it said could dramatically raise the effectiveness of vaccines.
Called QS-21, the material could help in the efforts by numerous companies to create a new generation of genetically engineered vaccines against diseases like malaria, herpes, certain forms of hepatitis and even AIDS.
The vaccines would consist of particles derived through genetic engineering from a particular virus or bacteria.
The particles would stimulate the body to produce the same antibodies it would create in response to the actual invader.


Israel and Soviets Restore Full Relations
A quarter-century of diplomatic estrangement ended today when the Soviet Union and Israel restored full relations and expressed hope that their renewed ties would help the cause of peace in the Middle East.
On many practical levels, little will change just because ambassadors will again be exchanged after a 24-year lapse.


Review/Dance; Two Stellas Merge as Everywoman
Anne Teresa de Keersmaeker, whose rigor and imagination make her one of the truly surprising choreographers on the international dance scene, returned to New York on Thursday night with "Stella," a strange and engrossing work.
The piece is very different from what this 31-year-old leader of a genuine Belgian dance avant-garde has presented since her company, Rosas, was last seen at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in 1987.


South Korea A-Arms Pullout Plan Reported
The United States has decided to remove all of its nuclear weapons from South Korea, including those aboard F-16 aircraft deployed there, The Washington Post reported in its Saturday issue.
President Bush's decision to withdraw American short-range, or tactical, nuclear weapons last month applied to weapons based on land and at sea.
The latest move would include those aboard F-16's.


Mercer Knocks Out Morrison
Ray Mercer retained his World Boxing Organization heavyweight title when he knocked out Tommy Morrison at 28 seconds of the 5th round of a scheduled 10-round bout.
The end came after Mercer nailed Morrison with right hands that drove Morrison into the ropes.
Mercer then landed a powerful left hook that made Morrison sag.
The final sequence was a left, three clubbing rights and a left.
With that combination, Larry Hazzard, New Jersey's boxing commissioner, climbed onto the ring apron to signal that the fight should be stopped.
But at the same moment, Referee Tony Perez waved an end to the bout.


Getting Around
Because of a water main break on Thursday, 42d Street will remain closed between Third and Fifth Avenues pending repairs that are expected to take at least until Monday.
BUSES: The closing affects buses on the No. 42 and 104 lines.
Eastbound buses on both lines will run along 40th Street between Third and Fifth Avenues.
Westbound buses will run along 49th Street.
SUBWAYS: Service returned to normal yesterday.


Guam: Equal in War, but Not in Peace
To the Editor:
I applaud "Free the Government's Plantation" (editorial, Oct. 6), which called for statehood for the District of Columbia.
In essence, you seem to argue that simple justice requires that the legitimate desires of the people of the District for self-determination be met.
I agree wholeheartedly.


Guam: Equal in War, but Not in Peace; Elusive Emancipation
To the Editor:
If the Federal Government is having trouble "freeing the plantation" right under its nose in the District of Columbia (editorial, Oct. 6), you cannot imagine the difficulties we in Guam have in trying to get a meaningful form of self-government.
Guam too is a colony -- inscribed on the list of non-self-governing territories at the United Nations and an "unincorporated territory" under United States law -- that is subject to the almost limitless force of Congress's territorial clause powers.


Rush of Pleas Clears Brooklyn Cases
The Brooklyn District Attorney's office said yesterday that it had cut its backlog of felony cases by 15 percent in an unusual three-week campaign of plea bargains, reduced charges and dismissals that gave many defendants a windfall and helped smooth a reorganization of courts and the prosecutor's office.
In the clash of criminal law, where accused muggers and thieves and the lawyers who defend them rarely see eye to eye with prosecutors, and judges are frequently overwhelmed by caseloads, the campaign offered a rare glimpse of common ground that left all sides generally satisfied, if not downright happy.


Review/Cabaret; Songs Hot, Cool and Blue, by Sylvia Syms
The veteran cabaret singer Sylvia Syms has reached the age where her once-robust contralto has developed many treacherous seams and crevices.
Yet her singing, like that of the late Mabel Mercer, still transcends the ravages of time through indomitable will combined with an interpretive wisdom that has deepened dramatically in recent years.
Miss Syms, who is appearing Fridays through Sundays at Eighty-Eight's (228 West 10th Street) through Oct. 27, calls her new program "Endangered Species." The title alludes to the popular standards that she regards almost as sacred texts and that she interprets as a distillate of her personal experience.


Minnesota Cancels Plan to Play Lottery on Nintendo
Minnesota, under fire by its own legislators, has dropped its plan to use Nintendo video games in the home as a way to play the state lottery.
With the revenue growth of state lotteries tapering off, the Nintendo plan had created a great deal of interest in other states as an innovative use of the most widely available and easy-to-use computers in homes.
But Minnesota legislators criticized the use of a children's toy to allow adults to gamble, and some also expressed concern about what they say is the already-high level of gambling in Minnesota.


The Magnet For Iron Men And Women
Beginning at 7 A.M.
Saturday, more than 1,400 athletes will set out on one of the toughtest endurance races in the world, the Gatorade Ironman Triathlon.
Invented in 1978 by John Collins, the Ironman has grown into the Mount Everest of the endurance set.
Collins combined the distances of three events -- the Waikiki Rough Water Swim, the Around-the-Island (Oahu) Bike Ride and the Honolulu Marathon -- into a one-day race: a 2.4-mile swim, a 112-mile bike race and a 26.2-mile run.


Bonds Rise as Inflation View Is Reassessed
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds rebounded yesterday after Thursday's sharp selloff, and interest rates moved lower.
Traders and analysts said a reassessment of Thursday's consumer price report, coupled with the release yesterday of figures showing September housing starts were weaker than expected, had much to do with the turnaround in prices.


Catharsis at Grand Central
"I hate you!" Sarah Bernstein screamed at a man who beat her by a step to a taxicab.
"The city is crumbling right before our eyes," moaned Judith McDonald.
"I may have to walk to work," cried Al Tripoli.
Look on the bright side, Sarah, Judith and Al.
The city may be crumbling, but it sure knows how to pick up the crumbs in a hurry.


Game 7 Rates for CBS, Too
CBS finally has baseball ratings to celebrate: Game 7 of the National League Championship Series between Atlanta and Pittsburgh on Thursday night scored a 19.8 Nielsen rating, leading to CBS's first Thursday prime-time victory since 1986.
That playoff's average rating of 14.4, as calculated so far, will fall when the rating for last Monday's Game 5 is factored in (that game was played in the afternoon, and daytime ratings are not figured as quickly as those for prime time).
But the reduced average should not keep CBS from substantially exceeding the complete National League Championship Series average of 12.0 in 1990.
Each rating point equals 921,000 TV households.


Walter Elsasser, 87, Geophysicist And Leader in Study of Magnetism
Walter M. Elsasser, a Johns Hopkins University geophysicist who won a National Medal of Science in 1987 for his pioneering research in planetary magnetism, the movement of the earth's crust and other fields, died Monday in Baltimore.
He was 87 years old.
He died of old age, said a university spokesman, Lisa Hooker.


Public &amp; Private; Trouble With Teddy
The trouble with Teddy is that he's like the little girl with the curl in the middle of her forehead.
When he's good, he's better than anyone else, but when he's bad -- oh, boy!
When he finally opened his mouth during the Judiciary Committee hearings on Anita Hill's charges against Clarence Thomas, he tied it all up with a ribbon.
He said with considerable ire that he hoped we would not be hearing any more about perjury or racism, that instead of trying to divert attention the committee should concentrate on sexual harassment.
For just a moment he was what he was always meant to be: Edward M. Kennedy, the liberal conscience of the Senate.
And then he lapsed back into a self-imposed silence, into the cat's cradle woven of the facts of Teddy's private life.


U S West's Net Off 11%; Bell Atlantic Posts Gain
Continuing the mixed profit results reported by the nation's telephone companies for the third quarter, U S West Inc. said yesterday that its earnings had dropped 11 percent from a year earlier, while another regional Bell company, the Bell Atlantic Corporation, reported a profit increase of nearly 7 percent as the sale of an investment helped to override the weak economy.


Holtz Talks Soft But Irish Aren't Out
Lou Holtz recoiled earlier this week at the suggestion that his once-beaten Notre Dame team could back into a national championship, or at least play in a bowl game that would clearly determine a national champion.
"Our overall football team is not national champion caliber," Holtz said.
"That's the farthest thing from our minds."


Shareholders Plan to Drop Nynex Suits
The Nynex Corporation is on the verge of freeing itself of a series of lawsuits filed in the name of shareholders against its directors and senior management.
The lawsuits stem from accusations, first made by the Federal Communications Commission, of corporate misconduct and overcharging of Nynex's telephone companies by its nonregulated purchasing unit.
Nynex reached a settlement with the F.C.C. last year without admitting guilt but was required to pay a fine of more than $1.4 million and refund $35.5 million to customers in reduced rates for future calls.


Review/Fashion; Voyages Into Uncharted Waters
The first three days of spring ready-to-wear showings here were filled with clothes of such inspired giddiness one could not doubt this city is the hub of the fashion world today, just as it was of the art world early in this century.
Experiments of dazzling impracticality were presented before surprisingly receptive audiences.
Leading the charge into new fashion territory were Rei Kawakubo and Yohji Yamamoto of the Tokyo school and John Galliano of London.
Go to Milan for wearable clothes.
Go to London for gently quirky styles.
Here is where the trophies of new voyages of discovery are presented.


A Day After the Deluge, It's Back to 'Normal'
Just a day after one of the worst water-main breaks in New York City history disrupted much of the city's subway and street traffic, commuters' routines more or less returned to normal yesterday, and city officials said they were closing in on what might have caused all the trouble.
Round-the-clock repairs and cleanup involving hundreds of transit workers restored service overnight on the Lexington Avenue and the No. 7 Flushing lines and got the shuttle between Grand Central and Times Square running again.


A Return to Normal After Break in Main
Subway service returned to normal in Manhattan and Queens yesterday, one day after one of the worst water-main breaks in New York City history.
Officials said they were closing in on what caused the 87-year-old pipe to break..
Workers overnight pumped two million gallons of water from subway tunnels, cleared debris and repaired short-circuited escalators and other electrical equipment.
All in time for yesterday's morning rush hour.
After a day of cramming into buses, scurrying for taxis or making dizzying alternative connections, commuters, not surprisingly, were relieved.
Article, page 25


Windows Jury Finds 3 Guilty And Acquits 5
Rejecting most of the prosecution's case, a jury yesterday acquitted five defendants and convicted three other defendants of only two charges in a major trial about accusations that the Mafia controlled the lucrative window-installation industry in New York City.
But prosecutors stressed that two of the convicted men, Venero Mangano and Benedetto Aloi, were "the two highest ranking organized-crime figures" in the complex six-month trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Guidepost; A Stamp Helps, Too
Every day about 30 million letters go astray.
The Postal Service says the causes include incorrect addressing, and handwriting so illegible that neither human nor machine can decipher it.
Here are some ways to avoid problems, especially with the approach of the holiday mailing period, when more mail than ever is likely to go astray.
Clarity Use a typewriter, a computer printer or handwritten block letters.
Limit the address to four or five lines.
ZIP Code To be read by the Postal Service's high-speed optical character machines the ZIP code should be on the last line of the address, after the state.
An incorrect ZIP code, or the omission of one, will cause a delay.
Apartment Numbers The apartment number should immediately follow the street address on the same line.
Absence of numbers is a big reason for nondelivery.  'Courtesy' Envelopes Don't try to reroute a reply envelope that has a bar code at the bottom by placing a new address label over the printed address.
The postal machine will read the bar code and send the mail to the destination the code represents.
Film Paste a label with your address on film cartridges so that if they fall out of the envelope, as many do, the post office can return them.


The Thomas Swearing-In; A Festive Mood at Thomas Swearing-In
In a White House ceremony that was as much a festive political victory rally as a solemn swearing-in, President Bush praised Clarence Thomas today, saying, "America is blessed to have a man of this character serve on its highest court."
"Clarence Thomas has endured America at its worst, and he's answered with America at its best," Mr.
Bush said.
"He brings that hard-won experience to the High Court, and America will be the better for it."


Guarding Against Bicycle Theft or Flats
A company in Salt Lake City has developed a bicycle pump that doubles as a lock.
The device, the Airlock, stores the lock's cables, which then will not coil, twist, and impede a cyclist under way.
The device, of course, is intended to discourage theft of the pump, the bicycle or both.


Senators Told of Deaf Ear Turned to B.C.C.I. Reports
A lawyer for Lloyd's of London told Congress today that the Government had repeatedly ignored his evidence that a Florida office of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International was engaged in criminal conduct.
The testimony, before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee's Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics and International Operations, came as the panel began its second round of hearings on the activities of the bank, which was seized last July by international bank regulators.
The bank has been said to have links to many illegal schemes, including illicit arms deals, kickbacks and a multibillion-dollar fraud that former employees have said was carried out at the direction of the bank's top executives.


Duke's Past Was Covered Extensively in New Orleans Press
To the Editor:
"Duke's Disguise," Jason Berry's article about news coverage of the neo-Nazi David Duke and his gubernatorial campaign (Op-Ed, Oct. 16), propounds the theory that Mr.
Duke's sordid past has escaped press scrutiny.
As Mr.
Berry, a resident of New Orleans knows, the facts do not support this contention.
I would like to set the record straight as it pertains to The Times-Picayune.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Ratings were reduced on short-term securities of Citicorp and its subsidiary, Citibank.
The cut by Thomson Bankwatch, which specializes in bank securities, did not prompt any immediate rise in the rates that Citicorp must pay to borrow.  [ Page 35. ]
Minnesota has dropped its plan to use Nintendo home video games to play the state lottery.
Minnesota legislators criticized the use of a children's toy to allow adults to gamble.  [ 35. ]


Firm Cuts Its Rating On Citicorp
The rating on short-term securities of Citicorp and its subsidiary Citibank was reduced yesterday by Thomson Bankwatch, a rating firm that specializes in bank securities.
The rating cut did not prompt any immediate increase in the interest rates that Citicorp and Citibank must pay for short-term borrowings, traders and investors said, but it was another blemish on the reputation of the nation's largest banking company.


McDonnell Joins Dynamics In Posting Good Results
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation, the nation's largest military contractor and the second-largest builder of commercial aircraft, said yesterday that its operating earnings rose sharply in the third quarter, bolstering the aerospace company's contention that it has put its financial woes behind it.
On a net basis, earnings at McDonnell actually fell 69 percent, but that was attributable to a one-time gain in the quarter last year.
When that gain is excluded, operating earnings were five and a half times greater than in the 1990 quarter.


Corrections
A chart titled "Tracking the Markets," appearing each Saturday in Business Day, has carried erroneous figures supplied by Salomon Brothers for the municipal bond yields in the "Interest Rates" panel since June 6.
Today's chart, with the corrected yields, appears on page 38.


Bridge
The players from the lonely North Atlantic island of Iceland made a great impression at the recent NEC World Team Championships in Yokohama, Japan.
They won their qualifying section convincingly and then defeated successively the United States II team, Sweden and Poland to take the Bermuda Bowl title.
A portent of things to come appeared on the diagramed deal, played at the start of the championships.
Thor Jonsson, as South for Iceland, competed boldly to reach two diamonds, and the spade three was led.
Dummy's jack was covered by the queen and ace, and the heart jack was led.
When West won with the ace and led another spade, South took his two tricks in that suit, ending in the dummy.


The Thomas Swearing-In; After Ordeal of Senate Confirmation, Views on Thomas's Court Opinions
To Clarence Thomas, the painful experience of defending himself before the nation against charges of sexual harassment will make him a more sensitive member of the Supreme Court, someone who can sympathize with those who may be falsely accused.
"I think it showed me just how vulnerable I am as a human being and an American," he said to Senator Dennis DeConcini, Democrat of Arizona, at the Judiciary Committee hearings on Saturday.
"I'll survive a different person."


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the shooting deaths of 23 people in Killeen, Tex., misstated the location of the headquarters of Luby's Cafeterias Inc., and in some copies misidentified the company's president and chief executive.
The headquarters are in San Antonio, Tex., and the chief executive is Ralph (Pete) Erben.


Man Convicted in 1979 Slaying Is Put to Death in North Carolina
A man who killed one woman and seriously wounded another in a drug-induced knife attack 12 years ago was executed by lethal injection at the state prison here early today.
The 36-year-old prisoner, Michael Van McDougall, became the fourth person executed by North Carolina, and the 156th in the nation, since the United States Supreme Court allowed the death penalty to be restored in 1976.


8 Soviet Republics Sign Economic Pact
Russia and seven other Soviet republics signed an agreement today to create a free-market community to replace the old command economy and begin easing the nation back from chaos.
The ambitious compact, bedeviled by doubts, was formally approved in a brief ceremony amid the gold-and-cream splendor of St.
George's Hall in the Kremlin before a beaming President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Poland and China To Get Boeing Jets
Poland's national airline, LOT, has signed a $300 million deal with the Boeing Company for the delivery of nine medium-range planes, a spokesman for LOT said in Warsaw.
And China agreed to buy 13 more Boeing 737 jets, in a deal worth more than $500 million, the official New China News Agency reported from Beijing.
Under the LOT contract, the airline will receive a mix of 737-300 and 737-400 aircraft.
The airline also took options for two additional 737's in the deal, which the airline said was signed Thursday in New York.
The China deal was the third contract signed this year between China and Boeing.


Your Taxes; Push for a Break On Real Estate
With the economy pulling out of recession at an agonizingly slow pace, real estate interests hope to find fresh support for a campaign to undo what they consider a singularly mischievous provision of the Tax Reform Act of 1986.
And they seem to have picked up an important ally in the Resolution Trust Corporation, the Government agency created to take over failed savings and loans and sell off their assets.
While passage of any tax-related legislation this year seems increasingly unlikely, there is a certain logic to the argument that making investment in rental real estate more attractive would spur overall economic activity while helping the agency dispose of its $12 billion inventory of rental properties, about 25 percent of the total portfolio.


Stephen Dickson, Baritone, 40
Stephen Dickson, a baritone who sang at the Metropolitan Opera, the New York City Opera and with many other companies, died yesterday at his mother's home in Oklahoma City.
He was 40 years old.
He died of complications from AIDS, said his manager, Bruce Zemsky of New York City.


Emile Mollard, Camouflage Specialist, 96
Gen.
Emile Mollard, a camouflage specialist who helped manufacture machine guns for the French Resistance in World War II, died on Wednesday, the newspaper Le Monde reported today.
He was 96 years old.
The newspaper report did not list a cause of death for General Mollard.


Corrections
A picture caption on the Evening Hours page last Sunday misidentified Judith Hollister, who appeared with the Dalai Lama.
She is the found er of the Temple of Understanding, not Tibet House.


The Beautiful Side of Growing Old
IN a blur of spangles and satin, 11 beauty contestants stripped off their evening gowns and pulled on their talent costumes.
The small room they shared left no space for maneuvering, much less modesty.
Undergarments flew through the air, as if spurred on by the competition.
"My mother is out there," said Fredde Barton of Valley Stream.


In the Time of the General
A NATION OF ENEMIES
Chile Under Pinochet.
By Pamela Constable and Arturo Valenzuela.
Illustrated. 367 pp.
New York: W.W.
Norton &amp; Company. $24.95.


DOUBTS OF BRITISH ON EUROPE KINDLED
Angry doubts about Britain's future in a united Europe have been raised again in this country after the European Community threatened to take legal action to halt seven major British construction projects, including a high-speed rail link between London and the new English Channel tunnel, on environmental grounds.
British officials said environmental consequences had been fully considered in the planning of all the projects where construction is already under way.
In addition to the proposed high-speed rail corridor between London and the Channel, the projects in question include two expressway extensions, a bridge approach and three private industrial sites.


Stadium Repair Halted
The roof that rips will have to stay torn for a while longer.
Andre Vallerand, the minister responsible for the Olympics Installations Board, issued a stop-work order on repairing the fabric that makes up the roof at Olympic Stadium, home of the Expos.
An international panel of experts said the roof would rip again if repaired.


AFTERMATH OF AN EMERGENCY
Winerip writes: "The Leedses -- white middle-class people who grew up in the suburbs of Minneapolis -- were not likely to engender any gut sympathies at this inner-city hospital. They had problems with simple communciation." Mrs.
Leeds is understandably frustrated by the apparent incompetence of the investigating caseworker.
Yet she herself displays a lapse of judgment when she states, "We felt, How could someone look at us and not see that we were good people?"
What do appearances have to do with being judged "good people"?
Did she mean that they were well dressed, clean and convincingly concerned?
And white?
That description could also be used to describe serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer.
MEERA KOTHARI
New York, N.Y.


Penn State Rumbles By Rutgers
The Scarlet Knights of Rutgers seemed to understand that a game at Penn State would no longer provide a definitive measurement of how far they have to go.
This was to be just another step on the way to where they want to be.
Their journey was instructive, if not productive.
Rutgers learned -- the hard way -- that giving Penn State a free trip down the field, and more than halfway back again, makes it difficult to beat the Nittany Lions on homecoming weekend.
That is hard enough already.


Plain Talk in Big D
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE?
By Molly Ivins. 284 pp. New York: Random House. $23.


CAMPUS LIFE: Skidmore; The President Attacks a Piano To Open Minds
At Skidmore College, a required course called Liberal Studies I is designed to make first-semester freshmen open their minds.
Last week, it had them dropping their jaws as the college's president, David H. Porter, attacked a piano keyboard with his left forearm, his right hand and at one point a block of wood strategically placed atop some of the black keys.
"Play of the mind may be the most important thing in creativity, or the most important thing at Skidmore," Mr.
Porter said as he proceeded to, well, play altered versions of sonatas by the American composers Charles Ives, Henry Cowell and John Cage.
Taught by Guest Lecturers
The course, required of all 628 first-semester freshmen, is designed to give students an interdisciplinary learning experience and "some understanding of basic problems of the human condition," according to David Burrows, a psychology professor and director of the program.
The 25 lectures are taught by guest lecturers drawn from every discipline at Skidmore.
Students also attend small seminars, twice a week, taught by faculty members from throughout the college.


Basement Wall Leak? Try Waterproofing It
THIS is a good time of year to repair or waterproof basement walls.
Serious cracks and major or chronic leakage should be repaired by a professional basement waterproofer, but small isolated cracks and damage like efflorescence, or salt deposits, and peeling paint caused by damp walls often can be remedied by amateurs using products like waterproofing paints.
To repair cracks and holes, use hydraulic cement, which is powdered.
Begin by scouring all loose material from the damaged area with a wire brush.
Also, if practical, undercut the sides of the area by chiseling so that the crack or hole is wider toward the inside of the masonry than at the surface.
Use a hammer and cold chisel, and wear protective goggles.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
COMPOSTING TIPS
What better time to start composting than now, when fallen leaves are plentiful.
If instructions or incentives are needed, the Cornell Cooperative Extension stands ready to provide them at two backyard compost-demonstration sites.
One site has been open for a year at Muscoot Farm in Somers.
Another, for southern Westchester, will open Saturday at the Lenoir Preserve on Dudley Street in Yonkers, with tours and demonstrations offered at no charge from 1 to 4 P.M.


Bright and Crisp, Autumn Ushers In a Quickened Pace
There's an internal shift that takes place in the fall, sort of like everything else in nature.
The birds are flocking south, their mating over for the time being. (Do they take a break from the kids in winter? Knit sweaters? Read books?)
The leaves turn brilliant colors, as their chlorophyll fades away and nutrients move into the roots, revealing the reds and yellows that have been there all along, like hidden parts of a personality.
If the days are bright and the nights cool, sugars maufacture anthocyanins that deepen the leaves to scarlet or purple.
We don't understand exactly what triggers this intricate fugue, but it's genetically programmed, and hormones are the conductors.


Norman Hill Towns of Sicily
THE NORMAN CONQUEST OF ENGLAND WAS amazingly tidy, almost a one-battle affair, but Sicily proved to be a different matter.
It took 30 years of attack and retreat, skirmish and siege, before Robert Guiscard and his younger brother, the Great Count Roger, managed to wrest all of Sicily from the Saracens by 1091.
The Normans had yet to become seagoers; they fought mainly on foot and on horseback, besieging the enemy in its mountaintop fortresses, charging down upon its armies in the river valleys, advancing slowly westward along the mountain ranges, the Nebrodi and the Madonie, that skirt the island's northern coast, edging their way toward Sicily's capital, the rich and cosmopolitan Palermo.
To trace the Normans' footsteps through these mountains today is to discover an unfamiliar side of Sicily, archaic and Arcadian, a land of rich pastures and heavily wooded slopes, with unexpected architectural treasures clinging to its peaks.
Given all the Normans' to-ing and fro-ing and the number of towns they captured, the brief pilgrimage my husband and I set out on recently involved some fairly arbitrary choices.
Our plan was to strike south from the coast at Sant' Agata di Militello, cross the Nebrodi and then turn west at Cesaro on to Route 120, the road that runs along the ridge dividing the mountain valleys from the rolling wheatlands of Sicily's interior.
We would let whim and the state of feet and stomach determine where we would linger and what we would leave for future visits.
Whim plus history required us to begin our pilgrimage on a pinnacle of pink marble that rises abruptly about 1,700 feet above the coastal plain.
It was here, at San Marco d'Alunzio, that in 1061 the Normans built their first Sicilian fortress.
With some 1,000 knights and as many foot soldiers (a ridiculously small army -- 30 buses' worth -- such as invades the Roman Forum or Agrigento's Valley of the Temples on any good morning), Robert and Roger had taken Messina by surprise, then marched into the interior and routed the army of the Emir, Ibn al-Hawas, 15,000 strong, under the ramparts of Enna.
The onset of winter forced the Normans to withdraw to the mainland, but they left a garrison here, at San Marco, among the ruins of the ancient city of Aluntium, to control both the sea to the north and the mountain passes to the south.
The town of San Marco d'Alunzio is pretty and prosperous.
Although most of the two- and three-story houses have been done over in modern and rather tasteless stucco, there is a sprinkling of handsome churches and many narrow alleys and arched stairways that betray its medieval origins.
All that remains of the fortress is a massive wall, disfigured by a concrete water tower; only a rabid Norman fan would feel it worth hiking up the town's steep streets to see where the Great Count's widow, Adelaide, held her first Sicilian court and where his son Roger II, the greatest of the Norman kings of Sicily, spent much of his early childhood.
The real jewel of San Marco stands at the lower edge of town: the cella of an ancient temple to Hercules, converted by the Normans into the Church of San Marco.
Very small, simple and roofless, it has as its only ornament a severe marble portal added during the Renaissance.
Yet like the Norman cathedral at Trani, in Apulia, the church's golden stone has only sea and sky as a backdrop, and its pleasing pastiche of styles foreshadows the eclectic genius of Sicily's greatest Norman monuments.
The road south into the Nebrodi Mountains climbs almost 5,000 feet, soft rising curves that pass olive and almond groves, pine- and cypress-shaded villas.
Once past the town of San Fratello, the oaks begin -- scrub and cork oaks, holm and Turkey oaks -- and then the Bosco della Miraglia, one of the few great forests of beech trees remaining in Sicily.
Trees that stretch as far as the eye can see are balm indeed to the parched Sicilian soul, and this area, destined to become a regional park in the near future, is a favorite vacation spot for Sicilian nature lovers, who come to stay at one of the island's few country inns, and to walk in woods brilliant with turning foliage in the autumn and carpeted with low-lying mountain flowers in the spring.
Huge hogs, hairy, black and alarmingly boarlike in appearance, snuffle through the underbrush in search of acorns, a diet that produces deliciously flavorful meat.
Horses of the highly prized San Fratello breed graze in the clearings.
Beyond the pass of Portella Bella Miraglia, the woods thin out and open onto splendid views of Mount Etna and of the upper valley of the Simeto River.
The houses and fields seem minuscule and ageless in the distance; we could be looking at the same landscape, the same woods and settlements that the Norman soldiers studied warily as they marched.
Leaving Etna behind us, we head west, past fields yellow with wheat stubble or newly plowed, toward a rocky spur that sticks up high on the horizon.
This is Troina, perched 3,675 feet above sea level on its rock top and intimidating even for us who approach by car, and for whom conquest will mean no more than navigating the narrow streets that wind up to the citadel.
Sheer stone walls rise menacingly from the rock, yesterday's fortress fashioned into today's cathedral.
Of the old fortifications only one tower remains, converted into a campanile and pierced by an arch.
A narrow alley leads under the arch and round behind the apse, to where the hewed stone of the cathedral walls meet the live rock of the cliff.
From here, as from the terrace in front of the cathedral, all Sicily opens at one's feet: the soft hills of the central plain, the rugged mountains and tree-shaded valleys to the north, Etna blocking the eastern horizon.
One wonders if this view, imposing but windswept and chilly, was any consolation to Roger during the four terrible months he spent here with his bride in 1062, besieged by the Saracens from the surrounding countryside and by the Greek-speaking inhabitants of the town itself.
The latter, weary of Muslim domination, first welcomed and then turned against their Norman deliverers who, for all that they were Christians too, seemed more interested in pillaging than in colonizing.
Winter came early and fiercely that year, and the Normans were taken by surprise: Roger had a single woolen cloak to share with Judith, who, according to a contemporary chronicle, "had only her own tears with which to quench her thirst, only sleep to palliate the hunger that tormented her." The Saracens also felt the cold and took to drinking the strong local wine for warmth.
It was thanks to the soporific effect of this wine that in January of 1063 Roger and his soldiers were able to steal over the fortress walls and win back the surrounding town from the sleeping Saracen sentries.
After Troina, the road curves beneath the eroded crags and crumbling castle walls that stand benevolently over the town of Cerami, and then it descends gently into the river valley where in 1063 Roger won the battle that consolidated his control of central Sicily.
As many as 20,000 Saracens were defeated by a mere 500 Normans, led to victory, they claimed, by St.
George himself.
In token of thanks for heavenly intervention, Roger sent four of the Saracens' camels as a present to Pope Alexander II.
It is difficult to imagine camels at pasture in these fields, where sleek cattle and fat sheep are grazing, the source of the excellent meat and cheese for which these mountains are famous.
We are unprepared for the quiet grace and the architectural riches of Nicosia, a town whose population still divides itself between the Nicoleti, the descendants of the original Greek-speaking inhabitants, and the Mariani, descended from the Latin-speaking colonists who came from Lombardy with Roger's third wife, Adelaide (after almost a thousand years, the Lombard influence still makes itself heard in the local dialect, quite incomprehensible to other Sicilians).
The Mariani lived on top of the mountain, near the castle, and worshiped at what is now the basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore, while the Nicoleti lived down in the lower part of town and worshiped at the church of San Nicola.
The rivalry between the two factions was so fierce that even on Good Friday each carried its own statue of Christ crucified about the town, and fists flew if one procession invaded the territory of the other.
Only recently has the ill-feeling between the two groups diminished: the competing processions have been unified, and San Nicola is Chiesa Madre, the most important church in town.
San Nicola is a 14th-century church, with an elegant carved portal and a portico overlooking the town's main square.
Its bell tower, a fusion of different periods, has heavy Norman foundations and delicate Gothic windows in the second story.
The church's medieval interior was completely redecorated in later centuries, and frescoed vaulting hides its greatest treasure, a 14th-century wooden ceiling painted with saints, angels, animals and letters of the alphabet.
In photographs it looks absolutely enchanting, but it is closed to the public.
The steep, stone-paved streets that climb the hill toward Santa Maria are lined with the houses of the local nobility, awkward but charming country cousins to the great Baroque palaces of Noto and Palermo: terrified mermen writhe over one portal, while elsewhere squashed lions roar with the pain of the weighty stone above them.
Some of the old palaces and churches have fallen; wildflowers dance over tumbled stones and free-standing arches, and the air is full of birdsong.
The little palm-shaded church of San Giuseppe marks the boundary that separated the two processing crucifixes on Good Friday; here the tall and elegant convent church of San Vincenzo has heavy iron gratings on all its windows, protection or imprisonment for the nuns inside.
Near the top of the hill stands Santa Maria Maggiore, built in the 18th century to replace a Norman church destroyed by a landslide (a local baron donated the facade from his palazzo, hence the pagan goddesses on the capitals).
Below the church, weathered tile roofs descend sharply toward the piazza where the campanile of San Nicola looks up defiantly, and then they climb again toward the brick Romanesque bell tower of Il Salvatore del Mondo, which rises above the others' rivalries.
The view from Santa Maria Maggiore explains much about these Sicilian mountain towns: with little room at the top for modernization, the old neighborhoods that crowd around their citadels have remained unchanged, while expansion has headed downward.
The younger generations with their new prosperity and their Benetton boutiques live down in the valley in the high-rises.
Up here, the Sicily I first knew 30 years ago survives: the dowdy, narrow little stores with odd assortments of soaps and canned tomatoes, or bits of lace and baby clothes, the dingy cafes full of men with nothing to do and the silent streets, empty except for old women and cats.
More archaic still is the neighborhood we discover as we explore a little street to the north of Santa Maria, where the houses are half built on top of the rock and half carved into it.
A many-colored rooster struts on the doorstep of 1 Via Nisi, which for all its gleaming whitewash and majolica-tiled street number, is no more than a hole in the rock.
Across the street a sidewalk, protected by an iron railing, overlooks a steep cliff studded with prickly pears and riddled with caves that are strung together by paths, clotheslines and fences; this one a chicken coop, that one a storehouse, another stuffed with bales of hay.
In front of one of the lower caves a shepherd is milking his flock.
Caves also dominate the southern side of the town of Sperlinga.
Those that open onto the main street have been given 19th-century facades, flush with the rock, while above them walkways, complete with iron railings and street lanterns, zigzag their way up the face of the cliff.
Each cave has a door and a street number, a few even have flowerpots or laundry strung out, although most of them were finally abandoned in the 1950's after some 27 centuries of use.
Even Sperlinga's castle, one of the most mysterious and most beautiful in Sicily, is a cave, at least in part.
Above a long horizontal rift in the cliffside, thought to have first been fortified around 1000 B.C., the crenelated towers and arched walls of later centuries grow out of the living rock like giant lichens, and stairs carved into the pinnacle of the mountain lead up to the topmost tower.
It was just outside Sperlinga during the Allied invasion in 1943 that Robert Capa took his famous photograph of an enormous G.I. squatting down on his heels to ask directions of a tiny Sicilian shepherd.
We pass a number of equally picturesque and photogenic shepherds as we drive along almost 50 years later, for changes have come slowly in the mountains, and lack of economic opportunity means that those who stay on here follow the old ways.
In Sperlinga I talk to one of the elderly women who sell gaily colored rugs they weave by hand.
Signora Nunzia weaves on a handsome wooden loom that takes up the whole front room of her house and has been in her family for several centuries; she is often spelled by her daughter, who is trained as a teacher but can find no work in Sperlinga.
The town of Gangi marks our passage from the Nebrodi to the Madonie.
Unfairly prejudiced by the icy wind of a previous visit, we allot too little time to its bustling medieval streets and churches and push on to Petralia Soprana, the upper Petralia, as opposed to Petralia Sottana lower down the mountain.
Both towns are early -- Roger moved his headquarters west to the Petralias in 1066 -- both have some lovely churches and medieval houses, and both command beautiful views out over the surrounding valleys.
According to the local tourist office, the lower Petralia is where the action is, but we are won over by the quiet backwaters of Petralia Soprana.
In its deserted streets we meet Adelina, a snow-white goat who goes on walks with her master and comes when he whistles, and we stop to chat with the elderly women sweeping the little square in front of Santa Maria di Loreto, a pretty church of pale gray curlicues and twin steeples topped by colorful majolica.
They move their brooms with loving precision across the pebbled patterns, readying the square for the coming Corpus Domini procession.
It was Roger's great-grandson, the Emperor Frederick II, who awarded the town of Polizzi Generosa the title "generosa" (the generous), an honor that is reflected in the scale of its churches and palaces, bigger and more grandiose than those of the Petralias, although the spirit is that of a small town.
At a restaurant we find ourselves wedged between the mayor and his sidekicks (Christian Democrats) and two local magistrates (left-wing), whose good-natured political debate flies back and forth over our heads.
A chance remark leads to conversation and then to a tour of the town, guided by mayor and magistrates, which includes the Madonia wildlife museum and the Flemish triptych, portraying the Madonna and Child surrounded by angels and saints, attributed by some to Hans Memling, that hangs behind the high altar of the Chiesa Madre.
One of the westernmost towns of the Madonie, Polizzi looks out over the Imera River valley to the mountains surrounding Palermo.
From here it is possible to follow in haste on Roger's tracks, heading westward toward Palermo, toward the churches glittering with mosaics and the lush pleasure palaces of the Norman kings to come.
But we want a last look at forest and castle and so choose a longer route, up over the mountains through Portella della Colla.
Like the Nebrodi, the Madonie are thickly wooded on their northern slopes, the surviving oak and chestnut forest integrated with reforested pines.
This is where Palermo vacations and sometimes even skis in winter, but now rock cliffs rise from the autumn foliage, the turning colors brilliant in the slanting afternoon sun.
Where the road forks, we turn toward Castelbuono, for a quick and self-indulgent visit to the "good castle," a fortress powerful enough to have withstood the assaults of both enemy and time.
As massive, square and threatening as a gauntleted fist, the castle was built in the late 13th century by the Ventimiglias, the mightiest of the princely families that contended for the remains of the Norman kingdom.
An imposing cobbled ramp, wide enough for a baron to ride up with all his armed escort about him, leads to the narrow portal and the porticoed grace of the inner courtyard.
On one of the upper floors the 18th-century owners built a chapel, decorated in the school of Palermo's famous stuccoists, the Serpottas.
The rather mannered plasterwork -- macabre motifs of tormented saints and contorted cupids -- has nothing of the frothy gaiety of the Serpottas' Palermo oratories.
In comparison to the vigor of the Norman ruins that we have been visiting and to the forcefulness of its own surroundings, the chapel exudes an atmosphere of decadence and empty display.
It is a metaphor with which to end our Noman pilgrimage, an ornate reliquary of former might that sums up the centuries of violent power struggles and slow decline that followed upon the golden age of the Norman conquest.
FOLLOWING THE NORMANS
The Sicilian mountains are best visited in fall or spring (the flowers alone are worth the trip).
Remember that this is not a tourist area: the hotels are very simple, although reasonable, clean and occasionally quite attractive.
Following is a selective list of accommodations around the island.
Full-pension prices are for one person for one day.
All prices are calculated at a rate of 1,300 lire to $1.
Unless noted, credit cards are not accepted.
HOTELS AND INNS
CESARO: VILLA MIRAGLIA, Portella della Miraglia (S.S. 289) (telephone: 095-696585), is a converted hunting lodge with five rooms.
A double room, with bath, is about $55; the full pension is $65 a day.
Reservations for weekends should be made one month in advance.
NICOSIA: MOTEL LA VIGNETA, Contrada San Basilio (935-647866), is a quiet motel with 16 rooms.
A double room, with bathroom, is $55, and the full pension is $95.
Dinner for two, with wine, at the hotel restaurant is about $35.
Reservations should be made one week in advance; credit cards are accepted.
GANGI: ALBERGO MIRAMONTI, 19 Via Nazionale (921-44424), has 15 rooms.
A double room, with bath, is about $45, full pension is about $65.
The hotel restaurant offers such dishes as penne alla Miramonti, pasta with cream, prosciutto, mushrooms, ragu (meat) sauce and mozzarella.
Dinner for two, with local wine, is about $35.
ISNELLO: OSTELLO DELLA GIOVENTU, Contrada Mandria Marcata, Piano Battaglia (921-49995), is a ski lodge run by the Club Alpino Siciliano.
There are 16 rooms, and full pension is about $40.
Reservations are advised.
The hotel restaurant offers such local dishes as homemade pasta with mushroom-and-tomato sauce.
Dinner for two, with local wine, is about $40.
ISNELLO: PIANO TORRE PARK HOTEL, Contrada Torremontaspro (921-62672), is laid out around gardens, with a swimming pool, tennis and volleyball courts, and an indoor and outdoor restaurant.
There are 30 rooms, and a double room, with bath, is about $80; full pension is about $100.
Reservations are necessary.
RESTAURANTS
Plain but delicious mountain fare, in particular the well-flavored local pork and lamb, is served throughout this area.
Following is a sampling of restaurants.
SPERLINGA: RISTORANTE LA MADONNINA, Contrada Cicera (935-64330), serves local lamb and such dishes as pasta mucciata, cooked eggplant stuffed with pasta, tomatoes and cheese.
Dinner for two, with local wine, is about $35.
POLIZZI GENEROSA: RISTORANTE ITRIA, 3 Via Itria (921-88543), offers the local lamb and pork and such dishes as pasta with asparagus.
Dinner for two, with local wine, is about $30.
CASTELBUONO: RISTORANTE VECCHIO PALMENTO, 2 Via Failla (921-72099), presents historical local food, from old family recipes.
Specialties include dishes made with the local lamb and pork, and a dessert called Testa di Turco (Turk's head), a pancake with cream filling.
Dinner for two, with local wine, is about $50.
SOMETHING SWEET
The local hazelnut and almond crops get put to good use at the area's pastry shops, among them PASTICCERIA LA BLUNDA (Via Fratelli Testa, Nicosia), PASTICCERIA INGUAGGIATO (Corso P. Agliata. Petralia Sottana) and PASTICCERIA LIMA (50 Via Garibaldi, Polizzi Generosa).
The last two make sfoglio delle Madonie, a pastry that has sheep cheese in its spicy filling, but bears no resemblance to cheesecake.


Ms. Greene, Lawyer, Weds
Elizabeth Greene, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Greene of West Chatham, Mass., was married yesterday to Keith Lawrence Armstrong, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Armstrong of Wellesley, Mass.
The Rev.
Walter Pittman officiated at the First Congregational Church in Chatham.
Mrs.
Armstrong, 27 years old, graduated from St.
Lawrence University, as did her husband.
She received a law degree from Suffolk University and works in the litigation department of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in New York.
Her father is a senior vice president at the company's Boston office.


Headliners; Intelligence Test
The Senate Intelligence Committee last week voted to more or less forgive and forget charges that Robert M. Gates, as a top Central Intelligence official in the 1980's, slanted intelligence reports and failed to take notice as the Iran-contra affair blossomed in his backyard.
The Senate panel voted 11 to 4 to approve Mr.
Gates's nomination as Director of Central Intelligence, sending the issue to the floor, where a full Senate vote is expected in the next few weeks.
The committee chairman, David Boren, an Oklahoma Republican, said that whatever Mr.
Gates's past mistakes, "he has matured, he has grown and is ready to face the challenges ahead." But some on the Intelligence Committee -- Bill Bradley in particular -- were not so eager to let bygones be bygones.
Just before the vote, the New Jersey Democrat characterized Mr.
Gates as "a man who apologizes for undeniable mistakes" and "who recalls possible mistakes only when questioned repeatedly in public."


A Big Hit Makes Hunter A Big Hit
Brian Hunter was not swinging during batting practice Friday night at the Metrodome.
Pitches were drifting by.
He raised his elbow, swiveled his hips and watched.
One, two, three balls passed and he did not budge.
His waiting teammates were not thrilled with his patience.
They wanted to hit, too.
Finally, Lonnie Smith chided Hunter by teasing the rookie about his sudden celebrity status.


Corrections
A report in the Campus Life pages on Sept. 22 about Trenton State College misstated the arrangement under which college vice presidents live in college-owned housing.
The requirement that they live in the housing is part of the college's long range plan, not the development corporation's bylaws.
And the vice presidents pay a bi-weekly fee that includes property taxes.


The Power of the Peace Prize May Be Lost on Myanmar
Repressive regimes collapse not only from their own weaknesses, but also from the accretion of falsehood -- rendered obvious and thus humiliating by truthsayers.
The Nobel Committee clearly hopes that its award of this year's Peace Prize to the imprisoned Burmese dissident Daw Aung San Suu Kyi will encourage the Burmese people to feel less alone and will hasten the collapse of a deeply repressive and mendacious regime.
It is the same reasoning that lay behind the seemingly futile awards, in earlier years, to Soviet literary and political truthtellers like Pasternak, Solzhenitsyn and Sakharov.
In 1988 and 1989, when Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi was swept to the front of Burmese democratic resistance to the regime of U Ne Win, it was not only because she represented the legacy of her father, U Aung San -- regarded as the founder of modern Burma, and assassinated in 1947 on the eve of independence from Britain.


A QUESTION OF MERCY
The embarrassment of a deteriorating body and the constant battle with pain that will not abate steal the spirit and strip away the pride.
So in the end, it isn't actually a question of mercy, but rather a question of helping to keep the dignity of one's existence alive, even though the body is failing.
Life is too short, but sometimes it's too long. ROBERT BALDWIN
Lynbrook, L.I.


How to Avoid Bare Patches in Spring
THOUGH it may seem academic to many gardeners, it should be pointed out that there is a huge difference between fall and spring gardens.
What seems prolific and filled with foliage now will be barren and empty come spring.
All this is another way of saying to think spring when planting bulbs now.
Too many gardeners, especially those who are new to the experience, forget that many of the plants they see now will not be there in spring, because the plants have reputations as lazy risers.
And if there are no plants to fill these voids, the bare spots will remain until the late risers begin to push up from the soil.


A Five-Sister Play, A 'Family' of Actors
The Irish playwright Brian Friel has set five actresses a daunting task.
In less than three hours, Brid Brennan, Catherine Byrne, Rosaleen Linehan, Dearbhla Molloy and Brid Ni Neachtain must persuade the audience that they are sisters.
In Mr.
Friel's memory play "Dancing at Lughnasa," which opens Thursday on Broadway, the women are a fictionalized version of the author's own family, living out one August in County Donegal in 1936 before they start to scatter, their lives to go irreparably sour.
For three of the actresses, the play's Broadway opening will be the culmination of 18 months of work together on a drama whose international exposure could never have been predicted at its Abbey Theater premiere in April 1990.
The two latest additions to the cast -- Miss Linehan in October 1990 and Miss Molloy this September -- have had to undergo a process of integration on stage that can be more than just difficult.


Basement Wall Leak? Try Waterproofing It
THIS is a good time of year to repair or waterproof basement walls.
Serious cracks and major or chronic leakage should be repaired by a professional basement waterproofer, but small isolated cracks and damage like efflorescence, or salt deposits, and peeling paint caused by damp walls often can be remedied by amateurs using products like waterproofing paints.
To repair cracks and holes, use hydraulic cement, which is powdered.
Begin by scouring all loose material from the damaged area with a wire brush.
Also, if practical, undercut the sides of the area by chiseling so that the crack or hole is wider toward the inside of the masonry than at the surface.
Use a hammer and cold chisel, and wear protective goggles.


All About/Translation Services; The Growing Gelt in Others' Words
WITH America's export engine revving up, the nation's translation services are reaping the benefits.
To make money abroad, more and more companies are tailoring their products to local markets.
That means having legal contracts, technical information, instruction manuals and other materials translated into and out of dozens of foreign languages.
The largest translation companies say demand has grown rapidly in recent years, changing what was once a cottage industry of dozens of tiny firms into a full-fledged business with a myriad of small- and medium-sized competitors fighting for market share.


Topics of The Times; Columbus Bashing
In ugly protest against Columbus celebrations last weekend, unidentified vandals despoiled his statues in Washington and New York City.
In Washington, they poured blood on the Union Station statue during the finale of a three-day festival and spray painted "500 years of slavery." In New York's Columbus Circle, they scrawled and splattered by night.
Their right to protest is not in question, but their methods disgrace any cause.
It is not known who the vandals represented, but various native groups -- North and South Americans -- have been protesting the hoopla over next year's 500th anniversary of Columbus's first landing on their ancestors' territory.
They don't want to be, and shouldn't be, ignored.
A representative of the National Congress of American Indians took part in the Washington festival "to set the record straight." Indeed, Native Americans are using the coming quincentenary to heighten awareness of their fight for better treatment, with some success.


POSTINGS: With Roof Garden; A Colonnaded Taxpayer
Taxpayers, one-story retail buildings erected for short lives on potential development sites, are usually as spare in design as they are simple in function.
But a new one by the Durst Organization that snakes through several derelict hold-out properties along the Avenue of the Americas, from 42d to 43d Street, has an unusually detailed, buff-brick colonnade and a roof garden cater-corner from Bryant Park.
"Instead of being a flat glass-and-aluminum wall, it has a third dimension that adds to the excitement of the streetscape," said the architect, Peter Claman, of Schuman Lichtenstein Claman Efron.
"Because of all our property in the area," Douglas Durst said, "we wanted something better than you'd typically think of. There was obviously a cost to that, but the overall result was worth it."


CLASS STRUGGLE
The problem with texts is that they must tell the story of history from someone's viewpoint and that someone else's may be left out or misrepresented.
Why not dispense with texts of history and let the students' own backgrounds provide the text?
A project on diversity, allowing children in California and elsewhere to build on their own history, would be more conducive to learning than reading a text.
Just think, the students could bring in their own bread and eat it together.
Of course, without textbooks, students and teachers would have to research issues themselves.
This takes more time than merely assigning (or reading) pages in a prepared text.
EMILY A. REISNER
Durham, N.C.
ILS&gt;Photo of school children (Photograph by Alon Reininger/Contact for The New York Times)


Review/Music; The Bamberg Symphony
Any American who came of age musically during the 1960's on a tight budget must retain some affection for the Bamberg Symphony Orchestra.
Its recordings offered reliable, inexpensive exposure to much of the standard repertory.
Despite rough edges in the playing and often uninspired leadership, the performances possessed a basic honesty.
To judge from the orchestra's concerts with Christoph Eschenbach last Sunday afternoon and on Wednesday evening at Avery Fisher Hall, the honesty and the roughnesses remain.
So, it appeared, does the concentration on standard repertory, at least for export.
Sunday's program was all Beethoven: the "Prometheus" Overture, the Third Piano Concerto and the "Eroica" Symphony.
Wednesday's was mostly Dvorak: "Carnival" and the "New World" Symphony, with Shostakovich's First Cello Concerto tucked between.


WORLD SERIES: Sports of The Times; 2 Players Who Know The Real World
In the ultimate scenario for this World Series, Carl Willis of Minnesota will pitch to Jerry Willard of Atlanta, a duel of the vagabonds.
Actually, most of the players in this Series, coming from somewhat smaller inland cities, seem relatively unspoiled from daily pressures and publicity barrages.


Flaubert's Comma
To the Editor:
In a recent letter in your pages (Sept. 1), Robert K. Robison mentions a story about Oscar Wilde's laboring in the morning to put in a comma and laboring in the afternoon to take it out.
It may be apocryphal, as Mr.
Robison says, but in any event it's usually attributed to Flaubert, whose painstaking method of composition was famous.
Wilde, bon vivant that he was, encouraged the myth of effortless production.
And Wilde, like Dorothy Parker, is credited with a lot more than he ever said.
DAVID GALEF University, Miss.


Wendy Baker Has Wedding
Wendy Holladay Baker, the daughter of Jane W. Baker of New Canaan, Conn., and Charles W. Baker 3d of Potomac, Md., was married yesterday to Richard Francis McGowan, the son of Mrs.
Richard F. McGowan of Rome, Me., and the late Mr.
McGowan.
The Rev.
T.
Guthrie Speers Jr. officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
McGowan, 29 years old, is a consultant for Avid Technology in Burlington, Mass.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father is a stockbroker at Cardy &amp; Company in Rockville, Md., and her mother is the merchandising coordinator for Nationwide Papers, a division of Champion International in Stamford, Conn.
The bride's stepmother, Priscilla B. Baker, is the director of tourism for the National Park Service in Washington.


Gentrification
To the Editor:
"Gentrification Ebbs as Prices Decline" would have been a more felicitous headline ("Prices Decline as Gentrification Ebbs," Sept. 29).
Either way, if gentrification is coeval with private housing development in fringe areas, then surely it is unkind to concluded that "the future is uncertain in areas that bloomed too late in the 1980's."


Happy Birthday To a Big Bull Market
How does an annual return of 53 percent strike you?
That is, as it happens, the increase in the Russell 2,000 index of small stocks in the first year of its bull market, which began on Oct. 17, 1990.
By contrast, the Dow Jones industrial average gained only 30 percent from its low of last October through its record close of 3,077.15 on Friday.
Not a bad move, but hardly in the same league.


Israeli Nuclear Arsenal Exceeds Earlier Estimates, Book Reports
A new book says that Israel has a nuclear arsenal far larger than previously suspected by the United States Government, and further asserts that a principal potential target for those arms has been the Soviet Union.
The book, by Seymour M. Hersh, an investigative reporter, says the Israelis have gone to full nuclear alert -- meaning that nuclear missiles have been wheeled out of silos and put on launchers -- three times, twice during the 1973 war and once this year, while Israel was under missile attack from Iraq.
In those cases, the book says, the targets would have been the Arab nations threatening Israel.
Israel's Nuclear Arms
But, quoting Israeli and American officials who discussed the matter with the Israelis, Mr.
Hersh says Israel's central strategic doctrine in the 1970's and much of the 1980's was that the Soviet Union should know that it was under the threat of Israeli nuclear attack.
Mr.
Hersh says Israel used American reconnaissance-satellite photos and other intelligence data -- some of it obtained openly and some of it illegally -- to target Soviet cities.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Farmingdale 180,000
5 Hawthorne Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old colonial; dining room, Florida room, fireplace; taxes $5,200.
Mineola 162,000
330 Latham Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40- year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, aluminum siding; taxes $2,600.
Nesconset 190,000
6 Bonarck Lane  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 28-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace, inground pool; taxes $6,500.
Smithtown 193,000  77 Aberdeen Road  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 28-year-old ranch; dining room, den with fireplace, deck, 0.5 acre, 2-car garage; taxes $4,300.
Village of the Branch 200,000
1 Wood Duck Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old contemporary; dining room, den, basement, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $5,400.
Williston Park 181,000
23 Remsen Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, attic, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $2,600.OTHER AREAS OTHER AREAS New Milford, Conn. 129,000
22 Sterling Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 22-year-old raised ranch; large storage shed with electricity, extra half-bathroom, 1/2 acre; taxes $1,762.
Katonah, N.Y. 367,500
22 Wakan Drive
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 16-year-old contemporary; cathedral ceiling entry hall, family room, pool, 4 acres; taxes $7,500.
Freehold, N.J 85,000
56 Mechanic Street
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; 1-car garage, w/w carpeting, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $1,786.


Dollar Steady Last Week
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
129.88
129.55
129.95
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6878
1.6880
1.5015
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1270
1.1287
1.1728
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7275
1.7230
1.9595
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$360.00
$359.50
$372.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Ms. Voutsinas to Wed
Spiros and Aris Voutsinas of Bellmore, L.I., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Jean Voutsinas and Peter Klose, a son of Woody and Elizabeth Klose of Red Hook, N.Y.
Ms.
Voutsinas, 24 years old, graduated from Cornell University, as did her fiance, and is studying law at Boston University.
Mr.
Klose, 25, is a student at the New England School of Law.


Style Makers; Ion and Laila Ionescu, Jewelry Designers
Ion and Laila Ionescu, both 36 years old, met in Manhattan through friends in 1988.
Each had emigrated from Romania years before, to pursue jewelry design.
Collaboration and marriage followed.
"In Romania, it was illegal to possess precious metals in any but the smallest quantities," Mrs.
Ionescu said.
"A jewelry designer could work for the Government producing approved traditional designs but could not legally pursue this art independently without risking imprisonment. We each had to be committed to taking the risks."


Traffic Alert
Autumn Jubilee: Second Avenue will be closed today between 14th and 34th Streets from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Off-Duty Policeman Shot on a Bronx Street
An off-duty police officer was shot in the Bronx yesterday, and the police blanketed the area last night in search of a suspect.
The police said that the officer, Michael A. Bynum, 26 years old, was shot after he and a friend went looking for two men his friend had fought with earlier in the day.
His friend, who the police did not identify, was unhurt; Officer Bynum was in sastisfactory condition at Jacobi Medical Center.
He was hit in the right forearm and left calf.


Elizabeth Burns Is Married to Jefferson Hansen
Elizabeth Ann Burns, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Jerome Burns of Dedham, Mass., was married yesterday to Jefferson Paul Hansen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Hansen of Green Bay, Wis.
The Rev.
Edward B. Anderson officiated at the Unitarian Universalist Church in Nantucket, Mass.
Ms.
Burns, 32 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in English from Northeastern University.
She and her husband are candidates for Ph.D.'s in American literature at the State University of New York at Buffalo.
The bridegroom, 26, graduated summa cum laude from Beloit College, Beloit, Wis., where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


Elizabeth Rex to Wed William Barnes
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Rex of Darien, Conn., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Elizabeth Johnson Rex and William Henry Barnes, the son of Gen. and Mrs.
John F. Barnes of Austin, Tex.
Miss Rex, 28 years old, is a regional manager at Institutional Investor, a New York financial trade magazine.
She graduated from Lafayette College.
Her father is a senior vice president at Smith Barney, Harris Upham in New York.


Fumes Sicken Passengers As Train Stalls in Tunnel
Two dozen Amtrak passengers were treated by paramedics at Pennsylvania Station yesterday after a crowded train stalled in the tunnel was filled by diesel fumes from its engine.
None of the passengers was made seriously ill, officials said, but 16 were taken to nearby hospitals.
Some passengers complained that a slow response had turned an annoying delay into an ordeal that they said had left many on the train gagging or vomiting from the fumes.


Cantonese, and Seafood Is a Specialty
REFLECTING the current desire for Cantonese fare in northern New Jersey, the former Chan's Garden in Livingston changed both its name and its focus last November.
A new chef and three cooks, all Hong Kong-trained, were brought in to offer typical dishes like salt-baked chicken, seafood casseroles and steamed fish so fresh they are plucked live from tanks at the back of the bright open dining room.
Outstanding dim sum, the bite-sized snacks, are also a specialty here on weekends.
With a clean-lined new decor -- there's not a red lantern or dragon in sight -- and shaped-up service, North Sea Village is developing into one of the state's better Chinese restaurants.
It is still owned by Hai-Kan Chan, of the family who also operates several other places including Chan's Garden in Dunellen.
This Essex County restaurant is usually crowded with predominantly Chinese diners, often a reassuring sign both that the food is authentic and the prices not out of line.
A three-course meal, not counting tip, tax and drinks (there's no liquor license), runs about $20.


Crime/Mystery; Who Slew Snoo?
THE LAST DETECTIVE
By Peter Lovesey. 331 pp. New York: Doubleday. $18.50.


Smoking Allowed
To the Editor: "Smoking Permitted" agreed with my experiences in Britain.
But, as a member of the Ramblers Association, 1 WandsworthRoad, London SW8 2XX, I receive an annual accommodations guide, which lists many B &amp; B's specifically refusing smoking guests.
IRVING ITKIN West Orange, N.J.


POSTINGS: Saturday Seminar; Restoration Tips
People who have restored the interiors of old New York City homes and apartments almost invariably have concluded that the job requires a combination of the original construction techniques and more technologically advanced methods.
These dual themes will be the subject of an all-day seminar on Saturday entitled "Reviving Lost Skills for Historic Interiors." It will be held from 8 A.M. to 6 P.M. at the 130-year-old Friends Meeting House, a New York City landmark at 15th Street and Second Avenue.
The seminar is being sponsored jointly by the Brownstone Revival Committee, an association of people who own old houses, the New York Landmarks Conservancy, a nonprofit historic preservation group, and Traditional Building magazine, a publication for restoration professionals that is based in Brooklyn.
Among the subjects to be covered at the seminar, which is designed for professionals and owners of buildings and apartments built before 1940, are repairing plaster ornamentation, refinishing wood floors, restoring woodwork and replacing historic wall coverings and lighting.
A group of experienced professional crafts people will offer slide presentations, conduct discussion groups and lead workshops.


Her Imitation of Christ
MARIETTE IN ECSTASY
By Ron Hansen. 179 pp.
New York: Edward Burlingame Books/ HarperCollins Publishers. $20.


Smoking Allowed
To the Editor: Bravo to Europe for its continued tolerance of the individual.
Shame on the United States for our ever-growing holier-than-thou intolerance toward anything decreed by a few -- with media connections -- to be bad, wrong or different.
One has to wonder if democratic America will ever learn to live and let live.
In the meantime, write on, Auberon Waugh.
Your words to us are deserved!
DAN LOCKLAIR Winston-Salem, N.C.


Choral Ensembles Open Seasons
THE first public showcase for the Hartt Chamber Singers and Vocal Arts Ensemble is planned for 8 P.M. on Thursday in Millard Auditorium at the Hartt School of Music in West Hartford.
The free program, with podium honors shared by Gerald Mack and Thomas Nerbonne, includes works of Monteverdi, Mozart, Rheinberger and Britten.
For information, call 243-4422.
The professional singers of Concora (Connecticut Choral Artists is the group's formal title) are similarly ready to begin their 17th season with two concerts under the group's artistic director, Richard Coffey: one at 8 P.M. on Saturday at St.
Thomas Seminary in Bloomfield, and another at 4 next Sunday afternoon in South Church in New Britain.


The City's Hospitals Are Under Study. Again.
One thing New York City hospitals do not lack is advice.
The municipal system is regulated by both the city and the state, and inspected by each at least once a year.
Its failings are regularly grist for public hearings.
Its inadequacies are subjects for courses at the public health departments of local universities.
And the study of its problems helps nonprofit groups attract foundation grants.
But someone has always been able to find something bad to say about the public hospitals.
In 1934, Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia's head of the City Department of Hospitals described conditions in them as "deplorable."


CAMPUS LIFE: Berkley; School Helping Athletes Return to the Classroom
During one of his many paid "stay in school" lectures to local high school students, Richard Rodgers, a former defensive back for the University of California at Berkeley and, briefly, for the Los Angeles Raiders, realized he needed to practice what he preached.
Mr.
Rodgers had never made it past his sophomore year at the university, and had come to regret it.


The Ladies Were No Tramps
To the Editor:
In his article on "Star Trek," James Gorman states that Captain Kirk "romanced courtesans in parallel universes." I believe Mr.
Gorman forgot that the word courtesan means prostitute.
Captain Kirk fell for a lot of women over the years, including ambassadors, doctors, princesses, spaceship personnel and androids, but none were whores.
WARD M. WINTON  St.
Paul


Noted With Pleasure
Floating Vagabonds
One reason we should travel, Cynthia Ozick writes, is to regain a sense of wonder about even the most ordinary features of the world.
Her thoughts are in "Metaphor &amp; Memory: Essays" (Vintage, paper).


Father-Son Disputes Unfold at the Long Wharf
BOOTH IS BACK" at the Long Wharf's Newton Schenck Stage is apparently about the decline of the legendary touring tragedian, Junius Brutus Booth. It has been written that he liked happy endings (his King Lear didn't go mad and lived to see Cordelia get married), realistic endings (as Othello, Booth almost smothered his Desdemona for real) and non-endings (Richard III, refusing to be slain by Richmond, chased him off the stage and into the streets).
"Booth Is Back" is also ostensibly about the emergence of Edwin Booth, bastard son of Junius, from cocky upstart to a Prince of Players who tells the audience, "I'm Edwin Booth, and I'm going to give you the damnedest Richard you've ever seen."


Now Get Politics Out of Confirmation Process; Who's Normal?
To the Editor:
In Peggy Noonan's "Bum Ride" (Op-Ed, Oct. 15), about those who came forward to testify in last weekend's Senate Judiciary Committee hearings, I am puzzled by the distinctions she makes between the "normal humans" who spoke up for Judge Clarence Thomas and the "professional, movement-y and intellectualish" representatives of the "chattering classes" who supported Prof.
Anita F. Hill.
By Ms.
Noonan's lights, it is abnormal to go to Yale Law School and then become a judge in California (like Susan Hoerchner), but normal to gloat (as J. C. Alvarez did several times) about being "just a John Q. Public single mom from Middle America." But what's so hifalutin about Ellen Wells, who told how she and Professor Hill used to go shopping together for bargains?
And what of John Doggett 3d, so memorably determined to cast doubts on Ms.
Hill's stability?
Does his vanity, in Ms.
Noonan's judgment, fall within the normal range?
To my mind, Anita Hill's four corroborative witnesses were as impressive, and as plainspoken, as anyone we saw and heard all weekend.
If only one of them -- any of them -- would run for the Senate!
JANE HOWARD  Sag Harbor, L.I., Oct. 17, 1991


If Smiley Were Gates
In his confirmation hearings before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Robert M. Gates became the second best known spymaster in the history of television.
The first, of course, remains George Smiley, code name Alec Guinness or, lately, Denholm Elliott, whose appearances in adaptations of John le Carre's tales of huggermugger in London and points east have proved favorites on both public television and commercial stations.
As Mr.
Gates defended himself against charges that he had allowed political considerations to influence C.I.A. reports, possibly to promote his own advancement under the Reagan-Bush Administration, a viewer may have thought back to the irreproachable Smiley.
Differences abound, but in both the imagined world of Mr. le Carre and the real world of Mr.
Gates, intelligence gatherers feel the pressure of their customers, the office holders on whom they depend for their existence.
In fiction as in fact, democracy and espionage tend to get in each other's way.


Nuclear-Free Seoul
Officials in Washington said the United States planned to withdraw its last nuclear weapons from South Korea, complying with a North Korean condition for allowing international inspection of its own nuclear installtions.


ROOMS WITH A POINT OF VIEW
IT IS ALWAYS INTERESTING to see how an architect lives, especially an architect like Charles Gwathmey, whose residential work has made news ever since he erected a two-building complex of cubes and cylinders in Amagansett, L.I.
That modern, tightly controlled house and studio, built for his parents 25 years ago, became such a symbol of its time that it spawned hundreds of imitations from Maine to Montauk.
Over the years, Gwathmey's residential projects have grown enormously; indeed, recent ones are actually sprawling, modern estates.
Yet his own newly completed Manhattan apartment is a compact 2,500-square-foot space that is pure Gwathmey modernism.
Its design comes at a crucial point in the architect's career, a time when some of his firm's most important commissions are finishing and others beginning.
This month, the 130,000-square-foot Disney Convention Center designed by Gwathmey Siegel &amp; Associates opens in Orlando, Fla., and in March the much debated addition to the Guggenheim Museum is scheduled for completion.
Among the firm's many future projects is the redesign of the 700,000-square-foot interior of Philip Johnson's A.T.&amp;T. building for Sony Entertainment.


Carrying Teammates and the Ball
For a team dressed in silver and blue that too often finishes simply blue, this was to be the season in which the Detroit Lion with the biggest heart and insurmountable courage would lead his teammates to the light.
Yes, in 1991, the Detroit Lions, who finished 6-10 last year, were going to ride Barry Sanders's bulky shoulders and wondrous legs out of the darkness to a winning record, the playoffs and, with a touch of his magic, possibly beyond.


Redford Turns West Again
By now it is impossible to separate ideas of the West from the images Hollywood has created.
Jeremiah Johnson, the mountain man and Indian fighter immortalized by Robert Redford in a 1972 movie, actually died in Los Angeles, in 1990.
After the movie became a hit, Johnson's remains were moved to Cody, Wyo., to be buried in Old Trail Town, a reconstructed frontier town and popular tourist attraction.
Two thousand people attended the ceremony, including Mr.
Redford.
Today, visitors to Cody see photographs of the 20th-century movie star right next to 19th-century daguerreotypes of the real Jeremiah Johnson.
A couple of hundred miles away, in this little town on the edge of Yellowstone National Park, Mr.
Redford, dressed in jeans, T-shirt and cowboy boots, is filming another movie about the West, an adaptation of Norman Maclean's acclaimed 1976 novella, "A River Runs Through It." This time Mr.
Redford is directing but not starring; the cast of the production, which is scheduled for release in the spring, includes Brad Pitt, Craig Sheffer, Tom Skerritt and Emily Lloyd.


Amy M. Tardio, Editor, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Neil Tardio of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Marie Tardio to David Monte Blumberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Blumberg of Shaker Heights, Ohio.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Tardio, 31 years old, graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder.
She is the grooming and fitness editor at GQ magazine in New York.
Her father is a film director with his own production company in New York.


Mary Curley and Andrew Wheeler Are Married in Cape Cod Ceremony
Mary Elizabeth Curley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Curley of Bass River, Mass., was married yesterday in Centerville, Mass., to Andrew Chamberlain Wheeler, the son of Eugene M. Wheeler Jr. of Hopkinton, N.H., and Mrs.
Benjamin Wolff of Dedham, Mass.
The Rev.
William Costello performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Victory Church.
Mrs.
Wheeler, 29 years old, graduated from Salve Regina College and is the American editorial director for Chivers Press, a publishing and library supply company in Bath, England.
Her parents, who are retired, owned the Curley Publishing Company, a large-print publisher in South Yarmouth, Mass.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 6 about visiting Washington work places misstated the telephone number of the Pentagon.
It is (703) 695-1776.


Crime/Mystery; The Killers Next Door: We Can't Get Enough of Them
Good grief -- these people are real!
Nobody made them up.
These are real people who committed real crimes, and readers can't seem to get enough of them.
True crime is one of the hottest genres on the market, some two or three years after many people in the publishing industry swore that the frenzy had run its course.


Cornell Kicks Harvard Out in the Second Half
It might not have been pretty, but the 46-yard field goal from Cornell's Mike Cochrane, coming with 6 minutes 47 seconds left in the game today, bounced off the middle of the crossbar and cleared the uprights to insure a Cornell victory over Harvard, 22-17.
Cochrane, a sophomore playing in his first varsity game and in front of 12,500 homecoming fans at Schoellkopf Field, converted three second-half field goals to give the Big Red its sixth straight victory over Harvard.


CAMPUS LIFE: Princeton; A New Course About Indians Draws a Crowd
Joining the nationwide trend toward a multicultural curriculum, Princeton University is offering a course on American Indian religions for the first time this semester.
But no one, including the professor, expected that 282 students would wrench themselves out of bed before 9 A.M. twice a week to take it.
"It has always been 'politically correct' to ignore Native Americans," said David L. Carrasco, a visiting professor of religion from the University of Colorado at Boulder who is teaching the course.
"Now we're trying to bring back some balance."


Brice Marden Moves Ahead by Turning Back
Brice Marden doesn't rush things.
For example, the 53-year-old painter spent the first 10 days of this month carefully working out the installation of his "Cold Mountain" series, a group of 71 paintings, drawings and etchings now on view at the Dia Center for the Arts in the Chelsea section of Manhattan (through June 21).
Most of this time was lavished on the big fourth-floor gallery at Dia, determining the hanging of the six canvases that form the heart of the series, which was inspired by the writings of a Chinese Tang Dynasty poet called Cold Mountain.
Combining airy, calligraphic scaffoldings of line with whitish or palely tinted backgrounds, these 9-by-12-foot paintings are the biggest Marden has ever made.
In addition, their layered, crisscrossing road maps -- as spontaneous as they are finely chiseled -- measure off an internal space of immense and buoyant scale that twists and turns, bends back and pushes forward without ever fragmenting.


A New York State Revision Shows Fewer at Work
Indicating that the recession is more severe than previously believed, the New York State Department of Labor has said that there are fewer people working in the state and in New York City than it had originally estimated.
Compared with its previously released monthly estimate of the number of people on payrolls, the Labor Department's revised estimate for August shows that there were 79,200 fewer jobs held throughout the state at the end of that month, including 53,800 fewer in the city.


Package Links Luxury Train And Florida Keys
American-European Express, a luxury train service currently operating between New York and Chicago, will begin overnight train service between New York and Miami on Nov. 19.
The new train, called the Royal Floridian, will use restored Pullman cars of the 40's and 50's.
It will operate as part of vacation packages offered in conjunction with the Ocean Reef Club, a 4,000-acre resort in the north of the Florida Keys that features two 18-hole golf courses, a 175-slip marina and a lighted airstrip.
The Royal Floridian includes an observation car called the New York that originally ran with the 20th Century Limited as the Sandy Creek.
On their overnight journey, passengers will be served a seven-course dinner and get 24-hour valet service.
The train will depart from Pennsylvania Station in New York Tuesday and Friday at 10:30 A.M., arriving in Miami at 11:30 A.M. the following day.
Returning trains leave Miami Wednesday at 7 P.M. and Sunday at 1:30 P.M.
Travelers headed south can get on in Philadelphia, Wilmington, Baltimore and Washington and get off in Orlando, West Palm Beach and Fort Lauderdale.
Once in Miami, passengers will be taken to the Ocean Reef Club by limousine.


O Ye Gates
EVERYBODY WAS waiting for somebody else to open up the
-gates
.
The news was out that members of the House of Representatives had used their cooperative bank as a kind of kitty, paying out cash for some 10,000 bad checks a year, with no penalty.
Interest-free loans; hot cash in $10,000 bites; a General Accounting Office report with key lines left out; the Speaker of the House declaring the matter closed.
Obviously, it was a something-gate.
To start the bidding, I put "Housegate" in a headline over a political harangue.
I'm often first out of the box with what other pundits mutter is a trivialization of Watergate.
After
Koreagate
, which never got off the ground, there were
Lancegate
and
Billygate
. (Bert Lance's lively book, "The Truth of the Matter," is out this month and calls to mind those unhalcyon days.) My best was the encapsulation of a minor White House expense-account scandal as
doublebillingsgate
.


Miss Kneeland, Designer, Weds
Robin Turner Kneeland, a daughter of Mrs.
John R. Hetland of Orinda, Calif., and David R. Kneeland of Manchester, Mass., was married yesterday to J. Keating Willcox, the son of the late Barbara McFadden Willcox and the late Harold Mott Willcox.
The Rev.
Douglas Warren performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in Orinda.
Mrs.
Willcox, 29 years old, graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
She is an architectural designer at Carr, Lynch, Hack &amp; Sandell in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father, a physicist, is the president of Trygon Inc., a manufacturer of tools for medical research in Essex, Mass.
Her mother, Anne T. Hetland, is a lawyer in the Berkeley firm of Hetland &amp; Hansen.
The bride's stepfather is a law professor at Berkeley and the president of Hetland &amp; Hansen.


Aid Convoy Falls Victim in Croatia
Heavy clashes were reported today throughout Croatia's eastern panhandle region, despite a new cease-fire that was supposed to have taken effect at midday.
Two nurses from a French medical team were seriously hurt when their truck ran over a mine as they were transporting scores of wounded soldiers and civilians from a besieged eastern Croatian town, Vukovar.


With Autumn Showers Come, Yes, April's Flowers
This is the fall that thinks it must be spring.
In September, the magnolias bloomed in the New York Botanical Garden.
A few weeks later, the lilacs blossomed on Martha's Vineyard.
In Washington, the rhododendrons are out.


Susan H. Rosenberg to Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Rosenberg of East Hills, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Hope Rosenberg, to Hugh Ian Miller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney A. Miller of Kings Point, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Rosenberg, 27 years old, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is the sales and marketing director for the Stacy Charles Collection in Brooklyn, a wholesaler of yarns for hand knitting.


An Exhibition Transforms a Gallery in Kent, Inside and Out
FEW artists get to work on the outside of a gallery, as well as filling the interior.
But Cleve Gray had the opportunity at P.N.Y.K.
Gallery in Kent, and the result is "Inside Outside."
Visitors entering Kent Station Square see a white cottage bristling with colored trapezoids and arcs interspersed by long black rods.
The shapes, which look as if they had been playfully hurled, do not so much enhance the building as advertise it and proclaim its purpose.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Mirrors and Trelliswork
Q.
My small backyard is fairly dark.
I've heard that mirrors and trellises will help.
How do I do this? -- James R. Barrington, Washington.
A.
Trelliswork is indeed an effective and practical way to add an illusion of space, especially when designed with the false perspective known as trompe l'oeil.
The secret of trompe l'oeil lies in the diagonal lines that appear to radiate from an imaginary vanishing point -- much like the perspective of railroad tracks.
Since mirrors add brightness, as well as the appearance of depth, nothing beats a mirror-trellis combination when it comes to improving a small, dark garden.


Review/Dance; 'Terra Incognita,' a Columbian Triptych
Synergic Theater combined slides, light and shadow play with dance and music to create three views of the New World discovered by Columbus in "Terra Incognita," presented on Monday night at the Pace Downtown Theater.
The triptych opened with "Pasos," a new work created by David and Suzanne White Manning, the directors of Synergic.
The least convincing of the pieces, "Pasos" offered a portrait of Martin Alonso Pinzon, the captain of the Pinta, who according to program notes raced back to Spain in hope of claiming the discovery of America as his.
On the evidence of the piece itself, Pinzon was a first-class, relentless whiner -- a sort of Salieri to Columbus's Mozart.
Clearly, a good deal of research, imagination and work went into this ambitious but sometimes cluttered evening.
"Pasos," for instance, draws on old Catalan frescoes and the sardana, a traditional Catalan dance, for atmosphere and a sense of history.
But Mr.
Manning's script is jarringly peppered with Spanish words and anachronisms, and the choreography by Mrs.
Manning that is performed in front of the shadow screen does not add anything.


Twilight Agenda Is in Breeders' Picture
Two weeks before the Breeders' Cup series, the road to Louisville was getting crowded this weekend with contenders headed for the main event of the racing year and for championships that will apparently have to be won in one dramatic day of last-chance races at Churchill Downs.
The picture grew even more crowded when Twilight Agenda came out of California and outran Scan by a neck Friday night in the $500,000 Meadowlands Cup after a furious duel down the homestretch.


Now Get Politics Out of Confirmation Process; A Kangaroo Court
To the Editor:
Not being Australian, I don't really know what a kangaroo court is, but this appellation came irresistibly to mind while watching last weekend's proceedings of the Senate Judiciary Committee.


A Missing Olive Branch
With an Arab-Israeli peace conference now virtually certain to take place, what are the prospects that it will actually produce something?
American, Arab and Israeli diplomats are not hiding the fact that they really have no answer to that question.
Their attention has been so focused on the exhausting effort to organize the conference that little original or in-depth thought has been given to what can realistically be achieved once the parties get to the table.


Odds Long, Democrat Confesses
SUSAN KLUEWER realizes that she faces an uphill battle in her bid to be elected to District Court for the Second District, which embraces Hempstead and Long Beach.
"It's a long shot," she conceded. "I'm running against the odds."


AFTERMATH OF AN EMERGENCY
Your article about a family powerless in their struggle against the New Jersey Division of Youth and Family Services describes the rule, not an aberration.
The difference in this story is that the parents were able to get their child back.
Parents who are poor, of different color and of different ethnic and cultural backgrounds battle daily with D.Y.F.S. in an effort to resume parenting children who have been taken from them by the state, but can rarely satisfy the "instinctive" feelings of those people in power to decide their fates.
Unlike the Leedses, they will not be able to pay $10,000 in legal fees.
Instead, they have to rely on appointed counsel, many of whom are inexperienced in this area of the law.
The Leedses were also "lucky" at least that their child was placed with a relative and that they were permitted visitation.
Many times children are placed in foster care.


Iraq's Nuclear Program Shows the Holes in U.S. Intelligence
The startling revelations by United Nations inspectors about Iraq's nuclear weapons program are both exhilarating and embarrassing for the American intelligence agencies -- exhilarating because they provide a flood of reliable data about the country's ambitious quest for nuclear bombs, embarrassing because they illustrate just how little the United States knew about the program.
In the months since United Nations teams began their search-and-destroy mission against Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, they have uncovered a nuclear program far grander in scope, more sophisticated in design and much further along than was suspected in Washington.


AIDS Residence Housing Families Faces Review
A former orphanage in the Bronx reopened last May as a 99-bed residence and nursing center for homeless people with the AIDS virus that would be a novel experiment, housing both families and single people under the same roof.
But that mix is drawing scrutiny from New York State.
Officials from the State Health Department said last week that an independent panel of experts would review the Highbridge-Woodycrest Center at Woodycrest Avenue and 161st Street in High Bridge this month to determine if it provides a good environment for children.
The department's AIDS Institute has recommended that the 10 families at the center be offered a chance to relocate and that the department issue emergency regulations to prohibit the mixing of individuals and families in state nursing homes, arguing that children should not live in the same institutions as single people, who often have drug addictions and severe mental problems.


Yonkers Chamber Forms A Political Action Group
STEPPING boldly into the election fray, this city's Chamber of Commerce last month cast aside a 98-year tradition of watching from the sidelines and formed a political action committee.
Tomorrow, the business organization's new PAC is to announce endorsements for mayor and Council members.
"There has been a feeling that we've been spectators for too long," said Thomas J. Caramadre, president of the 700-member chamber and secretary of the PAC.
"The time has come for us to be players."


Challengers Win One On Land
The search for an edge in America's Cup racing is about gamesmanship as much as it is about building fast boats.
As in chess, each move by challengers or defenders to gain an advantage in the rules is open to the sting of a checkmate.
The 10 international challengers for the America's Cup indirectly checked the defenders, the San Diego Yacht Club, last week.
In a ruling by a yachting tribunal of America's Cup trustees, challengers gained an extra month to prepare their final yachts for racing.


Reality Check on 'Greatest Game'
To the Sports Editor:
I really was one of the 1 million (actually about 37,000) fans who saw "the greatest game ever played," ("Time Flies, Memories Stand Still," The Times, Sept. 29.) I was 22 years old then, and home on furlow from the Army.
I'm from Tremont in the Bronx and I was a Yankee fan.
I went to the Giants-Dodgers game on Oct. 3, 1951 with my friend, Charlie, the Dodger fan, and Sheldy, the Giant fan.


Hitting Rock Bottom May Have an Encouraging Side
If the presence of the Minnesota Twins and the Atlanta Braves in the World Series is a sign of a new age in baseball, will the Houston Astros and the Cleveland Indians be there next season?
The Twins and the Braves are the first teams ever to finish in last place one season and play in the World Series the next.


The Executive Life; The Satisfying Silliness Of the Paintball Wars
On a recent rainy Sunday, Christopher Siedman was running through the woods in a strange half crouch, climbing over low stone walls and hiding from enemy fire.
Decked out in camouflage pants, he and two friends were holding black metal guns.
They thought they were closing in on their objective, a heavily guarded compound at the other end of a wooded field.
But in fact, they were going around in circles in a swamp, thick brush blocking their passage.
Just then, the quiet was pierced by unmistakable Rambo-like screams of skirmish.


For Children, a Trip New York City Means Excitement
Here is a sampling of children's activities, compiled by Dulcie Leimbach, scheduled this fall in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
ALL AGES
November


Paul Taylor -- Full of Surprises, Even for Himself
Paul Taylor sat at his desk in the garret of his West Village row house, his English springer spaniel Bud lounging beside him.
It was still early in the day, but he talked with the energy of someone who had been barreling along for hours.
There was much to talk about.
After a dark time when his dance company seemed to be in trouble, undergoing a change of administrators and forgoing its traditional spring season at City Center because of financial difficulties, Mr.
Taylor is on a roll.


Preparing Romantic Seasonal Fare for Weekend Entertaining
SUMMER may be over, but that does not mean weekend entertaining has come to a halt.
Guests for lunch, dinner and overnight stays continue throughout the year.
A new book, "A Weekend in the Country" by Linda Burgess and Anne Scott (Prentice Hall Press, $30), offers some suggestions, with menus and recipes, for seasonal weekend entertaining.
Splendidly poetic photographs accompany the text.
The author and photographer are English, with English country houses, and their approach is decidedly a romantic one.
Weekends are a time for rustic activities like gathering berries from the hedgerows, drying herbs and putting up preserves.
Shopping malls, television, microwave ovens and high cholesterol counts do not seem to intrude in this world.


Low-Interest Loans to Lower-Income People
To the Editor:
"Keeping the Government Out of Housing," (Letters, Oct. 6) leads me to believe the writer, Abdul Rahman Abdi, is not old enough to remember the G.I.
Bill, which primed the housing market for decades and helped those who might not have been able to afford homes without this aid, myself included.
Too many of our citizens, now that they have "made it," are unwilling to help those who need a helping hand.
Shame!
Low-interest loans to lower-income people is where our money should be going.
MURIEL C. HYMAN  Matawan, N.J., Oct. 7


Headliners; Sharing the Wealth
Great wealth came somewhat easily to Theodore R. Johnson of Delray Beach, Fla., and he is letting most of it go the same way.
Mr.
Johnson, 90 years old, retired from United Parcel Service in 1952 having never been paid more than $14,000 a year, but his accumulated U.P.S. stock had come to be worth a small fortune, $700,000.
Over the next four decades it grew to be worth a large one -- $70 million.
Last week Mr.
Johnson announced that he was donating $36 million to education.
Of that, $14.4 million will go to Palm Beach Atlantic College -- he admires the Baptist institution's emphasis on free enterprise -- and $7.2 million will go into a program for the children of U.P.S. employees in Florida.
Gallaudet University for the deaf in Washington, the Florida School for the Deaf and Blind, a scholarship fund for poor children and the American Indian College Fund will get $3.6 million each.
"Need is the thing," said Mr.
Johnson.
"There are so many kids that can't go to college."


Miss Donaldson Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry T. Donaldson of Falmouth Foreside, Me., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Suzanne Thompson Donaldson, to Brian John Kearney, a son of Mr.
Richard V. Kearney of Great Falls, Va., and Dr.
Helen M. Kearney of Penfield, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Donaldson, 29 years old, is the photography and art editor of Interview magazine.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University, as did her fiance.
Her father is a vice president of Prudential Securities in their office in Portland, Me.


Psychiatry's Use in Thomas Battle Raises Ethics Issue
While the drama of the Clarence Thomas hearings unfolded on television screens, Republican defenders of the Supreme Court nominee and their Democratic opponents engaged in a behind-the-scenes struggle to try to use psychiatry to guide strategy and, in some cases, provide ammunition for their arguments.
The Republican defenders of Judge Thomas touched off this unusual and ethically ambiguous effort, enlisting a nationally known forensic psychiatrist to provide definitions of mental disorders that Senators and witnesses were using to try to undermine the testimony of Prof.
Anita F. Hill.


France Approved Use of AIDS-Tainted Blood
An official report charging that Government health authorities knowingly authorized transfusions of blood contaminated with the AIDS virus in 1985 has brought demands for indemnity from hemophiliacs and others who were infected.
The report by Michel Lucas, Inspector General of Health Affairs, said last month that delays in requiring heat treatment of blood stocks to kill the AIDS virus and in adopting a new screening test for blood donors had exposed an unspecified number of people to the virus that causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome.


The Other Side of the Merger
To the Editor:
"Making a Merger of Rivals Work" (Managing, Sept. 29) failed to take into account the fate of many of my former colleagues, in particular, those of us not hired by the Consumer News and Business Channel.
I was formerly the director of business affairs at Financial News Network, based in New York.
I am continuing, with the assistance of counsel, to pursue legal claims of up to 80 former employees who may not have been properly notified of their dismissal by either FNN or CNBC.
The rights of these employees and so-called "independent contractors" to receive 60 days' notice (or payment in lieu thereof) in a manner prescribed under the Federal Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act are being examined by our attorneys.
ELLEN DIAMOND  Wilton, Conn., Sept. 30


In Hot Water


Miss Cohn Wed To D. T. Healy
Jessica Faith Cohn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Cohn of South Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to Douglas Taylor Healy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Healy of Vail, Colo.
Judge George Hunter Roberts of Lewisboro (N.Y.) Town Court officiated at Le Chateau restaurant in South Salem, N.Y.
Mrs.
Healy, 27 years old, and her husband, 26, graduated from Dartmouth College.
She is a construction manager at BPT Properties, a commercial real-estate developer in New York.
Her father owns Texas, a restaurant in Pearl River, N.Y.
Her mother, Joan Lifton Cohn, is a senior account manager at W. B. Wood, a commercial design concern in New Providence, N.J.


King Hoping for Fight Before Trial
Evander Holyfield's defense of his heavyweight title against Mike Tyson, originally scheduled for Nov. 8 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev., will apparently take place in January.
"We're considering the week of Jan. 20," Don King said today.
King, the promoter for Tyson, who sustained a rib-cage injury that forced the postponement, spoke at a Las Vegas news conference that could be viewed here by close-circuit broadcast.
The news conference was also attended by Tyson.


Hofstra's Lynch Is Back and Fordham Pays
How deep is Hofstra at quarterback?
After the top two quarterbacks were hurt in the Flying Dutchmen's opening game, the third stringer, Michael Doto, stepped in and set a Hofstra yardage passing record of 487 yards in the second game.
Then when Doto suffered a separated shoulder in the next game, George Beisel, the backup recovered from a hand injury, passed for 507 yards in the fourth game to snap Doto's mark.


Hans Harnik, 73, Dies; A Lawyer for Austria
Hans Harnik, who left Austria to escape the Nazis and who, as an American lawyer, represented that country's new government after the war for nearly half a century, died on Friday at New York Hospital in Manhattan, where he lived.
He was 73 years old.
Mr. Harnik died of a heart attack, his family said.


Wall St. Property Prices Fall
Seven years ago, the value of the million-square-foot office building that housed Drexel Burnham Lambert and other well-known Financial District tenants was estimated at $160 million.
Last week, the 39-story building at 60 Broad Street, just south of the New York Stock Exchange, changed hands for $57.5 million.


POSTINGS: Coming to Harlem; A Ben &amp; Jerry's For the Homeless
The sputtering efforts to revitalize 125th Street, Harlem's main commercial and cultural corridor, will get a boost next spring with the opening of a Ben &amp; Jerry's ice cream parlor just off Fifth Avenue.
The venture will be owned by Joseph H. Holland in partnership with Harlem Ark of Freedom, a nonprofit community organization that operates HARKhomes, a shelter on West 129th Street for homeless men.
Some of the shop's employees will be shelter residents.


Is Special Olympics Leaving Some Behind?
Lumbering downcourt on a slow break, I butter-finger a bullet from my son, double-dribble, travel, step on my toes, and stop short for my best shot, a two-handed set that goes in at least 12 percent of the time.
I think, Yesssss, but before I can paint my rainbow, Joey Asaro lurches out of a wall of defenders on the opposing team and hugs me.
His teammates giggle, twirl, drool, jerk spasmodically, and hug each other.
The scoreboard blinks and gives them another 24 points.
Everybody who can, claps.
This was several years ago during a regular Thursday night pickup game at the San Francisco Center for the Handicapped.
Joey's team, the Wildcats, also known as "the Team That's Never Lost a Game," sometimes plays other Special Olympic teams of mentally retarded adults and youngsters.
Sometimes it plays teams of police officers or firefighters or gay triathletes, which goes a long way toward defusing the fear and mystery about the profoundly retarded, especially when they tickle rebounders or distract a hot scorer by bringing her a ringing telephone on court.


Smoking Allowed
To the Editor: After reading William E. Schmidt's article "Smoking Permitted," I wanted to shout "bravo" to the British and other Europeans who have resisted the attempts by anti smokers to impose their way of life on others.
The American brand of this movement is particularly annoying.
Perhaps those travelers who find smoking in Europe too difficult to take will stay away, thus making other Americans more welcome abroad.
If I'm in a place where the smoke bothers me, then I usually move or leave the establishment.
Incidentally, I'm not a smoker and never have been (except for the rare cigar) but I don't go about trying to impose my life style on others.
RON NOWICKI San Francisco


Emily Enders Is to Wed John Odom
February wedding plans have been announced for the Rev.
Emily Jane Enders and the Rev.
John Lamar Odom, both Presbyterian ministers.
The prospective bride, 34 years old, is pastor of the Glenwood Presbyterian Church in Glenwood Landing, L.I.
She graduated from Wellesley College and she and her fiance both received master of divinity degrees from Union Theological Seminary in New York.
She is a daughter of Corinne Enders of Hartsdale, N.Y., and Howard Enders of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mr.
Enders is an independent film maker.


For Michael Jeter, The Jig Isn't Up
Michael Jeter describes his role in "The Fisher King" as if it were a routine.
"All I did was show up in Central Park and let them bury me up to my waist in horse manure," he says.
"Then I put on a blond wig, some gold high heels, a red feather dress and a monkey-fur cape, and I got up on a desk and sang a song."
"An actor's main job is to show up for work, and that's all I did," Mr.
Jeter says.


Just Pals


Ms. McGuire, Lawyer, Weds
Michele Ann McGuire, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric L. McGuire of Alpine, N.J., was married yesterday in Tenafly, N.J., to David Michael Repetto, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Repetto of Ridgewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Edward Davis performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Mount Carmel Church.
Ms.
McGuire, who is 33 years old and is keeping her name, is an associate in the Hackensack, N.J., law firm of Lamb &amp; Corcoran.
She graduated summa cum laude from Connecticut College and received a J.D. from New York Law School.
Her father is the president of McGuire Chevrolet in North Bergen, N.J.


For School Board Head, Informed Tips
Six former presidents of New York City's Board of Education got together over lunch last week to give the current titleholder, H. Carl McCall, some tips on managing a job that they suggested ultimately left them baffled.
"How did you deal with the terrible challenge of having to have a relationship with the mayor and at the same time be an advocate for the schools?" Mr.
McCall, a longtime ally of Mayor David N. Dinkins, asked as he opened the colloquy.


Business Diary/October 13-18
ECONOMY For Better or Worse, Citicorp's Star Is Hitched to the Economy


Crime/Mystery; A Fondness for Degenerates
A DANCE AT THE SLAUGHTERHOUSE
By Lawrence Block. 309 pp. New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $19.


Copenhagen
To the Editor: A brief addendum on "What's Doing in Copenhagen" (Sept. 1, Travel).
A rare find -- a charming and relatively inexpensive place for lunch or tea in Copenhagen with superb food -- the Cafe at the Kunstindustri Museet, the Museum of Decorative Arts, worthwhile to see in its own right, Bredgade 68, behind the Amalienborg Castle.
You can enter the cafe without paying the museum fee.
The owner of the cafe, Neta, is also a fantastic source of things to see and do in Copenhagen.
MICHAEL J. GOLDSTEIN Los Angeles


A Shantytown Society Grows In the Shadow of Skyscrapers
In the chilly Manhattan morning, the sounds of seagulls calling and the rumble of freight trains across the Hudson River are the alarm clocks that tell Anthony Aldi and his shantytown neighbors that another day is breaking and that it is time to search for food.
"I wake up, I say two Our Fathers and two Holy Mothers, make four signs of the cross and then I say, 'God help me another day,' " Mr.
Aldi said.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Freehold 85,000
56 Mechanic Street
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; 1-car garage, w/w carpeting, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $1,786.
Howell 158,000
2 Windsor Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; c/a, family room, 1-car garage, h/w floors; taxes $3,387.
Jackson 111,000
14 Buckingham Drive
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 17-year-old ranch; den, c/a, 1-car garage, deck, inground pool; taxes $3,796.
Lakewood 76,400
392 Woodlake Manor Drive
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 5-year-old condominium town house; c/a, w/w carpeting; monthly maintenance $110; taxes $2,413.
Millstone 416,000
107 Stagecoach Road
6-bedroom, 3-bath, 2-half bath; 1-year-old contemporary; 3 fireplaces, family room, c/a; taxes $9,200.
South Orange 157,000
134 Sherman Place
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 2-half bath, 52-year-old colonial; den, eat-in-kitchen, 1-car garage, porch; taxes $3,899.
OTHER AREAS New Milford, Conn. 129,000
22 Sterling Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 22-year-old raised ranch; large storage shed with electricity, extra half-bathroom, 1/2 acre; taxes $1,762.
Katonah, N.Y. 367,500
22 Wakan Drive
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 16-year-old contemporary; cathedral ceiling entry hall, family room, pool, 4 acres; taxes $7,500.
Farmingdale, L.I. 180,000
5 Hawthorne Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old colonial; dining room, Florida room, fireplace; taxes $5,200.


Making a Difference; A Real Hollywood Presence
Picking movies that will succeed at the box office is hard enough even for the most experienced Hollywood executives.
For Masaru Kakutani, it will be even harder.
Mr.
Kakutani is heading the Fujisankei Communications Group's effort, announced last week, to build and manage its own Hollywood production company.
Never before has a Japanese company attempted to make movies on its own for distribution first in the United States and then around the world.
All of the Japanese companies that have previously come to Hollywood, in fact, have made a point of saying that the film business is best run by American managers experienced in the Byzantine process of Hollywood deal-making and the art of reading the movie-going public's tastes.


CLASS STRUGGLE
The problem of teaching American history that is politically correct might be resolved by splitting the course in two.
Separate political history from cultural history.
If it's properly taught, no group would get short shrift -- and the Eurocentric philosophy that has inspired our Government for most of the last two centuries could be portrayed in an accurate context.
HENRY WEIL
New York, N.Y.


This Week: '92 Garlic, '91 Brussels Sprouts
Plant garlic cloves in loamy soil with good drainage and full sun.
Space cloves, root end down, 4 inches apart and 3 inches deep.
Mulch with salt hay or straw, which should be removed in early spring.
Keep cutting annuals until the first frost, saving seeds from nonhybrids like cleome and hollyhocks.
Sprinkle some on the ground so you can dig up seedlings in the spring, or store the dry seeds in 35-millimeter film cans or resealable plastic bags and keep in the refrigerator to be sown indoors early next spring.


Helping Hands of All Sorts
THURSDAY.
Sometimes things work out the way they should.
Take Michael Rich, who sold more than $5,000 worth of raffle tickets for the Boys' Club of New York benefit.
His reward?
One of his own tickets won a prize, a $2,500 week for two at Rancho La Puerta, a spa in Mexico.
The party, at the Country Club, attracted 330 guests, who were asked to dress "Palm Beach 40's." Among the interpretations: white jackets, boned strapless dresses and feathered hair ornaments.
WEDNESDAY.
Not too many benefits feature a live animal exhibition, but then not too many organizations are as unusual as Helping Hands.
The helping, in this case, is done by monkeys trained to provide aid for quadriplegics, from feeding and brushing hair to adjusting television sets.
The $300-a-person party at the Metropolitan Club drew 150 guests for champagne, a buffet dinner, games of chance, dancing and, of course, the animal exhibition arranged by Jim Fowler (it included a baby mountain lion and a 7-month-old bear).


Harlem Residents Gather to Back Their Hospital
After weeks of intense scrutiny and criticism of Harlem Hospital, more than 200 Harlem residents went to the hospital yesterday to express both support for it and deep worries about its future.
Gathered for the annual meeting of the hospital's community board, hospital administrators and local officials said the scrutiny, much of which has come in the wake of two deaths there, was cause for renewed hope.


'The Human Blueprint'
To the Editor:
Natalie Angier has criticized my book "The Human Blueprint" (Sept. 29) for my "fervid" advocacy of the human genome project and my "relentless, 1950's-style boosterism." She suggests instead that "the mapping and the sequencing of genes are easy" (this will be news to the research groups that have desperately sought the Huntington's disease gene for years).
She raises the point that scientists have not yet cured sickle-cell anemia and AIDS, despite the fact that the relevant genomic sequences have been known for some time (about 12 years in the former case, less in the latter), and quotes the opinion of some scientists that many maladies may require even centuries for a remedy.


Ms. Schindler Is to Be Married
Dr.
Frederick J. Schindler of Fort Washington, Pa., and Mrs.
Sheila B. Schindler of Chester Springs, Pa., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter, Sophie Hood Schindler, and Curtis Alba Glovier, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Alba Glovier of McLean, Va.
Ms.
Schindler, 26 years old, graduated from Princeton University and is studying for an M.B.A. at Columbia University.
Her father is a senior research fellow with Rohm &amp; Haas, a chemical manufacturer in Spring House, Pa.
Her mother is a fund-raiser at the Phoenixville (Pa.) Hospital.


Elizabeth Sweet Engaged to Wed
Howard C. Sweet Jr. of Charlestown, R.I., and Melinda Held of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Adams Sweet, to Timothy Redmond Dowling, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Dowling of Ridgewood, N.J.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Sweet, 30 years old, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is an associate marketing manager in the fragrance division of Elizabeth Arden in New York.
Her father is a lawyer in Charlestown.
Her mother, a lawyer, is the associate general counsel and director of environmental affairs for Lever Brothers in New York.


Sunday Outing; A Visit to Nassau County That Is a Trip Back in Time
The Old Bethpage Village Restoration, a small rustic Long Island village of peaceful lanes, fertile pastures and simple domestic amusements dating from before the Civil War, can be found in the heart of a bustling suburban sprawl.
The village preserves a bit of the old, rural way of life, long before there was a Long Island Expressway.
The restoration is a living museum on about 200 acres that re-creates the life and work styles of the 18th and 19th centuries.
Typical homes, churches, schoolhouses and stores of the period have been saved from demolition and moved from their original sites around Long Island, then authentically restored and furnished.


IRAQIS ARE ARMING THE REBEL KURDS IN TURKEY'S SOUTH
The Iraqi Government is arming and supplying the Kurdish separatist movement in southeastern Turkey in apparent retaliation for Turkey's close cooperation with allied forces during the Persian Gulf war, according to Turkish officials, Western diplomats and Iraqi Kurdish leaders.
There has been an increase in the number of armed clashes in the southeast and a qualitative leap in both the tactics of rebel fighters and the caliber of the weapons they now use against Turkish soldiers, these officials said.


Ford Rounds Off A Few More Edges
I WORK nights and I don't do mornings.
But sometimes, against better judgment, I find myself at breakfast.
And it was one of those times, talking to some Ford guys, that I had my eyes opened wide.
I hate that.
What did it was the statement that the company had spent $3 billion to develop its new Taurus.
This was back in 1985, mind you, and I scribbled it down through eyes that were as red as my bloody mary.
Three billion dollars?
That is three
thousand
million. I mean, for what?


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
SCARY STUFF
The Witch's Dungeon in Bristol, a 25-year-old horror museum open only at Halloween, is so scary that it is not recommended for children under the age of 6.
The display, at 90 Brattle Street, just off James Casey Road, it is the life work of its designer, Cortlandt Hull, a movie buff who started it when he was 13 years old.


Overmyer Play at the Yale Repertory
WE have reached our embarcadero," Mary announces. Fanny thinks she has come upon glyphs. "Perhaps we'll find a translator," says Alexandra, musing upon their peregrinations and recalling the time she saw "the Dalai Lama himself transmute great buckets of gold -- into yak butter."
The trekking of Mary, Fanny and Alexandra, explorers through space and time, starting in 1888 and winding up in 1955, is by now familiar to followers of regional theater, where "On the Verge, or the Geography of Yearning" by Eric Overmyer has itself become well traveled since the 1985 premiere at Center Stage in Baltimore.
And now, in his debut as artistic director, Stan Wojewodski Jr. is staging Mr.
Overmyer's prodigious linguistic word play at the Yale Repertory.


Helping Hyperactive Children Fit In
THE four boys congregated around the table at the Sid Jacobson-North Shore Y.M.-Y.W.H.A., eager to start their arts-and-crafts project: making colored-salt terrariums.
One 11-year-old, distracted by smelling the glass bottle in front of him, was not paying attention to the social worker, Melissa Goldberg.
"Tropicana bottle!" he shouted. "This smells good!"


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about Robert M. Gates's rebuttal of charges that he slanted intelligence information misidentified the Senate Intelligence Committee's source of statements from several analysts.
At the committee's request, the analysts provided the statements, which concerned their role in a 1985 C.I.A. study assessing the likelihood of Soviet complicity in the attempted assassination of Pope John Paul II.
The statements were not provided by Mr.
Gates.


On the Street; Style Setters Among the Very Young
There is no uniform attitude toward children's clothes these autumn days.
A little girl is dressed in a biker's black leather jacket and boots; a boy learning to put a coin in a parking meter appears in a classic navy blazer and gray flannel shorts;; a tot in a stroller is dressed in Kente cloth; a father and child are dressed native Nigerian style, including the dashing headwrapping for the baby.
In the tradition of mothers and daughters dressing alike, young girls are adding leggings to their smock dresses and colorful T-shirts.


Julie Prag and Kenneth Vianale Are Married
Julie Anne Prag and Kenneth Jerome Vianale were married yesterday in Cambridge, Md.
The Rev.
Bruce Byrolly officiated at St.
Mary Refuge of Sinners Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Vianale, 32 years old, is a daughter of L. Catherine Long of Baltimore and Jules Benge Prag 3d of Clemmons, N.C.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Maryland and received a law degree from the University of Virginia.
She is a defense lawyer for the Legal Aid Society in New York.


An Italian Restaurant Out of the Past
ARTURO'S RISTORANTE in Bellerose proves that a restaurant need not be trendy to be popular.
Arturo's is no neon-punctuated pasta cafe, nor does it serve designer pizzas or offer the Island's latest hot ticket, Italian family dining.
For nearly 30 years, Arturo's has been a warm crowd pleaser in western Nassau County.
That welcome includes complimentary bruschetta, splendid garlic toast piled high with fresh tomatoes and herbs.
At meal's end, a glass bowl cascading with fresh fruit and nuts is a sweet farewell.


Now Get Politics Out of Confirmation Process; No Effective Remedy
To the Editor:
Senator Alan Simpson, as well as many of his Republican colleagues on the Senate Judiciary Committee, expressed shock or skepticism about the fact that Prof.
Anita F. Hill did not file a sexual harassment charge against Judge Clarence Thomas.
Senator Simpson remarked sarcastically that there must be something wrong with the "process."


Basement Wall Leak? Try Waterproofing It
THIS is a good time of year to repair or waterproof basement walls.
Serious cracks and major or chronic leakage should be repaired by a professional basement waterproofer, but small isolated cracks and damage like efflorescence, or salt deposits, and peeling paint caused by damp walls often can be remedied by amateurs using products like waterproofing paints.
To repair cracks and holes, use hydraulic cement, which is powdered.
Begin by scouring all loose material from the damaged area with a wire brush.
Also, if practical, undercut the sides of the area by chiseling so that the crack or hole is wider toward the inside of the masonry than at the surface.
Use a hammer and cold chisel, and wear protective goggles.


Post Office Says Agreement on Site Is Near
THE embattled regional office of the United States Postal Service is expected to announce that after a 17-year search it has found a permanent home in Westchester.
An agreement to acquire a site on Westchester Avenue in Harrison could be announced by the end of the week, postal officials say.
Improving the condition of the county's mail service, which the Postmaster General has called "the worst in the nation," has become "the highest priority in the country" for the Federal agency, said Kenneth L. Perrin, general manager of the real estate division.
"We are just elated we are close to having it resolved."


Topics of The Times; Salesmanship
A New Yorker who had lost her sunglasses and was in no mood to spend big money for another pair stopped at a street-corner stand one day last week.
From now on, she says, she's a constant customer.
But not because of the prices.
Because of the service.
Actually, she went to two stands.
At the first, one man held up a small mirror while another positioned the specs as deftly as any ophthalmologist.
Neither man liked the way she looked in the granny glasses.


Now Get Politics Out of Confirmation Process; Indian Reform on Rape
To the Editor:
I am writing to mention a predicament we faced in India a decade ago, when I was deputy leader of the then-ruling Congress Parliamentary Party, of which the late Indira Gandhi was the leader.


Basement Wall Leak? Try Waterproofing It
THIS is a good time of year to repair or waterproof basement walls.
Serious cracks and major or chronic leakage should be repaired by a professional basement waterproofer, but small isolated cracks and damage like efflorescence, or salt deposits, and peeling paint caused by damp walls often can be remedied by amateurs using products like waterproofing paints.
To repair cracks and holes, use hydraulic cement, which is powdered.
Begin by scouring all loose material from the damaged area with a wire brush.
Also, if practical, undercut the sides of the area by chiseling so that the crack or hole is wider toward the inside of the masonry than at the surface.
Use a hammer and cold chisel, and wear protective goggles.


A Busy Inventor Fills a Special Niche in the Toy Market
CONSIDER a simple music box and the fine motor control it takes to wind it up.
Imagine having no strength in your fingers to accomplish such a task.
Now imagine yourself as a disabled 3-year-old child who wants badly to hear the music box play.
Dr.
Steven Kanor thinks about such problems all the time.
Dr.
Kanor, a biomedical engineer and an inventor, is the founder and president of Toys for Special Children, a 20-year-old company in Hastings-on-Hudson.
Toys for Special Children ships specially adapted toys and other equipment for the disabled all over the world.


In the Nation; Waltz Of the Democrats
Republicans are gloating, with much reason, over the ineptitude of the Democrats who huffed, puffed and stumbled through the Clarence Thomas hearings.
This softball performance by Democrats on the Senate Judiciary Committee is bound to have left many in a huge television audience wondering what legitimate claim to national power this bumbling crowd could possibly have.


Ann Seaman Wed to A. R. Rogerson
Ann Barnard Seaman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Cann Seaman of Savannah, Ga., was married yesterday in Bedford, N.Y., to Andrew Robert Rogerson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Walker Rogerson of Old Lyme, Conn.
The Rev.
William Foley officiated at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Rogerson, 30 years old, graduated from Denison University.
She is a freelance television director in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was an executive vice president of the William Esty Advertising Agency in New York.


AFTERMATH OF AN EMERGENCY
Michael Winerip's article "Aftermath of an Emergency" (Sept. 15) aptly describes the current unfortunate state of affairs with regard to services to children and families at risk, in which all parties are victimized.
The current regulatory climate requires more and more services from providers, while fiscal restraints reduce the budgets and staff of these agencies and hospitals.
In this situation, while the omissions on the part of the caseworker are indefensible, so too are the untenable caseloads assigned to such workers.


Headliners; No More Mr. Who?
Diplomatic niceties went by the board last week when an American Treasury official, David C. Mulford, tongue-lashed his Japanese counterpart over trade issues.
Facing the press in Tokyo with Vice Finance Minister Tadao Chino, Mr.
Mulford, the Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs, told reporters that the Japanese were continuing to permit anticompetitive practices, setting up regulatory roadblocks to outsiders and dragging their feet on promises to ease up.
"I came here today to see if the Ministry of Finance has a plan for reform of the system," Mr.
Mulford said.
"It does appear that the same nontransparent, anticompetitive approach will be followed." Mr.
Chino protested that Japan intended to make progress and was taking steps even if they appeared to be modest ones.
But Mr.
Mulford countered that the steps were getting smaller.
"There's really no movement at all," he said.


King Hoping for Fight Before Trial
Evander Holyfield's defense of his heavyweight title against Mike Tyson, originally scheduled for Nov. 8 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev., will apparently take place in January.
"We're considering the week of Jan. 20," Don King said today.
King, the promoter for Tyson, who sustained a rib-cage injury that forced the postponement, spoke at a Las Vegas news conference that could be viewed here by close-circuit broadcast.
The news conference was also attended by Tyson.


Let the Lobbying Begin
Sydney decided on a vibrant video presentation, while Beijing stuck to the facts.
Manchester emphasized its history, but Berlin stressed its new solidarity.
Four of the leading candidates for the right to be host to the first Olympics of the 21st century took to the floor yesterday at the 25th congress of the General Assembly of International Sports Federations in Sydney.


AFTERMATH OF AN EMERGENCY
We at the Jersey City Medical Center appreciate your efforts to address the critical issues of reporting and investigating child abuse.
However, several points in the article inappropriately implied breakdown of a system that is intentionally structured to err on the side of protecting children.
Comments made by the Leeds family about foreign-born medical staff are particularly inappropriate.
Hospitals, and in particular medical personnel, play an important role in the identification, treatment and prevention of child abuse.
Our medical staff reflects the various ethnic and cultural groups in our community.
Our staff should be commended for its ability to cope with the many complex situations it addresses every day.
The children of Jersey City are well served by their professionalism, commitment and dedication.
JONATHAN M. METSCH President, Jersey City Medical Center
Jersey City
ILS&gt;Photo of children (Photograph by Marc Asnin/J. B. Pictures for The New York Times)


Hostage Caught in Power Struggles
"TWO ROOMS," a play by Lee Blessing at the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst, is a love story plunked down into a realm of prisoners and power struggles.
The lights come up on an all-too-familiar figure of a blindfolded handcuffed American.
This one, Michael Wells, has been taken hostage and added to the growing collection of human bartering chips gathered by various factions in the Middle East.


Playwright Pleasant and Unpleasant
BERNARD SHAW
Volume Three: 1918-1950.
The Lure of Fantasy.
By Michael Holroyd.
Illustrated. 544 pp.
New York: Random House. $30.


Corrections
An article in the Style Makers column on Oct. 6 about a picture catalogue of children available for adoption described its origin incompletely.
While the book, "New York's Family Album," was designed by Clark Kellogg, the original idea for the project came from MLR Marketing Communications.


How to Avoid Bare Patches in Spring
THOUGH it may seem academic to many gardeners, it should be pointed out that there is a huge difference between fall and spring gardens.
What seems prolific and filled with foliage now will be barren and empty come spring.
All this is another way of saying to think spring when planting bulbs now.
Too many gardeners, especially those who are new to the experience, forget that many of the plants they see now will not be there in spring, because the plants have reputations as lazy risers.
And if there are no plants to fill these voids, the bare spots will remain until the late risers begin to push up from the soil.


Crime/Mystery; In the Amazing Kingdom of Thrills
NATIVE TONGUE
By Carl Hiaasen. 325 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $21.


The Bausch Imagination Still Bedazzles
Nowadays, The Pina Bausch Tanztheater Wuppertal is greeted with the kind of anticipation reserved for a cult classic at a film festival.
The atmosphere around the recent and fourth visit by the German company to the Brooklyn Academy of Music had none of the controversy that accompanied the troupe's New York debut in 1984.
Progressively, the imprint of Miss Bausch's brilliant imagination has made itself felt: We expect her pieces to contain an unflinching look at painful male-female relationships, the bitter humor of human existence, repetitive structures with confessional vignettes, the use of trained dancers who virtually do not dance but who move with nuances of gesture and timing that only a choreographer could conceive.


What Became of The Democrats?
CHAIN REACTION
The Impact of Race, Rights, and Taxes on American Politics.
By Thomas Byrne Edsall with Mary D. Edsall. 339 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton. $22.95.


Arts Groups Reel From Fiscal Woes
DROPS in government financing, corporate sponsorship and donations are forcing Long Island arts organizations to cut programs to survive a recession that has claimed one theater group, the Long Island Stage of Rockville Centre.
As groups reduce their staffs, decrease performances and postpone programs, the possibility exists that other groups may close.


Indian Textiles
To the Editor: To add to "Tie-Dyed Fabrics in India," (Aug. 11) our group on a Journeyworld crafts tour also met Mr.
Wazir, who brought many of his antique textiles to us at the Prince Hotel in Bhuj.
But even more fascinating were our visits to nearby villages to see these textiles still being made, often by award-winning artisans.
In Bhajori we watched wool shawls being woven by hand and then tie-died.
We admired the elaborate mudwork embedded with mirrors inside a villager's home, and an elderly man performed a prayer song for us.
In Nirona we saw rogan painting, where bright castor oil-based pigments are applied in stylized designs to half of a piece of dark cotton, which is then carefully folded in half and pressed to print the other side.
Hodka, near the Pakistan border, offered quilts, embroidery and applique work.
We drank cups of tea in an open courtyard and I, a quiltmaker myself, bought four stunning quilts for about $12 each.
ANN SCHROEDER Jamaica Plain, Mass.


A Moral Victory Is Seen In Window Trial Losses
A disappointed Andrew J. Maloney, the United States Attorney in Brooklyn, said yesterday that, certainly, he had wanted to win more convictions in the six-month trial that examined racketeering in the window-installation industry.
But he said that the prosecution had exerted a strong influence on both organized crime and the lucrative New York City window industry, which he said had been controlled by the Mafia for more than a decade.


In 'Soldaten,' Apocalypse Fizzles Out
I am left with two questions about Bernd Alois Zimmermann's 1965 opera "Die Soldaten," now being expertly performed by the New York City Opera.
If, as I thought the week before last, it was so stunning a work of horror, spinning a tale of the brutal rape and destruction of an innocent girl by a group of soldiers, then why was it not better than it was?
And if, as I also thought, it was so deliberately ugly, having the effect, at times, of fingernails scraping on a blackboard, why was it not worse?
Some of the answers may be found in the work's source: the 1775 play by the German poet Jakob Lenz.
Lenz, who died both young and mad, is a crucial figure for German Expressionist opera.
His "Soldaten," for example, was much admired by the dramatist Georg Buchner, who wrote "Woyzeck" under its influence; "Woyzeck" was then used as the basis for Alban Berg's opera "Wozzeck," which in turn served as a model for Zimmermann's "Soldaten."


Why the 'Temperature Is O.K.'
To the Editor:
I laughed out loud when I read in "An Unusual Way to Add Figures" (Business Diary, Sept. 29).
Joel Kurtzman, your editor, wrote that the Administration was arguing "if your feet are in the oven and your head is in the freezer, on average, your temperature must be O.K." Let me explain why the economic "temperature is O.K." (I have studied both thermodynamics and economics.)


Indians Stage Protest Outside the Dome
Playing Indian songs and carrying "Stop the Chop" placards, about 150 American Indians protested against the Atlanta Braves outside the Metrodome today before Game 1 of the World Series.
Representatives for protesters said they are upset by what they call the false image of American Indians being fostered at Braves games.
The Atlanta fans have popularized a motion they call the tomahawk chop and a corresponding chant, and some have worn headdresses and "war paint"to games.
Many signs at the afternoon protest today admonished Ted Turner, the owner of the Braves, and Jane Fonda, his fiancee.


Defending Stephen King
To the Editor:
I don't know what Joe Queenan's particular pleasures are, but reading does not seem to be one of them.


Compliance Officers' Day in the Sun
Wall Street used to regard compliance officers, the industry's in-house cops, as lowly employees who never generated a dime of revenue, the invisible ones who filled out forms and processed paper.
Now, following the collapse of Drexel Burnham Lambert and the scandal at Salomon Brothers, the attitude is that no amount of compliance policing is too much.
Compliance officers, who are responsible for seeing that their firms obey the complicated securities laws, industry regulations and company rules, are now enjoying an elevated status.
Today, they often report more directly to top executives and company boards.
Their salaries and staffs are growing, and some firms engage in bidding wars to recruit them.
Merrill Lynch even featured its top compliance officer in a picture in its annual report.


Perahia Stretches, Carefully
The career of Murray Perahia on records has been an exercise in cautious expansion.
Eighteen years ago, Columbia Masterworks (to become CBS Masterworks and then Sony Classical) issued performances of Schumann's "Fantasiestucke" and "Davidsbundlertanze." They presented to the public a young American pianist, frail in appearance and slender in tone, who brought to the lyric Romantic repertory a rare equipoise between passion and taste.
The grace in this playing seemed not manufactured at all.
Alterations in tempo, points of emphasis and the interpretation of phrase marks were free of laborious calculation but instead the product of instinctive choices confirmed by intelligence.


Don't Overlook Female Athletes
To the Sports Editor:
I am taken aback that your prestigious paper does not provide any information involving other than the standard male-dominated, gambling- prone sports such as baseball, football, hockey.
There are few articles relating to college female activities, such as N.C.A.A.
Division I women's soccer.


Preparing Romantic Seasonal Fare for Weekend Entertaining
SUMMER may be over, but that does not mean weekend entertaining has come to a halt.
Guests for lunch, dinner and overnight stays continue throughout the year.
A new book, "A Weekend in the Country" by Linda Burgess and Anne Scott (Prentice Hall Press, $30), offers some suggestions, with menus and recipes, for seasonal weekend entertaining.
Splendidly poetic photographs accompany the text.
The author and photographer are English, with English country houses, and their approach is decidedly a romantic one.
Weekends are a time for rustic activities like gathering berries from the hedgerows, drying herbs and putting up preserves.
Shopping malls, television, microwave ovens and high cholesterol counts do not seem to intrude in this world.


Irish Trails
To the Editor: An addition to your column "Ireland on Horseback" (Aug. 25): Willie Leahy's Connemara Trail ends the last week of September.
However, Leahy offers the Aille Cross Country Trail from October through April.
Based in Loughrea in County Galway, this trail offers a variety of rides through the lush Galway countryside with an option to hunt with the Galway Blazers.
Cost of the Aille Cross Country Trail is $:700 (about $1,085) for six nights' lodging, all meals and all riding.
Also, three American companies represent the Irish trails listed in your column.
We are:


Legislators Campaign in the New Districts
REPUBLICANS hope to maintain their traditional control of the Board of Legislators in the November elections with the help of the new district lines they designed earlier this year.
The redistricting, based on population changes from the 1990 census, was controlled by the Republicans because they hold a 10-to-7 majority in the legislative chamber.
They say they hope to maintain that advantage and perhaps add to it, despite the uncertainty of three races where there are no incumbents.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  O'Meara Wins Disney  Mark O'Meara shot a final-round eight-under-par 64 yesterday to win his first PGA tournament of the season, by one stroke over David Peoples at the $1 million Walt Disney World Golf Classic in Lake Buena Vista, Fla.
O'Meara, who spent the week at his home less than a half hour from the tournament site, had led after the first two rounds but was one stroke off the lead entering the final round.
Peoples, another local favorite, carded a 65 in the final round, but ran out of birdies in the final four holes.
O'Meara regained a share of the lead on the par-4 ninth hole with an eagle and snapped a tie with Peoples with a birdie on the 400-yard 16th hole.
O'Meara picked up a new car and $180,000 for his 21-under-par 267 effort -- pushing his season's earnings to almost $530,000.
Peoples, who won the Southern Open three weeks ago, won $108,000.
Paul Azinger, who came into the final round with a one-stroke lead, finished third, the fourth consecutive year he has finished in the top five here without a victory.
Azinger shot a 67 yesterday on top of successive 65's, but in the end couldn't overcome his par 72 in the opening round. (AP) TENNIS  Wheaton-Lendl Final  David Wheaton and Ivan Lendl advanced to the final of the Marlboro Tennis Championships in Hong Kong with victories yesterday.
Wheaton was given a second chance in the exhibition tournament a day after being eliminated when he finished behind Shuzo Matsuoka of Japan in group play.
But Matsuoka became ill today and Wheaton went into the semifinals, where he beat a fellow American, Michael Chang, 6-3, 7-6 (9-7).
Lendl, the defending champion, defeated an Australian, Todd Woodbridge 6-2, 7-6 (7-3) in the other semifinal.
Lendl beat MaliVai Washington of the United States, 6-3, 6-2, to finish on top of his group. (AP) Navratilova Advances: Martina Navratilova defeated Judith Wiesner of Austria, 6-2, 7-6 (7-4), yesterday to advance to the final of the Women's Tennis Association tournament in Filderstadt, Germany, against Anke Huber.
Huber, a 16-year-old German, used a powerful forehand to defeat seventh-seeded Helena Sukova of Czechoslovakia, 6-3, 7-6 (7-2).
Navratilova, who turned 35 on Friday, has won at Filderstadt five times. (AP) SQUASH  Brother vs.
Brother  Rodney Martin, a 26-year-old from Sydney, Asutralia, defeated his older brother Brett, 15-11, 15-11, 13-15, 15-6, yesterday to win the $60,000 United States Open at the Heights Casino in Brooklyn.
The younger Martin, who also won the Open in 1989 and was the World Open champion in Adelaide, Australia, last August, confounded his 28-year-old brother with a dazzling display of deep strokes, perfectly placed drop shots and angled volley winners into the front-wall corners.
After losing the third game, Rodney rebounded by winning 10 straight points in the final game before closing out the match with a well-disguised forehand drop winner.
The Open attracted the world's best squash professionals, including top-seeded Jahangir Kahn of Pakistan, who was upset by fifth-seeded Rodney Martin.
BOXING  Contreras Takes Title  Israel Contreras of Venezuela captured the World Boxing Association bantamweight title by knocking out the champion, Luisito Espinosa of the Philippines, in the fifth round yesterday in Manila.
Contreras survived two knockdowns in the second round and put Espinosa down twice in the fifth. (AP)


Q and A
Scuba Diving in Belize
Q.
I am interested in obtaining information about Belize, with special emphasis on scuba diving. -- Nina Garfinkel, New York, N.Y.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
PATCHOGUE 23, WILLIAM FLOYD 21 -- Patchogue (4-1) scored all its points in the first half and held on as William Floyd scored 21 points in the second half before the comeback fell short.
Time ran out for Floyd while it was on Patchogue's 18-yard line and before it was able to get its field-goal unit onto the field.
The victory allowed the Raiders to clinch a tie for the league title.
Bobby Nitsch opened the scoring for Patchogue when he caught a 9-yard pass from Matt Krawczwk (17 of 31 for 236 yards) in the first quarter.
Early in the second quarter, Frank Alvarado intercepted a pass and dashed 80 yards for the Raiders' second score.
Krawczwk later hit Mike Hansen with a 45-yard scoring strike.
John Fechter closed out the half when he kicked a 27-yard field goal.
The second half began, much like the first.
Patchogue on its opening possession, drove the length of the field but was intercepted at the goal line.
Floyd then put together its own 80-yard drive that was capped by a Keith Toomey 2-yard run.
Rich Triollo scooted 50 yards for Floyd's last score of the day.
POPE JOHN 29, LENAPE VALLEY 0 -- Matt Petronzio, who entered the contest tied for the New Jersey state scoring lead, padded his statistics by rushing for three touchdowns and a two-point conversion to lead Pope John (5-0) over Lenape Valley (4-1).
The Lions didn't score until the midway point of the second quarter when Petronzio (22 carries for 145 yards) capped a 11-play, 35-yard drive with a 1-yard run.
Petronzio scored again from 10 yards out with 1:17 left in the first half.
Petronzio's third touchdown completed a 11-play, 90-yard drive.
The touchdown came on a 34-yard scamper to start the fourth quarter.
Mike Johnston (15 carries for 160 yards) closed out the scoring with a 56-yard run.
BRIARCLIFF 22, EDGEMONT 0 -- Quarterback Joel Ackerman (seven of 13 for 97 yards) threw for two touchdowns and Bob Lacasta (12 carries for 60 yards) scored the other as Briarcliff (5-0) defeated Edgemont (4-1).
Briarcliff only led 3-0 at the half.
Tim Spino returned the opening kickoff 85 yards, which led to George Cancro's 20-yard field goal.
Three turnovers set up all of Briarcliff's touchdowns, including two in the fourth quarter.
Briarcliff has forced 19 turnovers in five games.
Its defense has not allowed a touchdown all season.
The Bears had 154 yards of total offense while Edgemont only managed 25.
All-state linebacker Geoff Green led Briarcliff tacklers with 15 tackles.
Linebacker Ziad Jabri had 14 for Edgemont.
Offensive Stars
MIKE STRAZZERI darted for three touchdowns to lead East Islip past Central Islip, 27-6. . . .
TIM EGAN carried 25 times for 205 yards to power Chaminade over Holy Cross, 21-10. . . .JESS COMPAS ran 22 times for 152 yards and caught a 9-yard touchdown pass as Great Neck South tied Friends Academy, 15-15. . . .
CHRIS MILLER of Williston threw two touchdown passes and ran for one as Williston routed Wibraham-Monson, 35-0.
Williston (4-0) has not been scored upon all season. . . .
CANUTE CURTIS scampered for three touchdowns as Farmingdale pounded Uniondale, 37-0.
Quarterback BRIAN IHM threw two touchdowns, including a 75-yard scoring strike to BRIAN BACSO . . . .BETHPAGE used eight different running backs, who ran up 385 yards, to power the Golden Eagles past Wantagh, 42-0. . . .WAKENE WALTON rushed for three touchdowns and 220 yards on 14 carries to lift Harvey over Dwight-Englewood, 20-0.
Harvey posted its second consecutive shutout. . . .
TONY FURMAN of Bellport rushed for 94 yards and threw for 78 as the Clippers defeated North Babylon, 22-18. . . .
JARRETT SHINE scored three touchdowns to pace Brunswick past Hamden Hall, 28-0.. . .
BRIAN EARLY scampered for three scores to lead Hotchkiss past Choate, 21-3.. . .BEN COPLON scored on a 15-yard run and kicked a 36-yard field goal to steer Fieldston over Rye Country Day, 36-6. . .
DAMIEN FREBERG rushed 14 times for 131 yards and scored one touchdown to power Southington past Bristol Central, 27-13.
Defensive Stars
GARDEN CITY notched its third consecutive shutout as it crushed Mepham, 28-0. . . .SHAWN MAZAROSKI recorded 15 tackles, three sacks and a fumble recovery as Carle Place (4-0) defeated Manhasset, 17-6.
Longest Yard
EARL HASSELL of Copiague returned the opening kickoff 91 yards and rushed for another score to help Copiague trounce Hauppauge, 41-6.
Fantastic Finishes
KEVIN WOLLNEY of Sewanhaka stopped a 2-point conversion attempt with two minutes left to preserve a 22-20 victory over MacArthur. . . .
SKIP THOMAS booted a 32-yard field goal with 3:17 remaining to lift West Islip over Walt Whitman, 8-6.


Gabrielle Morgerman To Wed in December
Gary and Marion Morgerman of Huntington, L.I., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Gabrielle Morgerman and Patrick Kevin Morris, a son of Elizabeth Walters of Media, Pa., and M. Patrick Morris of Lenni, Pa.
Ms.
Morgerman, 28 years old, graduated from Smith College and is in the agent training program at the William Morris Agency in Beverly Hills, Calif.
Mr.
Morris, 28, graduated from Cornell University and received a law degree from New York University.
He is a lawyer in Los Angeles.


Brazil's Fresh Young President Has Grown Old Fast
Elected almost two years ago on a river of 35 million votes, Brazil's President, Fernando Collor de Mello, now finds himself dangerously alone.
Having squandered his political capital on economic shock programs that did not work, Mr.
Collor is facing a return of out-of-control inflation, this time without the support of Congress and without the public credibility to sustain wage and price controls.
Brazil is expected to undergo a 25 percent jump in prices this month, and in contrast to past bouts with such hyperinflation, this time the economy isn't expanding and there are no automatic wage increases.
On Monday, controls are to be imposed on basic food prices -- the third such effort under Mr.
Collor.


Vaux-le-Vicomte: A Perfect Chateau, Envied by a King
PICTURE THE PERFECT FRENCH CHATEAU.
A place of formal beauty, elegant without being overbearing, where reflections of golden masonry shiver in pools of dark water, where house and garden seem musically attuned in measured Baroque time, where white sand paths beckon the stroller toward prospects that advance or recede with the teasing dance of perspective.
Versailles?
No, Vaux-le-Vicomte, the nonpareil of French chateaus.
Beside its delicate harmonies, Versailles -- the cuckoo that grew in its nest -- seems a thing of monstrous excess and vulgarity.
If you go to Vaux during the weekdays of spring or fall, you may have it almost to yourself; tourist buses, grinding out the miles to the Loire, prefer a stop at Fontainebleau.
But you will be in the company of a flock of squirrels.
Not the gray gangsters of the woods and gardens, but pert-eyed, bushy-tailed animals that are figured everywhere in Vaux -- carved rampant in the Creil limestone attended by lions, woven in tapestry and painted on ceilings.
For the squirrel was the emblem of the man who conceived and built Vaux-le-Vicomte, Nicolas Fouquet, Superintendent of Finances during the middle years of the 17th century.
In the most spectacular of the Grands Appartements, the Salon des Muses, the squirrel appears beside Fouquet's device, "Quo Non Ascendet" ("To What Heights May I Not Climb?").
The paint had hardly dried when the squirrel paid for his busy temerity.
In 1661, three weeks after an extravagant fete celebrating the completion of Vaux, its guest of honor, the 22-year-old Louis XIV, had Fouquet arrested.
Accused of enriching himself at the expense of the kingdom, the disgraced minister was eventually taken to the remote fortress of Pignerol in the Savoy Alps, where he remained till his death in 1680.
From his cell, about 20 feet by 12, looking to the barren crags, Fouquet must have dreamed of the architectural idyll he had created in the Ile-de-France, which had consumed his fortune, his career and finally his life.


Voters League Sets Up A Fair-Campaign Panel
LAST year, campaigns in several local elections turned ugly.
Personal attacks, alleged distortions of voting records, accusations of misleading campaign literature -- all set the tone for acrimonious public squabbles that left voters uncertain of the facts if not disgusted with the political process.
In an attempt to redress what they perceive as a deteriorating political climate in the county, the League of Women Voters of Westchester has established the Westchester Fair Campaign Practices Committee, a nonpartisan, independent body formed to hear complaints of unfair political campaign practices.


A Familiar N.H.L. Voice Is Running the Penguins
PITTSBURGH, Oct. 19 --
Some players always seem to chase the puck, digging, digging, digging, never quite catching up.
Others seem to stay almost still, watching and waiting, until the puck arrives, appearing on their sticks, at the right place and time.
Similar things happen at the management level.
Some men pursue this job or that one, usually finishing out of the running, frustrated, itching to try again.
Others just seem to be hired again and again, whether or not they wanted the job.


When DiMaggio Was Overlooked
To the Sports Editor:
"Ted and Joe, 1941: Epilogue," (The Times, Sept. 29) stated that both Williams and DiMaggio made the Hall of Fame on the first ballot.
While that is indeed true for Ted Williams (he was named on 93 percent of the ballots his first time around in 1966), the same, incredibly, cannot be said for Joltin' Joe.


A Catcher To Match Braves' Pitching
One night in Montreal last June, John Smoltz stood on the mound and Greg Olson crouched behind the plate, waging a silent argument 60 feet 6 inches apart.
"He kept shaking me off," Olson related, referring to the signs he was giving the Atlanta pitcher.
"I gave him the whole sequence, but he shook me off. Finally, I went out and told him not to show me up. You don't show up your catcher. The funny thing is we're best buddies off the field. But that was the only problem I've had with the pitchers all year."


Child in Tampering Scare Had Been Ill
Amid an uproar from worried consumers, the city's Health Department seemed to retreat yesterday from assertions that jars of baby food had been tampered with at an East Harlem bodega and that a critically ill infant had apparently been poisoned by eating food from a such a jar.
The Acting Health Commissioner, Dr.
Margaret Hamburg, said late yesterday that the authorities were not ruling out the possibilities that jars of food had been tampered with, or that the baby, 5-month-old Linda Lin, had been poisoned by them.


Anglers Head For New Zealand
Some of the world's leading anglers will be converging on lakes and streams in New Zealand next month to duel with the country's trout in the World Fly Fishing Championship.
Thirty teams of fishermen and women, including a team from the United States, have signed up for the event being held in the Rotorua-Taupo region in the North Island from Nov. 17 to 22.
This is the first time that New Zealand has played host to the event, and only the second time it has been held in the Southern Hemisphere.
The championship is held under rules established by the world organizing committee, the International Confederation of Sport Fishing, based in Rome.
Information about fishing lodges in New Zealand and on American travel companies that plan fishing vacations down under is available from the New Zealand Tourism Office, 501 Santa Monica Boulevard, Santa Monica, Calif. 90401; (800) 388-5494.


Crime/Mystery; In Short: Fiction
HOW MANY MILES TO BABYLON  By Doris Gercke.
Women in Translation, 3131 Western Avenue, Suite 410, Seattle, Wash. 98121, Paper, $8.95.


DRESSED-UP DENIM
There is no end to what denim can do and the places it can go.
Trimmed with rhinestones or combined with the most opulent underpinnings, it makes for an intriguing evening look, casual but glamorous.


Richard Flamson, 62, Security Pacific Chief
Richard J. Flamson 3d, who led the Security Pacific Corporation during its aggressive expansion as one of the nation's largest banking companies, died on Thursday at Hoag Hospital in Newport Beach, Calif.
He was 62 years old and lived in Corona Del Mar, Calif.
Mr. Flamson died of leukemia, his family said.


World Markets; Lightening Up on Latin America
Two big investors in the stock markets of Latin America, which have been shown the best rises among all of the world's exchanges this year, are raising the yellow caution flag.
They are taking their profits on some of their holdings and paying more attention to the downside risk.
The two are Antoine W. van Agtmael, president of the Emerging Market Investors Fund in Washington, D.C., and Mark Mobius, president of the Templeton Emerging Markets Fund, based in Hong Kong.


CAMPUS LIFE: Iowa; Homoerotic Film Prompts Outrage Beyond Campus
A film screening that two German classes at the University of Iowa were asked to attend has sent a wave of public outrage through this state because of the homoerotic acts the film depicted.
Gov.
Terry E. Branstad said in a radio interview broadcast statewide that he was "shocked this kind of activity is going on at a state-supported university, and I don't think it's appropriate."


Huskies Hold Off Berkeley's Bold Bears
The clock kept winding down, the minutes turning into seconds, until finally there was nothing left on it.
But the day still wasn't over.
It came down to one final play between Washington and California today at Memorial Stadium.
One play, no time, one touchdown separating the teams and Cal with one last, desperate chance to win.


Making a Difference; Kicks, Hollers and Loans
Bankers are not alone in seeing opportunities in creating jumbo banks by merger.
When Chemical Bank and the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company announced plans to merge three months ago, the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now, or Acorn, a grass-roots group, saw its own opportunity.
It asked the two behemoths to pledge $10 billion in loans over a 10-year period to its constituency -- poor- and moderate-income neighborhoods that sometimes have difficulty getting services from big banks.
On Friday, the two banks agreed on a five-year commitment of $750 million in new loans and grants to neighborhoods where the merged entity will have a presence.


Correction
An article last Sunday about legal challenges to New York State budget-cutting tactics by Gov.
Mario Cuomo's administration referred incorrectly to the status of a plan to transfer $80 million from the Thruway Authority to the state.
While the transaction has been approved by the Governor and the Legislature, it has not taken place because of a legal challenge and because the Thruway Authority has not approved it.


For a Common-Sense Economist, A Nobel - And an Impact in the Law
When people think about what economists do, they are likely to conjure nightmarish equations and computer simulations and all manner of indigestible Greek-letter salad.
For the most part, they are right.
But exceptions are often more interesting than the rules.
And few are as interesting as the work of Ronald H. Coase, the 81-year-old retired University of Chicago Law School professor who last week won the Nobel prize for economics.
His ideas have swept throughlegal scholarship like a fresh breeze.
It is likely -- some would argue, inevitable -- that the Coasian way of thinking will influence policies ranging from access to transplant organs to the control of corporations.


Palestinians Present List of 14 Delegates for Talks
Asserting their intention to be treated as equals to everyone else at the conference table, Palestinian negotiators today gave the chief United States representative here a complete list of their delegates to the Middle East peace talks planned for Oct. 30 in Madrid.
The names of the Palestinian delegates are a critical issue because Israel has placed strict conditions on the Palestinians who will go to Madrid as part of a joint delegation with Jordan.
Among other things, the Israelis rule out sitting down with anyone who is from East Jerusalem or has overt ties to the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Smithsonian Trip To Lapland
Travelers on a Lapland Safari sponsored by the Smithsonian Institution's National Associate Program will skim across the snow north of the Arctic Circle on reindeer sleighs.
The ride through the wooded wilderness, reindeer driving lessons and lunch in a traditional tepee near the town of Enontekio in northern Finland are part of an eight-day tour that departs New York next Feb. 23 and will focus on the culture of the Laplanders.
From Helsinki, visitors will fly to Rovaniemi, just south of the Arctic Circle, which was totally rebuilt after World War II by the Finnish architect Alvar Aalto.
After visiting the Enontekio and Lake Ounasjarvi area -- where participants are provided with snowsuits -- the trip goes across the border to the Norwegian village of Kautokeino, a center of Lapp culture.
The Smithsonian says that only travelers in the best of health and prepared for a relatively strenuous schedule should join the tour, which costs $3,985 a person.
The price includes round-trip air fare, transportation in Finland, hotels and most meals.
A study leader, Smithsonian representative and a tour manager will accompany the group.
More information: Smithsonian National Associate Program, Study Tours and Seminars, 1100 Jefferson Drive S.W., Washington D.C. 20560; (202) 357-4700.


Mary Warner, Manager, Wed
Mary Catherine Warner and Andrew Fulkerson McGrade were married yesterday in Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
George Zabriskie officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from Harvard University.
She is a senior marketing manager at Time Inc. in New York.
Her father, Dennis K. Warner of Annapolis, Md., retired as a fund-raiser for universities.
Her mother, Suzanna Warner, teaches music in Brookline, Mass.


Q and A
Withheld Security Deposit  Question: When a tenant moves out, may a landlord rightfully withhold all or part of a security deposit on a rental lease for normal wear and tear in the apartment? . . .
Marcus Alan Spevak, Brooklyn Answer: No.
According to Michael Finder, an attorney who specializes in real estate matters, it is an accepted term of rental leases that normal wear and tear would not be sufficient reason for withholding all or part of a security payment.
It is assumed, Mr.
Finder said, that the landlord, not the tenant, absorbs such costs of upkeep as refinishing scuffed floors or repainting.
But when it comes to more specific damage -- holes in walls or broken windows -- a landlord would be justified in withholding his repair costs from the security deposit.
"If the tenant is concerned," Mr.
Finder said, "it might be worth taking photographs as proof of the condition in which the apartment was left, or arranging for a walk-through before leaving. If items of objection are identified, in writing, a tenant would have the option of repairing at his own expense." Loss of Use of Terrace Question: I own a small one-bedroom co-op that has as much outside terrace space as interior space.
The lease makes it clear that this is for my exclusive use and my maintenance reflects this right.
This past summer, for the second time since I moved in, the building has taken over most of the outside space for extensive but necessary waterproofing.
The last time the work was done I had to stay off the terrace for 14 months.
This project could be as long or longer.
Is there a precedent for a maintenance reduction in such cases?  . .
Sam Bryan, Manhattan Answer: Maybe.
But according to Stuart Saft, an attorney who serves as chairman of the Council of New York Cooperatives, it would be very unusual.
"I am not aware of any situation where the shareholder has had maintenance reduced," said Mr.
Saft, "But I believe a court might be sympathetic to the plight of this shareholder, especially if the construction were to last as long as 14 months."
Mr.
Saft said that most proprietary leases require shareholders to pay maintenance without offsets or abatements.
However, the lease also obligates the co-op to provide the shareholders with "quiet enjoyment" of their apartments.
"If the shareholder is deprived of this enjoyment for an extended period of time," said Mr.
Saft, "the court could interpret this as a form of constructive eviction."
Mr.
Saft said that it would not be unreasonable for you to approach the board to ask for some sort of compensation if the work goes beyond the spring and summer.
Responsive boards, Mr.
Saft said, plan renovations and repair work in ways that minimize the impact on individuals as well as all shareholders.
Property Tax Payments Question: I recently refinanced my home and in the process transferred my mortgage from a credit union to a commercial bank.
One of my closing costs was $73.50 for an outside firm to handle the payment of the real estate taxes.
It seems to me that this is an unfair charge since this firm already holds one-quarter of a year's worth of property tax payments in escrow.
Was this charge legal? . . .
Heidi Ann Erdos, Wayne, N.J.
Answer: Not if the bank is licensed by the New Jersey Department of Banking.
According to Christopher Cooney, a spokesman for the New Jersey Department of Banking, New Jersey banks may not charge fees for tax services like the one you describe.
However, Mr.
Cooney said that the Banking Department has proposed a regulation aimed at clarifying and streamlining the obligations connected with the payment of property taxes and other costs to the lender.
It includes a provision that would allow banks to charge a modest fee or for third parties to collect fees for this service.
The agency expects to make a determination on the rule change within the next few months.


Small Museum With a Big Mission
At a time when the venerable Detroit Institute of Art is curtailing service because of cuts in public subsidies, a minimalist approach to the arts is taking root in this affluent suburb.
The first exhibition at the Janice Charach-Epstein Museum Gallery, which took place in August, featured works by Man Ray, Camille Pissarro, Jacques Lipschitz and others, which were selected not only for their quality but also because they were done by important Jewish artists.
The paintings, sculptures and photographs were borrowed from the collections of Jewish families in the Detroit area.


Wall Street; In Spain, a Pretty Good Variety of Fund Results
Single-country funds are an easy way to invest in foreign stock markets.
But shop around.
The results of funds in the same country can be very different.
Take the three investing in Spanish stocks.
The best known is the Spain Fund.
One sign of its popularity over the last year is its average premium of 13.23 percent.
That is the amount over the value of the stocks in the fund's portfolio that investors are paying for a share of the fund.
In the last year, the fund's share price has jumped 20.76 percent, while the value of the underlying stocks has risen only 6.99 percent.


'Homicide': The Victims Abound
A man who has just been arrested for killing his wife and children speaks from his jail cell, his calm, polite tone coming from the depths of his craziness.
"Maybe someday I could tell you the nature of evil," he offers a detective named Bobby Gold.
"Would you like to know the nature of evil?"
"No, man," Gold says, " 'cause then I'd be out of a job."


TODAY'S SECTION
Speical Today: Sophisticated Traveler/Magazine Part 2


CORRECTION
The Residential Resales column last Sunday misstated the sale closing date for an apartment at 196 East 75th Street.
It was Sept. 12.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 20, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
2
8
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
3
13
THE MUMMY, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Ramses the Great and Cleopatra return to life in Edwardian England.
4
3
QUESTION QUEST, by Piers Anthony. (Avon, $4.99.) A woman is sent to hell to rescue a missing sorcerer; part of the "Xanth" fantasy series.
5
4
BUFFALO GIRLS, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $5.99.) Calamity Jane and her friends join Buffalo Bill's show in London.
6
2
SEASON OF THE SUN, by Catherine Coulter. (Onyx, $5.99.) A historical romance about a Yorkshire belle and a Norwegian landowner.
7
1
RENDEZVOUS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $4.99.) A freethinking British woman engaged to an earl has some second thoughts.
8
4
Q-IN-LAW, by Peter David. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" novel.
9 *
1
FOLLOW THE WIND, by Janelle Taylor. (Zebra, $5.95.) A young woman's attempts to save her family's Texas ranch from predators unexpectedly bring her romance.
10
2
THE SHADOW AND THE STAR, by Laura Kinsale. (Avon, $4.99.) The 19th-century romance of a wealthy man and a nearly destitute woman.
11 *
2
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Avon, $5.99.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.
12
9
THE WOMEN IN HIS LIFE, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The rise of a tycoon and his relationships with five women.
13 *
1
SURRENDER THE PINK, by Carrie Fisher. (Pocket, $5.99.) The romantic misadventures of a woman soap-opera writer in Hollywood, New York and the Hamptons.
14
39
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their immigrant mothers.
15 *
1
RABBIT AT REST, by John Updike. (Fawcett, $5.99.) The fourth and final novel about Harry (Rabbit) Angstrom.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
17
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
2
22
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
3
14
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
4
4
GET TO THE HEART, by Barbara Mandrell with George Vecsey. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of the country-music singer.
5
23
WHEN RABBIT HOWLS, by the Troops for Truddi Chase. (Jove, $4.95.) A woman voices the 92 personalities that live within her.
6
415
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
7
2
PRECIOUS VICTIMS, by Don W. Weber and Charles Bosworth Jr. (Signet, $5.99.) The case of a woman who killed two of her infant children.
8 *
100
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
9
15
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
10
2
THE MILWAUKEE MURDERS, by Don Davis. (St. Martin's, $4.99.) The story of Jeffrey L. Dahmer, who has admitted killing 17 people.
11 *
1
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, feel, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
12 *
30
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspiration.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
3
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
64
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
10
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
44
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
1
AN ALTOGETHER NEW BOOK OF TOP TEN LISTS, by David Letterman, Steve O'Donnell, et al. (Pocket, $10.) Humor.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Israel Approaches Peace Conference In a Grim Mood
Be careful what you wish for, goes the old saying, because you just may get it.
That point is being thrust home to Israelis now with all the delicacy of a battering ram.
Through the four decades of its existence, Israel has proclaimed that what it craves above all is to sit down at a bargaining table with its hostile Arab neighbors to talk peace.
Now that the opportunity is upon them, with a United States-arranged peace conference for the Middle East called for Oct. 30 in Madrid, many Israelis are wondering if they are about to go to their own hanging.


Bad Brother on His Doorstep
BLUE RIVER
By Ethan Canin. 222 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.


Political Memo; For Democratic Hopefuls, Race Turns to a Sprint
If the marathon was the metaphor for the Presidential campaigns of the 1980's, the 50-yard dash might be the most appropriate comparison for the Democrats of 1992.
In the four months between now and the New Hampshire primary, this campaign will be a sprint for money, organization, name recognition and support.


Deaths at Home Rend Town Used to Worst of War
This small, hard-nosed town on the edge of the Texas plains is the home of Fort Hood, the largest military base in the United States.
And when thousands of its troops marched off to fight the war in the Persian Gulf, many people here feared that scores of their neighbors would be killed or maimed.
So the town prepared for the worst.
Support groups for families were formed.
Special counseling sessions were held for the children.
Ministers and psychologists prepared for months of agony and tears.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Creating Rental Housing for the Homeless
PERMANENT rental housing for people who are homeless or likely to become so as a result of mental illness or drug or alcohol addiction received support from the Federal Government in August when $48.6 million was allocated to 24 state housing departments around the country.
The states will distribute the money to the agencies that applied for it and that provide the housing, maintenance and support services.
The largest sum to any agency was $4,859,992, awarded to the Hall-Brooke Foundation, a century-old private nonprofit psychiatric hospital and treatment center in Westport.
There were no other applications from Connecticut.
The money will buy eight two-family houses in Westport, Norwalk, Fairfield and Bridgeport where 48 people will live for as long as they wish, paying $400 a month rent each.
Rents paid out of job earnings, welfare or Social Security will be used to pay off the mortgages.


Wall Street; Is Stephens Coasting on Its Laurel?
AT a time when much of Wall Street is scrambling to take advantage of the red-hot market for initial public offerings, Stephens Inc. is a standout.
Other firms assume that the more companies they bring public, the more likely they are to hit the home runs investors crave.


At the Table


Everyone Old Is Young Again
As every therapist knows, you have to go backward before you can go forward.
Hampered by tight budgets and fearful of novelty, the television and movie industries are taking that notion to heart, delving into the childhoods of their familiar characters.
Prequels -- sequels that probe characters' pasts rather than their futures -- are proliferating.
This fall on television, a teen-age Yogi Bear and a callow Robin Hood have joined young versions of Superman, the Muppets, and Tom and Jerry.
A youthful Indiana Jones and Little Mermaid will also soon appear, and on the big screen, Roger Rabbit's and Darth Vader's formative years will unfold. (What's next? Tiny Terminator?)
The impetus for the trend seems to be financial; prequels are usually a safe bet.
"There's just such a craving for pre-sold or recognizable characters," said Bruce Johnson, senior vice president of syndication and cable television at Hanna-Barbera, the animation company.
"Parents and network executives are comfortable with them." Hanna-Barbera is producing two animated prequels this fall: "Yo, Yogi!," on NBC on Saturday mornings at 8:30, and the syndicated "Young Robin Hood." The former depicts the bear as a teen-age mall loafer; the latter will follow the exploits of the princeling when he had just set up housekeeping in Sherwood Forest, and when Friar Tuck was still in the seminary.


Stamps
If Stamps Could Talk
There is no data bank that tracks hobbyists' interests or dealers' sales, but there seems to have been a greater focus on postal history over the last five years.


'Nevsky,' Alive And Well
This Friday evening, Avery Fisher Hall turns into a movie theater.
It's a special kind of movie theater, though, as befits the special picture on the bill: Sergei Eisenstein's "Alexander Nevsky" (1938).
For the first time, New Yorkers will be able to hear, as part of the film, a proper representation of the remarkable score Sergei Prokofiev composed for "Nevsky." The music will be performed on site, by Seiji Ozawa and the Boston Symphony Orchestra, to benefit Lincoln Center programs.


Jill Solon Wed To John Weiser
Jill Karyn Solon, an associate producer for E Entertainment Television, a cable network in Los Angeles, and John David Weiser, a distributor for Columbia Pictures Television there, were married last evening at the Rainbow Room in Manhattan.
Rabbi Peter Rubenstein officiated.
Mrs.
Weiser, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Solon of New York.
Her father is the president of Robert Towers Advertising, and her mother, Joan Solon, is the president of the Women's Alliance for Citymeals-on-Wheels, both in New York.


Landlords and Skyscrapers
To the Editor:
Jeff Kisseloff's review of "Skyscraper Dreams" by Tom Shachtman (Aug. 25) is more a demonstration of his own bigotry against successful businessmen than an informative review.


Braves Have a Huge Edge: The Lonnie Smith Factor
As he prepared to lead off for the Braves tonight, Lonnie Smith was also getting ready to become the first player ever to appear in the World Series with four different teams.
Smith previously played for the 1980 Phillies, the 1982 Cardinals and the 1985 Royals.
Having Smith in the lineup may be a positive omen for Atlanta because the other three teams he played for all won the World Series.
Although he was seeking his fourth ring, Smith, scheduled to be the designated hitter tonight, refused to take credit for the achievement.


CLASS STRUGGLE
I studied the textbook illustrations displayed in Robert Reinhold's article "Class Struggle" (Sept. 29), and it seems to me that Houghton Mifflin did a good job.
A lecturer in American Indian studies complains, in the article, that the third-grade book "trivialized Indian history" and criticizes an illustration of how to build a "medicine dance tent" ("It reduces our sun dance and medicine dance to a toilet-paper project").
But how else can 8-year-olds learn something if it is not simple?
I only wish that I had had textbooks like these seven years ago, when I was in the fourth grade.
"A Moment in Time" looks colorful and exciting.
It is unfortunate that many are already criticizing the textbooks.
Let the children judge for themselves.
AMY WU
Thornwood, N.Y.


U.S. to Pull A-Bombs From South Korea
The United States plans to withdraw all nuclear bombs from South Korea, Administration officials said today.
Coming on top of cuts in nuclear missiles and artillery shells announced by President Bush last month, the new move would mean no nuclear weapons would remain in that country.
The officials said the step would be taken in part to persuade North Korea to permit international inspection of its nuclear plants and in part because the American military believes the bombs are no longer necessary to defend South Korea.


How to Avoid Bare Patches in Spring
THOUGH it may seem academic to many gardeners, it should be pointed out that there is a huge difference between fall and spring gardens.
What seems prolific and filled with foliage now will be barren and empty come spring.
All this is another way of saying to think spring when planting bulbs now.
Too many gardeners, especially those who are new to the experience, forget that many of the plants they see now will not be there in spring, because the plants have reputations as lazy risers.
And if there are no plants to fill these voids, the bare spots will remain until the late risers begin to push up from the soil.


Op-ed; Race, Gender and Liberal Fallacies
Clarence Thomas's second round of confirmation hearings was one of the finest moments in the modern history of America's democratic culture, a riveting, civic drama that fully engaged the electorate in an exposure and examination of its most basic fears and contradictions concerning class, race, sex and gender.
But even as it urged us to question some of our basic values and positions, it reconfirmed the strength and suppleness of our system of governance.
It also revealed one of its greatest weaknesses: there are serious misperceptions of what is really going on in our society, and lamentable failure in our threadbare, predominantly liberal discourse on it.


LOVE AND LEARN
In the Hers column "Love and Learn" (Sept. 22), Lucy Ferriss has pulled apart the so-called powerful male-naive female scenario ever so gently, and some compelling questions have spilled out.
How could so many men (teachers, bosses) fight the resistance they felt, lying just beneath the surface of their physical desire, and ignore the intelligent assumption that the relationship could be
better
without the sex?
Did young women ever allow themselves to wonder if friendship and respect were what they really wanted -- were even an option -- and that sex was just the most obvious and expected offering?


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have a flagstone patio on top of a poured-concrete garage.
Some of the flagstones have come loose, and I have been told that the concrete has to be chiseled to a depth of about one inch if the stones are to be cemented again.
I also have been told there are new glue-type products that can be used.
A.
Mastic adhesives suitable for this purpose have been available for some time, but probably the strongest adhesive is a two-part epoxy cement.
There are dozens of brands on the market.


Court Overturns Ruling on Nassau County Tax Assessment System
An appellate court has overturned a 1989 decision that declared unconstitutional Nassau County's tax assessment system for residential property.
In a unanimous decision, the four-member panel of the Appellate Division in Brooklyn held that State Supreme Court Justice Leo F. McGinity had erred in raising the issue of constitutionality without giving the Nassau County Board of Assessors an opportunity to be heard.
The decision was issued on Tuesday and received by the lawyers for both sides Friday.


A.T.&amp; T. To Subsidize New Art
A program to foster art by living artists, particularly women and minorities, has been announced by A.T.&amp; T.
The three-part program, called A.T.&amp; T. New Art/New Visions, will provide money for museum exhibitions, educational programs and acquisitions.


Alabama Upsets Tennessee; Georgia, Illinois and Texas Fall
For the sixth consecutive time, Alabama defeated Tennessee today, 24-19, with a freshman quarterback coming off the bench to engineer the upset.
Siran Stacy scored twice and Derrick Lassic once on short runs in the fourth quarter as Jay Barker rallied Alabama in the Southeastern Conference game.
(Tennessee, 4-2 over all and 2-2 in the conference, was rated No. 8 in The New York Times computer ranking and Alabama was rated No. 24.)


Review/Music; Masur Makes Worlds Collide, Gently
At the very beginning of the third movement of Dvorak's "New World" Symphony, there are a few moments that invoke not the New World, but the Old: timpani strokes and imitative melodic figures deliberately recall Beethoven's Ninth Symphony.
Then, without warning, this material is almost immediately transmuted into a folkish dance, a sort of Puckish rural fantasy, and the Old World is soon enough forgotten.
One of the heartening aspects of the New York Philharmonic concert that Kurt Masur conducted on Friday night was that this moment seemed completely natural -- as did nearly every other moment during the performances of the Dvorak symphony and Alfred Schnittke's First Cello Concerto.
Each work depended upon tradition for its premises and effects and each created something strikingly original by transforming it.
Meanwhile, Mr.
Masur is making it clear how beneficial an Old World Kapellmeister can be to the oldest New World symphony orchestra.


Now Playing: Real Life, the Movie
Fade in
on New York Harbor off The Battery on a muggy June day.
A young man jumps from a launch into the roiling water and disappears beneath the surface.
Within seconds divers in scuba gear plunge in after him.
Boats converge on the scene.
A helicopter hovers overhead.
But the man never surfaces.
Fade in
on five toughs rampaging down the mean streets of Washington one night.
The gang encircles a dazed man.
One of them rears back and unleashes a savage punch.
The victim falls stiffly, like a tree being felled.


On Columbus's Caribbean Route
Christopher Columbus probably never heard of a ship with "carved oak, Italian marble and period antiques," but those making vacation plans for 1992 may avail themselves of it.
A vacation aboard the vessel is one of a growing number of excursions and events during the 500th anniversary of the explorer's voyage to the New World in 1492.
It is being offered by the Friends of the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard University.
The group is organizing an 11-day voyage on the Sea Cloud, a 316-foot square-rigged yacht that is one of the largest sailing vessels afloat.


Schroeder Picks Up The Ball for Mutombo
Ambassador DIKEMBE MUTOMBO.
At least those are the words of Representative PAT SCHROEDER, Democrat of Colorado, who's trying to help the Denver Nuggets' 7-foot-2-inch rookie center stay in this country.
Mutombo, a native of Zaire, attended Georgetown University on a student visa requiring him to return home for two years after finishing college.
The visa runs out on Aug. 21, 1992, well before his five-year, $13.75 million Nuggets contract does.


Near Paris, Disney's Next Park
THE magic wand has not yet been waved, and cranes, earth-movers, 10,000 workers and a host of unfinished buildings and attractions testify to how much has still to be done.
Yet, rising out of the French countryside like a strange lost city, Euro Disneyland has already taken on the shape of things to come.
And everything is on schedule to implant that most American of dreamworlds into the European psyche when the fun officially begins at 9:01 A.M. next April 12.
For the moment, though, promotion is the order of the day.
So last weekend, the Walt Disney Company overcame its penchant for secrecy and invited the press for a sneak preview.
Mickey Mouse and his accomplices were of course on hand, Sleeping Beauty's Castle was unveiled and 3,000 employees, many in costume and all trained to smile, bombarded visitors with "Howdy," "Bonjour" and "Buenos dias."


North Korea Sprints Past United States
They came. They raced down the wings. They left quickly.
The reclusive North Korean national soccer team revealed only a few of its sporting secrets today in a 2-1 victory over the United States at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium.
They most certainly can sprint, both on the field and out of a stadium.


Free Program of Songs Honors Spain and Italy
VARIETY seems to be the key word for concerts this week, as the usual potpourri of classical performances are spiced with Latin American songs, American jazz and even an original musical comedy for kids.
The songs, representing Spain as well as the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico and other Hispanic regions, will be sung by the Cuban-born soprano Ana-Gloria Vazquez at the free Bronx Arts Ensemble program today at 2 P.M. in Woodlawn Cemetery's Woolworth Chapel at Jerome and Bainbridge Avenues.
Also included will be Verdi and Puccini arias, in observance of Italian Heritage and Culture Month, along with instrumental pieces of Bach and Mozart.
For travel directions, call (212) 549-1899 or (212) 920-0500.


As Candidates Hunt the Big Issue, Polls Can Give Them a Few Clues
As the 1992 Presidential candidates seek ways to harness their political fortunes to compelling issues, it is useful for them -- and for more neutral observers -- to pause and ask: What problems and issues are on the
public's
mind?
Since George Gallup began asking the question in 1935, many poll takers have relied on a standard question to gauge such public sentiment: "What do you think is the most important problem facing this country today?"


C. F. Falker to Wed Elizabeth Swire
Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Swire of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Emery Swire, to Charles Frederick Falker, the son of Monica E. Warner of Scarsdale and Robert L. Falker of New York.
The wedding is planned for late next year.
Ms.
Swire, 24 years old, graduated from Wellesley College and is attending Benjamin Cardozo School of Law.
Her father is a senior partner at the New York law firm of Townley &amp; Updike, and is president of the board of Cancer Care and the National Cancer Care Foundation.


Most Arab Capitals Welcome Talks
Most Arab capitals today welcomed the announcement of peace talks with Israel, marking a significant change in the public Arab attitude toward the nation most Arabs have boycotted for more than 40 years.
The vocal and open support for the peace talks reflected a new balance of power that has emerged after the Persian Gulf war, giving moderate Arab nations the upper hand in this region.


Joining Austria's Alpine Club
American hikers and mountaineers interested in becoming members of the Austrian Alpine Club, which owns and operates 270 huts in the Austrian Alps, should join the club's United Kingdom branch, say Austrian tourism officals.
That way, they point out, travelers get all the information they need in English.
The branches in Austria communciate in German.
The Austrian Alpine Club has reciprocal agreements with all the other Alpine associations providing hut accommodations in Austria and offers such benefits as reduced overnight rates, hut reservation priority and, for a small annual fee, excursion fares on the Austrian Federal Railways.
Members of the U.K. branch also receive a newsletter in English.
Many of the huts are in areas that are closed in winter, so the hut system is not generally used by skiers.
The address is: Austrian Alpine Club, United Kingdom Branch, Longcroft House, Fretherne Road, Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire AL8 6PQ, England; telephone, (707) 324835.


Copenhagen
To the Editor: On a recent trip to Copenhagen, I discovered an efficient and inexpensive accommodations service in the train station, provided by the Tourist Association, (telephone 33 12 28 80).
The service cost 13 Danish krone, $2, plus a 5 krone (83 cents) deposit, which was later deducted from the cost of the room.
Single rooms in hotels ranged from $58 without bath to $152 with full bath; doubles ranged from $83 to $200.
I requested a single room in a private home and paid only $23per night.
My room was cozy, clean, delightfully decorated and only a 10-minute walk from the Tivoli Gardens.
I had use of the refrigerator, a radio and a tape deck.
My hostess spoke good English and provided valuable information about tourist attractions.
At the end of my five-night stay, she bade farewell with a traditional Danish breakfast, on the house.
JOMARIE ALANO New York, N.Y.
The Danish Government Tourist Office in New York comments: This service may also be used by fax from the United States, calling 45 33 12 97 23.


Weekending in Gaucho Country
THE Spanish dictionary defines estancia as a cattle ranch, but in Argentina, a country of vast range land and fertile pampa, it has a much larger meaning.
It conjures up a romantic image of Argentina's past, a past the country hopes to bring back to life.
In the 1800's large landowners organized their bands of gauchos -- or Argentine cowboys -- on huge properties, most tending vast herds of cattle and sheep, but sometimes raiding the land of rival landowners.
The wealthy built palatial homes and filled them with fine furniture from Europe.
A family's social standing often depended on how large its estancia was, or how many estancias it owned.


Streetscapes: St. James' Church; A Metamorphosis Still in Progress
MOST buildings lead fairly predictable existences: They are built, undergo a few minor alterations and that's about it.
But St.
James' Church, at the northeast corner of 71st Street and Madison Avenue, has undergone half a dozen major changes to its 1885 building, including turning the interior around 180 degrees, a new facade and three different tower schemes.


The Executive Computer; Not Just Blue Sky: I.B.M. and Apple Have a Product
The new Apple-I.B.M. alliance is real and is about to deliver its first tangible products, so forget all the talk about it being years before the partnership bears fruit, executives of the two companies pronounced last week from a stage at the Networld trade show here.
Ellen Hancock, vice president and general manager of the International Business Machines Corporation's communications division, and Michael Spindler, president of Apple Computer Inc., said the first joint product was a Token Ring network adapter board for the Macintosh, a green card that finally gives Apple resident status in the land of corporate computing.
It will be ready by the end of the year, they said.


Why E.D.S. Loves a Recession
When the Electronic Data Systems Corporation acquired the Enron Corporation's extensive computing staff and equipment in 1989, it essentially guaranteed that it could handle these operations better.
It also promised Enron a savings of $200 million over the 10-year life of the contract.
The daring pledge underscored E.D.S.'s cocksureness about its ability to squeeze computing costs.
But its confidence was well placed.
The Houston-based natural gas company thinks it is on its way to saving at least that much, equal to 20 percent of its computing expenses, by 1999.
"We're out of the how-to-do-it part of the computing business," said Jack I. Tompkins, the Enron senior vice president who bargained with E.D.S. on the deal.
"We consider E.D.S. the technology experts."


Preparing Romantic Seasonal Fare for Weekend Entertaining
SUMMER may be over, but that does not mean weekend entertaining has come to a halt.
Guests for lunch, dinner and overnight stays continue throughout the year.
A new book, "A Weekend in the Country" by Linda Burgess and Anne Scott (Prentice Hall Press, $30), offers some suggestions, with menus and recipes, for seasonal weekend entertaining.
Splendidly poetic photographs accompany the text.
The author and photographer are English, with English country houses, and their approach is decidedly a romantic one.
Weekends are a time for rustic activities like gathering berries from the hedgerows, drying herbs and putting up preserves.
Shopping malls, television, microwave ovens and high cholesterol counts do not seem to intrude in this world.


Long Live the Long, and the Short, Skirt
In an era of short skirts, who, then, will wear long ones?
Designers and retailers suspect the first women to embrace the newer long skirts, which are being shown side by side with short ones, tumble into four categories:


John Scoville Hall, 83, Astronomer in Arizona
John Scoville Hall, an astronomer who also helped develop radar systems in World War II, died Tuesday at his home in Sedona, Ariz.
He was 83 years old.
Dr. Hall died of heart failure, his family said.


Making a Difference; Oil's Field of Dreams Is Usually Foreign
Most American oil giants, frustrated by drilling limits set by Congress, dismal natural gas prices and the waning promise of major domestic discoveries, are spending less these days to develop the nation's oil fields.
But few have placed a bigger portion of their bets on foreign fields than the Exxon Corporation.
Earlier this month the company announced that it would combine its domestic and foreign exploration units into one global operation by January, to be based in Houston.
The parent company has its headquarters in Irving, Tex., near Dallas.


Crime/Mystery; Mistress and Spy?
PARAMOUR
By Gerald Petievich. 294 pp. New York: E. P. Dutton. $19.95.


Shift in Status for Architects and Designers
WHO'S who in the design field?
For years, the distinction between interior decorators, interior designers and architects who do space planning has been blurred.
But now a new state law, which requires interior designers to take a tough test for state certification, should help the public distinguish the work of professional interior designers from that of self-styled decorators.
"It's a very important distinction," said Elizabeth A. Dresher, who graduated from college with a degree in interior design.
"Until now, anyone, the owner of a wallpaper store, someone who has had no training at all, could call themselves an interior designer. But there is more to interior design than picking out wallpapers and fabrics."


'On the Verge' Travels Through Time at Yale Rep
"WE have reached our embarcadero," Mary announces.
Fanny thinks she has come upon glyphs.
"Perhaps we'll find a translator," says Alexandra, musing upon their peregrinations and recalling the time she saw "the Dalai Lama himself transmute great buckets of gold -- into yak butter."
The trekking of Mary, Fanny and Alexandra, explorers through space and time, starting in 1888 and winding up in 1955, is by now familiar to followers of regional theater, where "On the Verge or The Geography of Yearning" by Eric Overmyer has itself become well traveled since the 1985 premiere at Center Stage in Baltimore.
And now, in his debut as artistic director, Stan Wojewodski Jr. is staging Mr.
Overmyer's prodigious linguistic word play at the Yale Repertory.


Trials of Renting A Car in Europe
READERS are having difficulties with auto rentals in Europe.
Letters to this department indicate that unwelcome surprises are in store for Americans who enter into an auto rental as casually at they might at home.
While it is easier to rent a car in Europe than it was a decade ago, two areas of concern emerge: street scams and vagaries involving traffic infractions.
Probably the most serious problem was reported from Spain, and with the summer Olympics coming up in 1992, the experience of Dr.
Julio C. Davila of Santa Fe, N.M, should be heeded.


Film Maker's Work Is Imbued With Look and Feel of New Jersey
A STAR-CROSSED romance between two teen-agers -- the daughter of a Jewish doctor and the son of an Italian sanitation worker -- who meet in a Trenton high school.
A bittersweet reunion of seven 1960's radicals who were on their way to march on the Pentagon when they were arrested in Secaucus.
A compassionate look at Shoeless Joe Jackson, one of the eight Chicago White Sox who threw the 1919 World Series and wound up, unrecognized, in the minor leagues in Hoboken.
Movie buffs are bound to get the titles at once -- "Baby, It's You," "Return of the Secaucus Seven," "Eight Men Out" -- and identify the writer and director, John Sayles, whose recently released exploration of contemporary urban blight, "City of Hope," takes place in a hypothetical Hudson City.


Harvard President Sworn In
Neil L. Rudenstine was sworn in as the 26th president of Harvard University on Friday.
In his inaugural address, he said the high cost of tuition and the protection of free speech were two of the main challenges facing universities.
"We must encourage and fully protect genuine freedom of inquiry and speech, even speech that may be offensive to some," he told an audience of 15,000 people.


West Virginia Stages Late Rally Over Boston College
Darren Studstill's 40-yard touchdown pass to Michael Beasley with 24 seconds left rallied West Virginia to a 31-24 victory over Boston College today.
Boston College (1-5) came within a foot of a touchdown on the final play.
Glenn Foley threw a 46-yard pass to Michael Campbell, who was kept out of the end zone by three West Virginia defenders.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about breast cancer misstated the date for a Long Island Rally Against Breast Cancer.
It will be held on Wednesday at 11:30 A.M. outside the State Supreme Court building in Mineola.


Chess
The saying, "It is difference of opinion that makes horse races," also holds true for gambits.
If no one were willing to bet that the gambit pawn could be safely accepted and eventually a winning end game achieved, the defense would choose some other course.
And the same goes for the gambiteer: if no one put a high value on superiority in quick striking force, the attack would fade into obsolescence.
In gambit confrontations, there are purists who repeatedly dredge up the question: Is this attack ultimately correct?
But in the case of most enduring gambits, there is no practical answer other than the ingenuity of the player who won the last game.
An illustration of an old gambit that is currently enlivening world-class practice is the Vienna Variation of the Queen's Gambit in the game between Grandmasters Ljubomir Ljubojevic of Yugoslavia and Jan Timman of the Netherlands.
It was played in the first round of the World Cup Tournament, which began in Reykjavik, Iceland, on Sept. 23.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
At Home With Halpins...
THE current Suffolk County White House is a four-family in downtown Lindenhurst.
"Patrick thought it would be a good investment," said Debra Randazzo Halpin, Suffolk's First Lady.


Sandra L. Zelinsky Weds Neal S. Lorberbaum
Sandra Lee Zelinsky, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl S. Zelinsky of Greenwich, Conn., was married in New York last evening to Neal Scott Lorberbaum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald C. Lorberbaum of New York.
Rabbi Joel Zion performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club.
Mrs.
Lorberbaum, 26 years old, is a supervising underwriter at ITT Hartford in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University, as did her husband.
Her father is the president of the New England Brokerage Corporation in Greenwich.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Sept.
Aug.
Sept. 90
Rents
172.2
-1.6
+5.4
Homeowner's costs
172.3
-0.3
+3.7
Fuel and utilities
105.7
-0.3
+0.5
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester Rockland
*4*Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex, Somerset and Passaic
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.04
9.06
10.48
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.72
6.83
8.34
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.93
8.94
10.29
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.62
6.65
8.12
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.91
8.94
10.37
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.78
6.67
8.29
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.11
9.15
10.65
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.28
7.37
8.54
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
5.36
5.40
7.62
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.10
6.88
9.70
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


The High Cost of Cheap Land
To the Editor:
In "How to Revive Housing Starts," (Forum, Sept. 22) Charles Lockwood describes and advocates policies that have led us to the current near-disastrous financial conditions.
He says that to revive housing, "obviously more land must be made available by expanding the infrastructure more quickly." But the spread of development in pursuit of "cheap" land has huge accompanying public capital and operating costs.
These costs -- public safety, education, transportation, utility delivery and other government services -- far outweigh the initial cost of creating "cheap land." Of course, such sprawl has also encouraged the abandonment of the costly public investment in the infrastructures of older urban areas.
Providing "cheap" lot prices in the name of home ownership has been extremely expensive for taxpayers if all the costs of sprawl are analyzed.
The less land available for "cheaper" development, the less sprawl will be encouraged.
The less sprawl, the less costly and more efficient the delivery of public services will be.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Supreme Court: Vote to confirm Clarence Thomas as associate justice of the United States Supreme Court.
Approved 52 to 48, Oct. 15.
2.
Veto Override: Vote to override President Bush's veto of a $6.4 billion measure to provide extended unemployment benefits for people who have been out of work at least half a year.
Failed, with 65 in favor and 35 opposed (two votes short of the two-thirds necessary to override), Oct. 16.
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
N
Y
Lieberman (D)
N
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
N
Y
Lautenberg (D)
N
Y
New York
D'Amato (R)
Y
Y
Moynihan (D)
N
Y
House
1.
Semiautomatic Arms: Vote on an amendment to a major anti-crime bill that would strike a provision of the bill that calls for banning the sale and ownership of semiautomatic weapons.
Approved 247 to 177, Oct. 17.
1
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
N
2. Gejdenson (D)
N
3. DeLauro (D)
N
4. Shays (R)
N
5. Franks (R)
Y
6. Johnson (R)
N
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
N
2. Hughes (D)
N
3. Pallone (D)
Y
4. Smith (R)
N
5. Roukema (R)
N
6. Dwyer (D)
N
7. Rinaldo (R)
N
8. Roe (D)
N
9. Torricelli (D)
N
10. Payne (D)
N
11. Gallo (R)
Y
12. Zimmer (R)
Y
13. Saxton (R)
Y
14. Guarini (D)
N
New York
1. Hochbrueckner(D)
N
2. Downey (D)
N
3. Mrazek (D)
N
4. Lent (R)
N
5. McGrath (R)
N
6. Flake (D)
N
7. Ackerman (D)
N
8. Scheuer (D)
N
9. Manton (D)
N
10. Schumer (D)
N
11. Towns (D)
N
12. Owens (D)
N
13. Solarz (D)
N
14. Molinari (R)
Y
15. Green (R)
N
16. Rangel (D)
N
17. Weiss (D)
N
18. Serrano (D)
N
19. Engel (D)
N
20. Lowey (D)
N
21. Fish (R)
Y
22. Gilman (R)
Y
23. McNulty (D)
N
24. Solomon (R)
Y
25. Boehlert (R)
Y
26. Martin (R)
Y
27. Walsh (R)
Y
28. McHugh (D)
N
29. Horton (R)
Y
30. Slaughter (D)
N
31. Paxon (R)
Y
32. LaFalce (D)
N
33. Nowak (D)
N
34. Houghton (R)
Y
KEY Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Czechoslovakia Reaches Out Despite the Pressures Within
Vaclav Havel has an unlikely mission in his first official visit to Washington this week: to seek a kind of associate membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization for Czechoslovakia, Poland and Hungary, even if the interest is more in political and economic assistance than in military matters.
Less trumpeted, but perhaps as significant, will be his acceptance of the original copy of an obscure document that sets forth the guarantees under which ethnic groups combined to form Czechoslovakia, and has slumbered for decades in the Library of Congress.
The Czechoslovak President's dual purpose reflects complex and troubled times in Central Europe nearly two years after the collapse of Communism there.
For if the NATO discussions show that Czechoslovakia and its close neighbors are looking forward to integration into Europe, and all this implies for the suppression of nationalism, Mr.
Havel faces a return home to resurgent nationalist tensions and suspicions that are tearing apart his country's two ethnically distinct components -- the Czech and Slovak regional republics -- as well as the map of Central Europe as it was drawn after World War I. With the Soviet Union in turmoil to the east, and Yugoslavia in flames to the south, just how long can Czechoslovakia hold on?.


Managing; Soldiers Return to the Workplace
KENTUCKY FRIED CHICKEN has a formal program to recruit junior military officers as area restaurant managers.
"They are accustomed to managing the kind of young, inexperienced people that we employ," said Richard M. Detwiler, director of public affairs.
The Harris County Sheriff's Department in Houston held a job fair at nearby Fort Hood to encourage departing soldiers to apply for guard work at its new jail.
"Military people are drug-free, disciplined and used to abiding by rules and regulations," said H.R.
Barrera, the department's recruiting officer.


Dead: 23 Texans and 1 Anti-Gun Measure
The day after his birthday last week, George J. Hennard armed himself with two semiautomatic pistols that held a total of 32 bullets, stuffed his pockets with extra ammunition, then drove his pickup truck through the window of lunchtime-crowded Luby's cafeteria in Killeen, Tex., and began shooting people.
Ten minutes, many screams and maybe a hundred shots later, 23 people lay dead -- Mr.
Hennard among them, a suicide -- and 23 others were injured.
In the aftermath, there emerged a portrait of Mr.
Hennard as a strapping, handsome 35-year-old who lived alone in the pillared mansion of his divorced parents.
Acquaintances described him as a combative and unstable man who regarded women with smoldering hostility.
Indeed, two-thirds of the dead at Luby's were women.


Short-Term Leases Lure the Once-Burned Auto Buyer
When Richard and Terrie Hursey went out to buy a family car last fall, their dealer worked out a financing plan that allowed them to meet their $300-a-month budget.
They bought a 1989 used Ford Taurus, financing the $11,992 purchase over five years, for a monthly payment of $293.22.
He says he was led to believe that he could trade up after about a year.
But the Livermore, Calif., couple was distressed to learn last month while shopping for something larger that their car is worth thousands of dollars less than what they owe on their loan.
"We've got a funny feeling we're stuck with the car," said Mr.
Hursey.
"I just feel we got the shaft."


A Theatergoer's World
THE THEATER, WILLIAM HAZLITT WROTE, shows us "all that we are, all that we wish to be, and all that we dread to be."
It has always been so.
Who can doubt that in the fifth century B.C., when Aeschylus, Euripides and Sophocles were in full output, the theater was the moral center of Athens?
With their plays, humankind took a new turn.


Why the Thomas Hearings Were a Sometime Thing on TV
At about 7:45 on the first night of the explosive testimony at the Senate Judiciary Committee hearings into sexual harassment allegations against the Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas, Dan Rather, the CBS anchor, announced that his network's coverage was going off the air, even though Judge Thomas had yet to testify.
CBS, Mr.
Rather said, had to satisfy its contractual obligations to carry a major league baseball playoff game.
Then Mr.
Rather said something extraordinary: "Of course, the hearings can be seen on other stations."


The Life and Loves of Marguerite Duras
NOVELIST, PLAYWRIGHT, FILM MAKER, COMMUNIST, outrageous social commentator, Marguerite Duras has awed and maddened the French public for more than 40 years.
Considering her impoverished childhood in Vietnam, her participation in the French Resistance, her Communism and ultimate disaffection with the Party, her two marriages and many liaisons, the near-fatal cure she underwent for alcoholism in 1982, and, especially, her miraculous recovery from a five-month coma induced by complications from emphysema in 1988, it is reasonable to suggest that Marguerite Duras is a force of nature.
Her 48th work, "The Lover," published in 1984 when she was 70, was a best seller not only in France and throughout Europe, but in the United States as well.
According to the French publisher Jerome Lindon, whose Les Editions de Minuit brought out "The Lover," it is one of the few contemporary French books to have an international impact.
He knows of at least 29 foreign editions, including 3 in separate Chinese dialects.
It won France's most prestigious literary award, the Prix Goncourt.


South's Senators Expect To Survive Vote on Judge
Despite vows of revenge from liberal women's groups, political experts say that Southern Democrats who voted to confirm Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court need not fear any negative consequences at the polls.
Politicians, poll takers, political strategists and officials of liberal advocacy groups said in interviews that by voting to seat Judge Thomas, four Southern Democratic Senators who are up for re-election next year maintained their standing among black voters who are a critical part of their political base.


New &amp; Noteworthy
CREATED FROM ANIMALS: The Moral Implications of Darwinism, by James Rachels. (Oxford University, $9.95.) Though it's been almost 150 years since Charles Darwin's book "The Origin of Species" closed the biological divide between people and animals, the author argues, humanity's moral code still hasn't caught up.
Last year our reviewer, Robert Wright, said the book "does an excellent job of enlisting Darwinism in the animal rights movement." In THE COMPASSIONATE BEAST: The Scientific Inquiry Into Human Altruism (Anchor/Doubleday, $11), Morton Hunt explores the biological and psychological roots of altruism.
SOMETHING TO REMEMBER ME BY: Three Tales, by Saul Bellow. (Signet, $5.99.) Three of Saul Bellow's recent short fictions are drawn together here -- two novellas brought out as paperback originals in 1989 and a short story first published last year in Esquire.
In "The Theft" Clara Velde, an Indiana hayseed who moved to New York and became "the czarina of fashion writing," is thrown off balance when an emerald from her longtime lover disappears.
The story, "though far from major Bellow, is ebullient in tone and has a parable-like brevity," Joyce Carol Oates said here.
In "The Bellarosa Connection," the founder of a memory training school recalls the story of Harry Fonstein and his quest to thank Billy Rose, the theatrical impresario, for running an underground operation that allowed him to escape from Italy during World War II.
Our reviewer, William H. Pritchard, called the novella "cannily resourceful entertainment."


Gentrification
To the Editor:
In "Gentrification" (Sept. 29), Thomas Lueck fails to distinguish between neighborhood gentrification and real estate speculation.
The East Village and Lower East Side continue to gentrify to this day.
This is evident in that the incomes of new residents moving to the neighborhood far exceed the median income, as well as that "new sidewalk cafes and nightclubs line the blocks near Tompkins Square Park (and) dry cleaners, video stores, fruit and vegetable stalls and other retailers are thriving."


Corrections
An article on Sept. 29 about the Canadian Rockies misstated the year in which the poet Rupert Brooke visited Banff and Lake Louise.
It was 1913, not 1916.


Lions Can't Change Spots Against Leopards
Led by tailback John Kahn's 224 yards rushing and fullback Chris Flood's two touchdowns, Lafayette trounced Columbia, 30-15, today before 5,113 spectators here at Fisher Field.
The loss ended Columbia's hopes of winning consecutive games for the first time in 13 years.
In 1978, the Lions beat Harvard and Lafayette in the first two weeks of the season.


POSTINGS: Cast Iron's Advocate; Saving the Past
First, in 1966, Margot Gayle helped found the Victorian Society of America, after Sir Nikolaus Pevsner, the eminent British architectural historian, warned that if Americans did not start saving their best examples of 19th-century architecture, "you don't have much else to save."
Then, in 1970, Mrs.
Gayle focused her affection for the last century's buildings by founding Friends of Cast-Iron Architecture, a devotion to a construction technique that was merely cheaper and faster than stonework when it was used 150 years ago but that has since come to be seen -- with the help of eyes like Mrs.
Gayle's -- as a distinctive contribution the city's architectural heritage.


Surgery for Smith
Los Angeles Clippers forward CHARLES SMITH underwent arthroscopic surgery to repair torn cartilage in his right knee.
He will be out of action four to six weeks.
The Clippers also announced that they had reduced their roster to 17 by requesting waivers on free agents DARWIN COOK, JIM USEVITCH and GREG WILTJER.


First Guest


Don't Slight The Filipinos
To the Sports Editor:
I was quite hurt when I read recently that Martina Navratilova had remarked, "It's a pretty stupid stand, which would keep some of the best players out of the Olympics while a Filipino player, who never performed in an international tournament, will be allowed to play." She was referring to an International Tennis Federation policy, which stipulates that female players must play for their countries in the previous Federation Cup international team competition to qualify for the Olympic Games.


Social Events
Art by AIDS Patients
Oct. 21 -- A reception and a preview of artworks by AIDS patients will benefit the educational outreach programs of the Hell's Kitchen AIDS Project.
Members of Broadway theater casts and television shows will be on hand.
The event will be in the lobby of 909 Third Avenue (55th Street) from 6 to 9 P.M.
Tickets, $40, or $75 a couple, from (212) 245-2909 or at door.
Hospital Salutes Lena Horne
Oct. 21 -- The Lenox Hill Hospital's annual autumn ball will salute Lena Horne for her humanitarian work.
Cocktails at 6:30, followed by dinner and dancing, at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 439-2410.
Museum Party
Oct. 21 -- The Museum of the City of New York, at Fifth Avenue and 103d Street, will be the setting for its annual dinner-dance, starting with cocktails at 7:30.
The benefit will include an exhibit, "Broadway: 125 Years of Musical Theater." Black tie.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 534-1672, extension 253.
Paul Taylor Opening
Oct. 22 -- The Paul Taylor Dance Company opens its season at 7 P.M. at the City Center with the New York premiere of "Company B," set to the music of the Andrew Sisters.
Then, it's on to the Pierre for cocktails, dinner and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 245-5100.
Chamber Music Society
Oct. 22 -- The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center opens its 23d season with a benefit at Alice Tully Hall.
A champagne reception at 6:30 will be followed by a concert and dinner.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 875-5782. 'Carmen Miranda' at BAM
Oct. 23 -- The Brooklyn Academy of Music will benefit from the premiere of "Carmen Miranda," a concert exploring Brazilian music through the repertory of the late singer, whose daughter Aurora Miranda will be among the performers.
A dinner at the BAM Opera House follows the 7 P.M. performance.
Tickets: $30 and $15 general admission; $500 including the benefit dinner; from (718) 636-4100.
TV Awards at Lincoln Center
Oct. 23 -- The Dwelling Place, a shelter for women in Manhattan, will benefit from the 38th International Advertising Film Festival at Avery Fisher Hall.
Cocktails at 6:30 will be followed by a showing of prize-winning commercials and dinner and dancing.
Tickets: $15 for the screening only, $50 for cocktails and screening, and $275 for the entire evening; from (212) 593-1950.
Sports Night at the Waldorf
Oct. 23 -- The Boys' Club of New York will hold its annual All Sports Hall of Fame dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria with more than 70 past and present professional athletes in attendance.
Cocktails at 6:30.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 997-0100.
Laurel and Hardy
Oct. 23 -- Games, magicians, dancing, a buffet supper and continuous showings of Laurel and Hardy's "March of the Wooden Soldiers" at F. A. O. Schwarz, Fifth Avenue at 58th Street, are in store for guests at a benefit for Ronald McDonald House.
Tickets, $75 for adults, $15 for children under 17, from (914) 277-4800.
In Memory of a Teen-Ager
Oct. 24 -- A party will benefit an affiliate of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, the Laura Rosenberg Foundation, named for a 15-year-old who died of leukemia 10 years ago.
It will be at the Crane Club, at 408 Amsterdam Avenue, near 79th Street.
Drinks and dancing from 7:30 to 10 P.M.
Tickets, $25, at the door.
Information: (212) 213-5000.
Funds for Diabetes Research
Oct. 24 -- A masked ball at the Copacabana, 10 East 60th Street, will raise research funds for the New York chapter of the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation.
Dinner included; party starts at 7:30.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 689-2860.
Legal Services Party
Oct. 25 -- MFY Legal Services, which gives free legal help to poor people in civil cases, will offer food, drinks and dancing at the New York Academy of Art, 419 Lafayette Street, near Astor Place, starting at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $50 from (212) 475-8000, extension 36, or $60 at the door.
Movie at Avery Fisher
Oct. 25 -- "Alexander Nevsky," the 1938 Eisenstein film with music by Prokofiev, will be presented as a benefit for Lincoln Center's programs at 8:30 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall, with Seiji Ozawa conducting the Boston Symphony Orchestra and the Tanglewood Festival Chorus.
A balalaika party with Russian foods and performers will follow.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 875-5440.
For Drug Prevention
Oct. 25 -- A special performance of the Big Apple Circus in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center will benefit the Scott Newman Foundation, a drug prevention center, founded in 1980 in Los Angeles by Paul Newman and Joanne Woodward in memory of Mr.
Newman's late son.
A 6 P.M. reception with Mr.
Newman and Miss Woodward precedes the 7 P.M. performance and box supper.
Tickets: $75 for adults and $35 for children 13 and younger, for the performance; $125 for adults and $50 for children, including the reception; (212) 722-6226.
Aid for Bangladesh
Oct. 25 -- A benefit dinner with entertainment to raise funds for poverty-stricken villages in Bangladesh will be held in the delegates' dining room at the United Nations starting with cocktails at 7.
The sponsors are the International Health Awareness Network and the Zonta Club of New York; Jerry Orbach will be the master of ceremonies.
Tickets $125, from (212) 988-2293.
Synagogue Art Party
Oct. 26 -- The Brotherhood Synagogue, 28 Gramercy Park South, is planning a champagne reception from 8 to 10 P.M. to open an exhibition of more than 200 works by artists including Alexander Calder, Will Barnet and Chaim Gross.
Reception tickets, $12.50, at the door; exhibition free.
Information: (212) 674-5750.
Weizmann Institute Award
Oct. 27 -- The American Committee for the Weizmann Institute of Science will honor Kirk Douglas at the Waldorf-Astoria for his service to Israel.
Carl Reiner will be the master of ceremonies and Tony Randall a special guest.
Cocktails at 6 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 779-2500.
Holocaust Remembered
Oct. 27 -- Robert Maxwell, the owner of The Daily News, and Diana and Eli Zborowski, founders of the American and International Societies for Yad Vashem, will be honored at the 10th-anniversary celebration of the societies.
Yad Vashem was established by Israel in 1953 as a memorial in Jerusalem to victims of the Holocaust.
Tickets, $300, from (914) 376-2271.
Champagne at Cartier
Oct. 28 -- A champagne reception from 6:30 to 8:30 P.M. at Cartier, Fifth Avenue at 52d Street, will benefit the junior and young rider programs of the National Equestrian Federation of the American Horse Shows Association.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 972-2472.
Hero Awards
Oct. 28 -- Chesebrough-Pond's will present its national hero awards at a black-tie dinner-dance at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The evening, starting with cocktails at 7, will benefit Big Brothers/Big Sisters of America.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 421-9770.
Research for Lupus
Oct. 28 -- The Lupus Foundation, which seeks a cure for lupus, a disease of the immune system that is often fatal, is planning a black-tie dinner-dance at the Plaza that will include a special performance of "Forbidden Broadway." Cocktails at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 685-4118.
Israel Cancer Fund-Raiser
Oct. 28 -- The Israel Cancer Association is planning a party from 6:30 to 11:30 P.M. at Le Bar Bat, 311 West 57th.
Dinner, dancing and drinks.
Tickets: $65 from (212) 751-0766, or $75 at the door.


Colorado Towns Open Casinos
Gambling returned this month to three historic mountain mining towns in Colorado: Central City, Black Hawk and Cripple Creek.
Sixteen casinos with a total of around 1,300 slot and video poker machines as well as blackjack tables are now working; next spring about 6,500 slot machines are expected to be in operation.
Gambling in the three towns was made legal last year in a statewide referendum that allows them to offer slot machines, poker and blackjack with a maximum $5 bet.
The towns are National Historic Districts and have good examples of preserved Victorian architecture.
Central City was once called the "richest square mile on earth," and its main street has appeared in Western movies, including "Centennial." Its 1878 Opera House offers a season of opera each summer.
Nearby Black Hawk, with its plank board sidewalks, includes the Lace House, known for its elaborate scrolls and woodwork.
Visitors to Black Hawk can learn how to pan for gold.
Central City and Black Hawk are 34 miles west of Denver.
Cripple Creek, 45 miles west of Colorado Springs, offers a narrow-gauge railroad and mine tours.


Bridge
A trophy that began its life on one Atlantic island four decades ago unexpectedly landed on another earlier this month.
The Bermuda Bowl, the emblem of world championship since 1950, now resides in Iceland, which has just 3,000 tournament players.
The enthusiasm there was remarkable: hundreds of players gathered in the middle of the night to hear the progress of the later matches at the NEC World Team Championships in Yokohama, Japan.
The Icelanders, who began as a long-shot team after taking the fourth and last qualifying position in the European Championships in June, showed themselves to be bold bidders and accurate players.
On the diagramed deal, Jon Baldursson held the South cards and refused to allow West to play in one no-trump.
He landed on his feet in two hearts, and West led the club king.


HARASSMENT CASES CAN GO UNNOTICED
Federal law requires companies to have policies prohibiting sexual harassment, but employers that vigorously try to enforce their own rules are few and far between, experts say.
The policies at many companies lack specifics as to what behavior is offensive, or what remedies are available.
Some companies train and educate only their top managers, rather than the entire work forces.


Review/Music; The Whispers In Retro Mode
The 1970's returned to the Apollo Theater Thursday night in the form of the Whispers.
They arrived without a hint of irony or retro cool.
The group, dressed in matching purple suits and dancing tightly choreographed and slick moves, haven't changed much since the late 1970's and early 1980's, the high point of their career.
And the audience, heavily represented by women unafraid to shriek, was there to hear the group sing the older material, unconcerned that the band, which has been left behind by the hip-hop revolution, is short on new hits.
The Whispers, who are kings of smooch music, have one of the stranger vocal combinations in pop, the twins Walter and Wallace (Scotty) Scott.
Family voices blend well, and the twins manage an unearthly effect that sounds at times as if one voice were overdubbing parts, and at others like a single thick voice.
The Scotts would sing long, jazz-influenced lines that seemed improvised but weren't, or the melodies of a song in unison; on hits like "And the Beat Goes On," their first few notes set people screaming.


Miss Kenny, Banker, Wed
Elizabeth Fraser Kenny, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Kenny of Baltimore, was married yesterday in Ruxton, Md., to Nathan Richardson Allen 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Benjamin Smith officiated at the Episcopal Church of the Good Shepherd.
Mrs.
Allen, 24 years old, is an associate at Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford, as did her husband.
Her father is a professor of pediatrics at the University of Maryland.


The Prophet at the Y
SAGES AND DREAMERS
Biblical, Talmudic and Hasidic Portraits and Legends.
By Elie Wiesel. 443 pp.
New York:  Summit Books. $25.


Smoking Allowed
To the Editor: I found the "Smoking Permitted" article (Sept. 8, Travel) all too true, as my experience on numerous business trips has proven.
It's certainly not easy to avoid tobacco smoke in Britain.
Your article recommended a guide to smoke-free travel in the U.K., "Eat, Drink and Sleep Smoke-Free" and gave a London address for ordering with a $:12.50 bank draft, but the book is also available in the U.S. by mail.
Royal Mail, which specializes in British travel videos and books, has the title for $21.70 postpaid.
There's also a companion book at the same price, "The Healthy Holiday Guide," which describes British hotels and accommodations catering to the health-conscious, including exercise facilities and places selling kosher, vegetarian and dietetic foods.


Singular Sensation
To the Editor:
Michael Kimmelman was more accurate than he perhaps realized when he employed the singular in the first sentence of his article about the 1920's: ". . . the Bugatti Royale cruised the streets of Europe"  [ "Bold Images That Show Why the 20's Roared," Aug. 25 ] .
For within that decade there was indeed only one Royale in the world: the prototype Golden Bug, which Ettore Bugatti used as his personal transportation.
The first production model, and second overall, was not completed until 1931, and in the ensuing years only five more would be produced.
WILLIAM L. HICKMAN  New York


Lithuania Is Reviewing War Cases, Judge Says
The chairman of the Lithuanian Supreme Court said today that the cases of five people who had been exonerated of convictions for participating in killings of Jews during World War II were being studied.
But he said no decision had been made to reverse the exonerations.
The chief judge, Mindaugas Losys, was taking issue with Judge Genadijus Slauta, a member of his court, who said on Wednesday that the rehabilitations would be reversed because his study of the cases had shown that the defendants' convictions had been justified.
Judge Slauta did not say that the reversals had already taken place.


A Wing for a Wing
In what must be considered a minor move for both teams, the Hartford Whalers traded left wing PAUL FENTON to the San Jose Sharks for left wing MIKE McHUGH.
The 31-year-old Fenton, who has 89 goals and 79 assists in 351 games, didn't play a game for the Whalers since being acquired from Calgary in August for future considerations.


Tracey Stelzer, Student, to Wed
Robert M. Stelzer of Los Angeles and Mrs.
Melvin Beinart of Rye Brook, N.Y., have announced January wedding plans for their daughter Tracey Jane Stelzer and Andrew Leon Hyams, the son of Dr.
George Hyams of New York and Harriet Hyams-Shimel of Snedens Landing, N.Y.
Miss Stelzer, 31, graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton and received a law degree from Emory University.
She is studying for a master's degree in public health at Harvard University.


Now Get Politics Out of Confirmation Process
To the Editor:
The Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on the confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States make clear that the process needs to be changed.
The Senate hearings were an exercise in futility, as Judge Thomas avoided any substantive answers that would have exposed him to the same fate as Judge Robert Bork a few years ago.


Homeownership -- a Receding Dream
YOUNG couples struggling to pay the rent and still save enough for a down payment on a house fell further behind their homeowning parents last year, according to a new study of home costs and ownership rates.
The problem among the young lingered despite the hopes of economists, home builders and uncounted rent-paying nonowners that the recession, lower interest rates and falling prices would make homeownership easier for them.


Janet Flanders Wed in Georgia
Janet Carolyn Flanders, a daughter of Frank M. Flanders and Carolyn Flanders, both of Swainsboro, Ga., was married yesterday in St.
Simons Island, Ga., to Scot Jameson Johnston, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robin R. Johnston of Bellevue, Wash.
The Rev.
Vernard Robertson performed the Methodist ceremony at the Lovely Lane Chapel.
Mrs.
Johnston, 27, is a financial analyst for Avatar Associates, a New York investment management firm.
She graduated from the University of Georgia.
Her father owns farm land and timberland in Emanuel County, Ga.


Palaces and Pleasures
Nicolas Fouquet's chateau of Vaux-le-Vicomte, set like a jewel among its gardens, is a glittering emblem of all that was splendid in the life of 17th-century France.
Across the ocean in Asheville, George Washington Vanderbilt's North Carolina version of a French chateau, Biltmore Estate, is a symbol of all that was golden in America's Gilded Age.
To visit either is to experience something perfect of its type.
No further invitations are required.


Delay in Vote on Iowa Rules
Iowa Democrats today put off for at least a month a decision on whether to change party rules to enliven the nation's first Presidential preference vote.
The Iowa Democratic Central Committee, meeting in closed session, discussed two possible rules changes today but took no action.
It decided to take up the matter again on Dec. 14 or at a special meeting next month, said a party spokesman, Joe Shanahan.


Why Patriots Catch the N.F.L.'s Interest
The National Football League is keeping a close eye on the situation in New England, where the Patriots' owner, Victor Kiam, is attempting to raise $38 million to pay off his partner, Francis Murray.
No one is quite sure what will happen with the Patriots, but it appears that Kiam will not be able to raise the funds and could lose the team.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have a flagstone patio on top of a poured-concrete garage.
Some of the flagstones have come loose, and I have been told that the concrete has to be chiseled to a depth of about one inch if the stones are to be cemented again.
I also have been told there are new glue-type products that can be used.
A.
Mastic adhesives suitable for this purpose have been available for some time, but probably the strongest adhesive is a two-part epoxy cement.
There are dozens of brands on the market.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Oct. 5 MANHATTAN Carnegie Hill 760,000
1112 Park Avenue (90th St.)  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, fireplace, 4 exposures; maintenance $2,118, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group) Chelsea 279,000
161 West 15th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, jacuzzi, 14-ft.-ceilings, south exposure; maintenance $541, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Coleman Neary Realty)  Greenwich Village 1.375 million
40 Fifth Avenue (11th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,750-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, solarium, fireplace, 3 exposures; maintenance $2,400, 29% tax-deductible (Broker: Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)  SoHo 392,500
31 Green Street  2,400-sq.-ft. open loft-co-op; 1 bath, sleeping loft, 14- to 26-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $730, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Delson-Ginsberg Real Estate - Corcoran Group)  Upper East Side 1.5 million
114 East 78th Street  6-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, 4-story, Georgian town house; elevator, dining room, 2 powder rooms, 2 fireplaces, 3 1/2-room hospitality suite on 1st floor, terrace. rear garden, 18- by 102-ft. lot; taxes $14,237 (Broker: William B. May)  BRONX  Riverdale 44,000
3875 Waldo Avenue  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 675-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; renovated lobby, dining foyer, eat-in kitchen; maintenance $397, 38% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher)  Wakefield 140,000
4335 Carpenter Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, attached brick house; dining room, full basement, attached, 1-car garage, 20- by 92-ft. lot; taxes $1,273 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  BROOKLYN Clinton Hill 152,000
275 Clinton Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, large living room, washer/dryer; maintenance $500, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  Prospect Park South 315,000
99 Argyle Road  2-family, detached frame house; 6 bedrooms, 3 baths in primary duplex unit; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in other; dining room, eat-in kitchen in both; 2-car garage, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,100 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  Sheepshead Bay 180,000
4565 Bedford Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family attached brick house; dining room, finished basement, new roof and windows, 1-car garage, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,368 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  Elmhurst 214,000
42-17 77th Street  2-family, semi-attached stucco house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; finished basement, 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,578 (Broker: Century 21/Best Inc.)  Kew Gardens Hills 264,000
141-36 Union Turnpike  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached brick and stucco house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, private driveway, 86- by 156-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  STATEN ISLAND  Grasmere 300,000
34 Hastings Avenue  4-bedroom, 5-bath, single-family detached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 3 fireplaces, whirlpool, 2-car garage, 1/4-acre lot; taxes $1,523 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)  New Dorp Heights 165,000
7 Vincent Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/4-bath, single-family detached ranch; kitchen skylight, rear deck, finished basement, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)


A New Attorney General Steps Up
William Barr, President Bush's choice for Attorney General, is an able and energetic lawyer who has already displayed strong loyalty to his client in the White House.
In various high-ranking Justice Department jobs, he has boosted the Administration's hard-line crime legislation and endorsed its view of executive power.
As Acting Attorney General this summer, Mr.
Barr made key decisions under pressure that led to the rescue of hostages in the uprising at the Talladega prison in Alabama.
He impressed Mr.
Bush as much for not grandstanding as for firm leadership.


CAMPUS LIFE: Minnesota; Conflict Escalates Over Organization Devoted to Racism
Weeks of oral clashes between supporters of a white student union and demonstrators escalated into a brawl involving about 30 people Thursday at the University of Minnesota, while the union's founder was giving an on-campus radio interview, the campus police said.
No one was arrested, but at least three people were injured in the fight, in which tear gas was used by some of the brawlers.
Two were treated for head injuries, the campus police said.


Bright and Crisp, Autumn Ushers In a Quickened Pace
There's an internal shift that takes place in the fall, sort of like everything else in nature.
The birds are flocking south, their mating over for the time being. (Do they take a break from the kids in winter? Knit sweaters? Read books?)
The leaves turn brilliant colors, as their chlorophyll fades away and nutrients move into the roots, revealing the reds and yellows that have been there all along, like hidden parts of a personality.
If the days are bright and the nights cool, sugars maufacture anthocyanins that deepen the leaves to scarlet or purple.
We don't understand exactly what triggers this intricate fugue, but it's genetically programmed, and hormones are the conductors.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Clinton, Conn. 189,000
50 Olde Orchard Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; family room w/fireplace, large deck and country kitchen, 1.2 acres; taxes $2,986.
Guilford, Conn. 165,000
35 Coginchaug Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old contemporary; skylights, office area, wooded lot, 2 acres; taxes $4,004.
New Milford, Conn. 129,000
22 Sterling Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 22-year-old raised ranch; large storage shed with electricity, extra half-bathroom, 1/2 acre; taxes $1,762.
Katonah, N.Y. 367,500
22 Wakan Drive
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 16-year-old contemporary; cathedral ceiling entry hall, family room, pool, 4 acres; taxes $7,500.
Larchmont, N.Y. 584,000
8 Rochelle Road
5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 66-year-old Mediterranean stucco; fireplace, formal dining room, eat-in kitchen, den; taxes $11,836.
New Rochelle, N.Y. 235,000
15 Liberty Avenue
5-bedroom, 1-bath, 93-year-old Victorian; entry hall, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, wraparound porch; taxes $2,168.
OTHER AREAS Freehold, N.J . 85,000
56 Mechanic Street
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; 1-car garage, w/w carpeting, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $1,786.
Farmingdale, L.I. 180,000
5 Hawthorne Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old colonial; dining room, Florida room, fireplace; taxes $5,200.
Mineola, L.I. 162,000
330 Latham Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40- year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, aluminum siding; taxes $2,600.


CLASS STRUGGLE
To thrust the complex burden of the global world and its history on very young children is a dubious project.
It seems to me that we have to acknowledge that children of elementary- school age need first to master the realities of their world in sequence, from family and neighborhood to city and region.
No centrally devised, all-purpose text will serve this purpose.
But with the technological capacities of publishing today, schools could obtain a diverse selection of materials, drawing on local resources for history, ecology, economics.
The Foxfire project set a great example for active community participation.
Once children are well oriented in the actual world they inhabit, the wider frames of reference can be added.
It's in the secondary grades that a standard curriculum becomes appropriate.
JUDITH GROSSMAN
Baltimore


Zelda's Room
To the Editor:
Reading Sharon O'Brien's review of the collected writings of Zelda Fitzgerald (Sept. 1), I wasn't surprised to learn that Fitzgerald produced most of her art after her mental breakdown and commitment.
It's not that I believe her insanity allowed her to tap into some hitherto undiscovered deep creative stream.
I believe she could do it because she finally had a room of her own.


Kristina Catlin Weds in Albany
Kristina Ann Catlin, a daughter of David Catlin of Fairport, N.Y., and Gail W. Catlin of Albany, was married in Albany yesterday to David Lucien Bangs, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Bangs of Shallotte, N.C.
The Rev.
Robert Eggenschiller performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church.
Ms.
Catlin, who is 30 and is keeping her name, is an associate in acquisition finance at Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York.
She graduated and received an M.B.A. from Cornell University.
Her father is the vice president for human resources at the Case-Hoyt Corporation, a printing company in Rochester.
Her mother is the manager of special gifts for WMHT, the public television station in Schenectady.


INSIDE
Cars Face Tougher Air Test
In a move that would affect tens of millions of car owners, the Government may require exhaust tests making inspections at neighborhood gas stations impractical.
Page 14.
North, in His Own Words
In his coming book about the Iran-contra affair, Oliver L. North says that "President Reagan knew everything." But newly public excerpts offer slim evidence.
Page 16.
It Might as Well Be Spring
Magnolias blooming in New York.
Lilacs blossoming on Martha's Vineyard.
Rhododendrons in Washington.
In autumn?
What's up?
Page 24.


CLASS STRUGGLE
Three cheers to California for sticking to its guns (arrowheads, catapults, spears, sabers).
What makes a textbook worthwhile is not so much the specific information it contains but the way it shapes young minds.
To give a new generation of schoolchildren a sense of pride in their heritage and respect for the cultures of others is to give an invaluable gift to future generations.
JOHANNA SCHULMAN
Somerville, Mass.


Iran-Contra Defendant Asks for Secret Papers
A lawyer for Clair E. George, the indicted former intelligence official, has asked a Federal judge for thousands of classified documents and related court papers from two earlier Iran-contra cases, a move that prosecutors protested as an effort to prevent a trial from taking place.
The lawyer, Richard I. Hibey, on Friday asked United States District Judge Royce C. Lamberth for copies of more than 900,000 pages of secret documents and sealed pleadings in the cases of Oliver L. North, a former national security council aide, and Joseph F. Fernandez, a former Central Intelligence Agency station chief in Costa Rica.


Now Get Politics Out of Confirmation Process; Black and Conservative
To the Editor:
We in the South have been justly criticized in the past for our treatment of and disapproval of blacks who held liberal views and who did not agree to think as we did.


House Cleaning. Also Senate.
Americans are disgusted with Congress, and the hostility is rising.
The only question is whether Congress cares, because if it does, it now has a ripe opportunity to reform its practices and repair its standing.
Consider the sense Congress has conveyed just in recent weeks.
Representatives have given new meaning to the expression "on the House," bouncing checks in the House bank, ignoring bills from the House restaurant, getting House officials to fix their parking tickets.
All over the country voters have been smelling self-indulgence.


Thoroughly Modern


Repair Shops Fear the Cost Of E.P.A. Plan
In America's smoggiest city, auto repair shop operators say that the high cost of complying with proposed vehicle emissions testing rules could force many of them to drop a service that has become a staple of their business.
Regulations being considered by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency would require emissions testing at a variety of engine speeds for vehicles in cities that have the worst air pollution.
To comply with the requirement, every garage performing the test would have to have a dynamometer, a kind of treadmill for vehicles that costs more than $100,000.
California already requires measurement of tailpipe emissions for every vehicle in the state, but the test is conducted with the engine idling and does not require a dynamometer.


More at Stake
To the Editor:
I appreciated the article "Are These Movies on Their Way to Extinction?"  [ Sept. 22 ] , outlining the financial and intellectual challenges confronting the Margaret Mead Film Festival.
I would like to add another, less obvious but equally troubling byproduct of the possible demise of this festival.


The Children of Interplast
SAN PEDRO SULA SITS IN NORTH central Honduras, between the glyph-covered Mayan stairway at Copan and the coral atolls of the coast.
In September, beneath the gaze of a giant Coca-Cola sign floating like a patron saint on a near hill, the downtown bustles with people keen to run their errands before the hot, sticky hours of afternoon cascade into thick, humid nights.
On a tree-shaded street in the center of town stands San Pedro Sula's public hospital, at the time of my visit a couple of years ago, a sprawling maze of one-story buildings, porticos and courtyards.
Outdoor benches overflow with patients and their families, on a checkerbord of yellow and green tiles.
People fill the wards, crowd the walkways and spill into the courtyards.
Many of life's joys and afflictions are on parade: a woman with a machete wound delivered by a jealous lover enters the eye clinic; a badly burned man, cocooned in gauze, hobbles out of a ward to get some fresh air; a man in a straw hat, holding the elbow of a pregnant woman, guides her toward a sign that says "Farmacia"; a man and a woman exchange rapid, staccato accusations, while their hands make small slashes in the air.
A young mother sits in a corner, nursing a baby, in her eyes the narcotic of her love.
Twin boys, each with a cleft mouth, race toy trucks along the cement.


Sophomore Is No Jinx for Dartmouth
In the Ivy League, where practice time is so limited, sophomores are sure to make mistakes, says Yale's Carm Cozza, a deduction gained from coaching here for 29 seasons.
But Jay Fiedler, Dartmouth's sophomore quarterback from Oceanside, L.I., made none during a pressure-packed final drive today.
Fielder's last pass found Mike Bobo in the back of the Yale end zone for the winnning touchdown with 23 seconds left to play.


De Klerk Assails Mandela's Police Assertions
President F. W. de Klerk, angered by allegations of police complicity in the persistent political violence in South Africa, has upbraided Nelson Mandela, president of the African National Congress, for making what Mr. de Klerk described as a "vitriolic" accusation that the police were killing blacks at the President's behest.
"I totally reject these unsubstantiated allegations," President de Klerk said in a statement circulated by his office on Friday.
"They are irresponsible, unfounded and unjustifiable."


Review/Rock; Squeeze and Skins Build on the Beatles
The double bill of Squeeze and the Candy Skins, Wednesday and Thursday at the Beacon Theater, could have been a Beatles fan club meeting.
Both bands clearly idolize the Beatles' ability to wrap an effortless melody around unexpected chords and lyrics that acknowledge the complexities of relationships; both have studied and borrowed the Beatles' own chord progressions.
Squeeze, however, wants to push things further.
Chris Difford and Glenn Tilbrook, Squeeze's songwriters, have a puzzle-maker's approach to pop.
On the surface, the band follows the Beatles model; Mr.
Tilbrook sings like a lighter-voiced Paul McCartney in tunes that chug along like 1960's pop-rock, with occasional excursions into rockabilly or quasi-country.
Their unannounced project is to write songs that make unlikely chords and tunes cohere, with lyrics that intelligently anatomize romance, while sidestepping ordinary structures (like a song with verses and a bridge but no chorus), but that sound catchy anyway.
Sometimes they go so far that the songs lose their pop veneer and start to ramble, but after 17 years as a band, Squeeze has learned when to hold back.
And when it does indulge itself, it can always fall back on its hits.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have a flagstone patio on top of a poured-concrete garage.
Some of the flagstones have come loose, and I have been told that the concrete has to be chiseled to a depth of about one inch if the stones are to be cemented again.
I also have been told there are new glue-type products that can be used.
A.
Mastic adhesives suitable for this purpose have been available for some time, but probably the strongest adhesive is a two-part epoxy cement.
There are dozens of brands on the market.


Electing Little-Known Candidates as Judges
TEN State Supreme Court seats for the Island will be filled on Election Day, along with openings on the County, District and Family Courts, in races that have received little attention so far.
On the Island, where Republicans outnumber Democrats 3 to 2, the outcomes in the major races, particularly in Nassau County, appear to be foregone conclusions because of political arrangements in the selections.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 6 about Board of Legislature candidates rendered the name of the Republican-Conservative candidate in the Fourth District incorrectly.
He is Gary Ajello.


Style Makers; Judith Straeten, Fashion Archivist
Judith Straeten knew that the process that produced the famous Fortuny pleated dresses earlier in the century had apparently been lost.
But Miss Straeten, the archivist/curator for Brunschwig &amp; Fils, New York and a former assistant curator of the Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, has always operated on the theory that anything someone once did can be done again.
It took Miss Straeten a year of experimentation before she was satisfied with the extraordinarily slender, fan-like mushroom pleating she was achieving with sheer silk, a close relation of the fabric that made Mariano Fortuny's dresses a collector's item and the name a legend in fashion.
She dyes whisper-light silk in scores of colors, or to match (one woman wanted a dress the shade of her pale blue eyes, another something to match her emeralds).
She makes the dresses herself, all of them based on original Fortuny patterns.
Each dress -- some slim columns, with and without sleeves, others fashioned in a long tunic effect -- takes a minimum of five yards of fabric, has three panels and requires 40 to 60 hours of work from the dying and pleating process to the finished dress.


BEST SELLERS: October 20, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
1
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
3
2
9
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
4
4
3
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
5
3
6
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer has to contend with a mysterious force.
6
5
82
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
7
7
4
THE DECEIVER, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $22.50.) Sam McCready recalls his years in the British secret service. (LP)
8
8
32
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
9
9
7
FLOWERS IN THE RAIN, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $20.) A collection of short stories, many of them set in Scotland.
10
6
7
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $22.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his older brother.
11
13
3
THE DRAGON REBORN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor, $22.95.) The fate of a man doomed to save and then destroy the world; part of a fantasy series.
12
12
17
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
13
10
4
THE DUCHESS, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $21.) An American woman, in Scotland to marry a duke, finds a mysterious stranger more attractive.
14
1
HARLOT'S GHOST, by Norman Mailer. (Random House, $30.) The world's events of the past few decades as seen by three Yankee aristocrats who work for the C.I.A.
15
3
IMAJICA, by Clive Barker. (HarperCollins, $23.) A fantasy in which three residents of Earth seek to reunite it with four other Dominions.
16 *
14
2
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Macmillan, $21.95.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
2
2
8
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces. (LP)
3
3
5
LA TOYA, by La Toya Jackson with Patricia Romanowski. (Dutton, $19.95.) Growing up in a leading show business family.
4
4
48
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
5
7
4
J.
EDGAR HOOVER, by Curt Gentry. (Norton, $29.95.) The career of the longtime Director of the F.B.I.
6
5
23
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
7
10
4
EXPOSING MYSELF, by Geraldo Rivera with Daniel Paisner. (Bantam, $21.50.) The autobiography of the television personality.
8
6
18
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
9
1
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
10 *
9
16
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
11
11
18
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America.
12 *
1
CRUEL DOUBT, by Joe McGinniss. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The ordeal of a North Carolina woman whose son was accused of planning the murder of herself and her husband.
13 *
13
13
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
14
8
6
HARD COURTS, by John Feinstein. (Villard, $22.50.) A journalist's behind-the-scenes look at a year of professional tennis.
15
12
7
ANNE SEXTON, by Diane Wood Middlebrook. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) The life of a gifted poet who was hampered by mental illness.
16 *
14
3
THREE BLIND MICE, by Ken Auletta. (Random House, $25.) How ABC, CBS and NBC lost their dominance of the television world during the 1980's.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
10
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
1
IS THIS YOUR CHILD? by Doris J. Rapp. (Morrow, $23.) How children's troublesome allergies can be prevented and treated.
3
3
90
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a fellow named Waldo.
4 *
2
49
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
5 *
4
32
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
BROTHERLY LOVE, by Pete Dexter. (Random House, $22.) The tragic life story, told with vividness and force, of a working-class man condemned by fate and the rules of his society -- a South Philadelphia neighborhood where life is brutal and unforgiving.
IN MORTAL COMBAT: Korea, 1950-1953, by John Toland. (Morrow, $25.) A distinguished military historian's examination of a war so humiliating for the United States that attention to avoiding the same mistakes may have contributed to defeat in Vietnam.
TALKING IT OVER, by Julian Barnes. (Knopf, $21.) Mr.
Barnes's sixth novel -- credible, moving, funny and frightening -- concerns an impossible love triangle and raises, like his previous books, some risky questions about the nature of fiction itself.
THE INVENTION OF ARGENTINA, by Nicolas Shumway. (University of California, $34.95.) An absorbing discussion of Argentina's founding fathers, arguing that their failure to agree on a model of the national destiny led to national collapse.
PRIDE OF FAMILY: Four Generations of American Women of Color, by Carole Ione. (Summit, $19.95.) The captivating story of a black aristocratic clan and the mother-daughter conflicts within it, fought out with spunk, energy and resourcefulness.
THE CULTURE OF PAIN, by David B. Morris. (University of California, $29.95.) A sensitive literary scholar's fascinating tour of what hurts, both mentally and physically, and of what is, and has been, thought about pain in Western culture.
BEYOND DESERVING, by Sandra Scofield. (Permanent Press, $21.95.) This intelligent novel circles around the pains and joys of a family of macho men and the women who are married to them; it suggests that rogues may indeed be amiable, or at least tolerable.


Counting Herself In
DEBORAH, GOLDA AND ME
Being Female and Jewish in America.
By Letty Cottin Pogrebin. 396 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $22.


Hotel Chain Cuts Smokers' Rooms
Homewood Suites, a national chain of all-suite hotels, will increase its proportion of suites reserved specifically for nonsmokers to 75 percent from Jan. 1.
At present, 50 percent of the group's rooms are designated smoke-free, compared with the hotel industry's average of 35 percent.
A poll undertaken by Hotel and Motel Management, an industry newspaper, indicated that nearly three-quarters of hotel quests surveyed were likely to choose nonsmoking rooms and 65 percent felt their availability important in hotel selection.
Homewood Suites said its own survey showed that 7 out of 10 guests preferred nonsmoking rooms.
Changing a hotel room from smoking to nonsmoking involves more than hanging a no-smoking sign on the door, said a spokeswoman for Homewood.
All soft upholstery must be replaced, including sheets, curtains and pillows.
Furniture and rugs must be cleaned by a water-extraction process and the rooms must be repainted, she said.


North Says Reagan Knew of Iran Deal
In his forthcoming book about his role in the Iran-contra affair, Oliver L. North insists pointedly that "President Reagan knew everything" about the arms-for-hostages scandal, but excerpts of the book made public today cite slim and ultimately inconclusive evidence.
Mr.
North's memoir of the affair, written and produced as a virtual clandestine operation in which participants were sworn to secrecy, is called "Under Fire: An American Story." It being published by HarperCollins , with excerpts appearing on Monday in Time magazine.


'Indians,' an Echo of Vietnam
IN 1968, "Indians" was Arthur Kopit's attention-grabbing attempt to open up the real savage story of how the West was won, to demythologize that old game of cowboys and Indians, the one that leaves out the genocide of nearly all the Indians and the slaughter of more than 4,000 buffaloes.
Clearly, parallels to the Vietnam War were rife.
In fact, it was a newspaper account of a shooting in Saigon that inspired Mr.
Kopit to draw a startling analogy, making connections to an historic American arrogance in perpetuity.


Looted Crown Heights Store Reopens
The image is still etched on Sang Han's mind: shards of broken glass scattered over the shirts and sneakers that looters had left behind, strewn on the pavement in front of his devastated Utica Avenue store.
An alarm bell was still ringing feebly when he arrived late on the night of Aug. 20, the second night of violence in Crown Heights that left the black and Hasidic neighborhood exhausted and raw.
After two months of healing, few visible signs of the violent storm remain.
Mr.
Han's store, Sneaker King, is open again for business, with new glass counters and doors, restocked merchandise and a freshly installed alarm system.
Teen-age customers pick through the rows of stone-washed denim clothing and finger the white high-top sneakers as they would on any Saturday morning shopping trip, apparently ignorant of the recent history.


Review/Dance; Works by Erin Fitzgerald
Every step was carefully plotted in the dances that Erin Fitzgerald presented Thursday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
Even when depicting states of passion, her choreography was obviously calculated -- so much so that it lacked urgency.
And Ms.
Fitzgerald never provided intellectually rigorous analyses of her characters and dramatic situations that might have justified the steady lowering of emotional temperature.
Her dances had too much ice water in their veins.
"Impatiens" began strongly.
As they moved side by side, Maureen Ellenhorn and Ms.
Fitzgerald appeared to be women who were not necessarily happy to be close together.
Yet neither were they happy apart.
The choreography included several effective sequences, including nervous foot tappings, staggerings and regainings of balance and rapid motions of the legs that suggested the pedalings of bicylists.
But as movement motifs kept being repeated, excitement drained from the dance.


A Developer's Big Gamble on the New Hong Kong
At the ribbon-cutting ceremony for a customs station on the China-Hong Kong border, Gordon Y. S. Wu was patiently listening to an address by a senior Chinese official.
It was one of Mr.
Wu's first China ventures, and all his profits from building the station were to come from public tolls.
Suddenly, Mr.
Wu's face went red.
The deputy mayor of Shenzhen, a special economic zone on the border, was saying that no tolls would be charged.


Preparing Romantic Seasonal Fare for Weekend Entertaining
SUMMER may be over, but that does not mean weekend entertaining has come to a halt.
Guests for lunch, dinner and overnight stays continue throughout the year.
A new book, "A Weekend in the Country" by Linda Burgess and Anne Scott (Prentice Hall Press, $30), offers some suggestions, with menus and recipes, for seasonal weekend entertaining.
Splendidly poetic photographs accompany the text.
The author and photographer are English, with English country houses, and their approach is decidedly a romantic one.
Weekends are a time for rustic activities like gathering berries from the hedgerows, drying herbs and putting up preserves.
Shopping malls, television, microwave ovens and high cholesterol counts do not seem to intrude in this world.


The Great Divide; Spectacles Like The Thomas Hearing Are a Cost of Political Standoff
"I cannot recall an episode such as this," the nominee said, "so evil, so inexcusable, so ill-befitting the dignity and the integrity of the Senate of the United States -- an inexcusable, underhanded, vicious, shabby attempt to smear me  [ and ]  destroy my personal character . . ."
That is Robert A. Leffingwell speaking at his confirmation hearing, not Clarence Thomas, in Allen Drury's 1959 novel, "Advise and Consent," after a last-minute witness had accused him of youthful membership in a Communist cell.
Backed by the President, Leffingwell's party counterattacked with accusations of mental instability and suggestions that revenge might be a motive.


William Dinkins, Mayor's Father And Real Estate Agent, Dies at 85
William Harvey Dinkins Jr., the father of New York's Mayor, David N. Dinkins and a retired real-estate broker in Trenton, died on Friday night at the Delaware Valley Medical Center in Langhorne, Pa.
He was 85 years old and was a longtime resident of Trenton.
Mr.
Dinkins died of cardio-pulmonary arrest, said Leland T. Jones, the Mayor's press secretary.
The Mayor, who went to the hospital Friday night, canceled his appearances scheduled for yesterday.


Harlan J. Smith, 67, Astronomer in Texas
Dr.
Harlan J. Smith, an astronomer who headed the University of Texas's McDonald Observatory, in the Davis Mountains of west Texas, died on Thursday at the Seton Medical Center in Austin, Tex.
He was 67 years old and lived in Austin.
Dr. Smith died of cancer, his family said.


Danbury Gets a Third Thai Restaurant
JUST when it seemed that the Thai restaurant explosion had peaked, another one has opened in Danbury.
The arrival of Thai House brings the small city's Thai restaurant total to three.
This one is across the street from a Vietnamese food market, which suggests that Danbury either has a larger Southeast Asian population than many other Connecticut towns and cities, or that the people who live in and around Danbury are especially receptive to the spicy yet subtle cuisine of Thailand.
Whatever the reason, Thai House is the second Thai restaurant to open on Danbury's main thoroughfare in recent months.
Its locale is familiar, as it has housed at least two previous restaurants.
But Thai House has made the storefront L-shape space its own, decorating the plain walls with colorful Thai pictures and golden embroideries and enlivening the modest surroundings with recordings of modern Thai background music.


Technology; Digitizing TV Into Obsolescence
Like the record players of the 1970's that have been superseded by compact disk players, today's television sets may soon be relics.
Just as digital technology has made CD systems possible, digital technology will transform television.
Digital video is likely to usher in not only the much-heralded high definition TV, but also make possible advances in teleconferencing, video telephones, electronic cameras and interactive education systems.


Jets Receive a Lesson From Professor Coslet
The Jets have been warned.
Coach Bruce Coslet has given them the history lesson for the week.
Indianapolis, without a victory in seven games this season, tacked two losses onto the Jets last season, and the Colts are capable of doing the same thing again this year.
That's the gospel according to Coslet.
Coslet has also been telling his team that the Colts and the Jets (3-4) will only be separated by a few wounded knees and funny bounces when the two teams meet in the Hoosier Dome this afternoon.


Crime/Mystery; The Blood on the Bedroom Ceiling
CRUEL DOUBT
By Joe McGinniss. Illustrated. 460 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Word Tour
From the humble hamburger (originally Hamburg steak, from Hamburg, Germany) to the luxurious limousine (from the hood worn as part of a traditional costume in Limousin, France), foreign place names pop up as common nouns throughout the dictionary.
Our illustrated examples combine fact and fancy.
Cantaloupe
These melons were first  grown on the former papal  estate of Cantalupo, just  outside Rome.
Tuxedo
The tailless dress coat was  introduced at Tuxedo Park,  near Tuxedo Lake, N.Y. --  possibly by a resident with  very short legs.
Vaudeville
In the Middle Ages, the  Valley of the Vire (Vau-de- Vire), a region in  Normandy, was well known  for its satirical songs.
Flashy
Because gaudily dressed  gypsies lived in the village of  Flash (in Derbyshire,  England), anyone who wore  bright colors was called a  flashy dresser.
Spaniel
This gentle canine comes, of  course, from Spain  (Espana), where it was  greatly prized for its skill in  flamenco dancing.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Consumer confidence index
72.7
73.1
Budget deficit, in billions
$-43.7
$13
Wednesday
Auto sales, annual rate, in millions
5.5
6.0
Thursday
Initial jobless claims, in thousands
423
415
Durable goods orders, percent change
-3.8
1.0
Monday: Number of cattle in feed lots *
Comdex computer show  Tuesday: Five year Treasury auctions *
Import and export prices *
G-7 conference on inflation in Tokyo Wednesday: Federal Reserve issues Beige Book  Friday:Existing home sales  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc)


Quotation of the Day
"It's really bizarre. I never raked leaves and picked lilacs at the same time." -- Frances Tenenbaum of Martha's Vineyard.  [ 24:1. ]


Sorry, No Hablo Espanol
I AM not wired for foreign languages.
Perhaps I was born with the wrong plug, because six years of high school and college French made a very faint impression, and despite numerous trips to Mexico my Spanish is limited to a few basic expressions and the first two verses of "La Bamba." On the other hand, my husband, Duke, can have a dinner conversation in French or Spanish, make small talk in Russian or German, bluff Italian, and bargain in Thai.
"I'm just a dilettante," Duke says, which only makes me feel more inadequate.
"I can barely follow this." He gestures toward the television where he is honing his skills watching "Nuestra Belleza" (Our Beauty), a Spanish-language beauty pageant.


Putting Down Touchdown Fever
To the Editor:
Allen Barra came up short with his rundown of football films that emphasized the college game's seamier moments  [ "Football Movies Kiss Rah-Rah Goodbye," Sept. 29 ] .
Mr.
Barra writes: "By the mid 1960's, fans realized that both the college and the professional game were big business." By this standard "Saturday's Hero," released in 1951, was way ahead of its time.
John Derek (Bo's husband) played the star quarterback who believed that his college football scholarship would permit him to study books and read poetry to Donna Reed.
But Sidney Blackmer, as mean a head coach as you'll ever see, reminds Derek that he was hired to play football.


BEAN CUISINE
IT IS NO LONGER NECESSARY TO APOLOGIZE FOR DRIED beans.
They've become the height of frugal, high-fiber fashion.
But they're still misunderstood.
Consider all that annoying business about soaking, overnight no less, and then cooking for hours.
In this era of micro-moment cuisine, who can even bear to read through the recipe?
But as bothersome as they may sound, as conducive as the thought of them may be to opening cans or buying takeout, beans are actually remarkably convenient, an attribute that has long been appreciated by those who do know beans.
The soaking requires no attention.
Then, rinsed and mixed with the right blend of ingredients and enough liquid in a heavy, tightly covered pot, any variety of dried bean -- baby limas, Great Northerns, kidney beans, chickpeas, black beans, pinto beans, to name a few -- can be left in a slow oven or crock pot to cook to rich, mellow succulence, untended.
Go about the day's work if you will, run a marathon or get a good night's sleep.
Or, as has been a religious tradition for centuries, observe a day of rest.


'Booth Is Back' at the Long Wharf
"BOOTH IS BACK" at the Long Wharf's Newton Schenck Stage is apparently about the decline of the legendary touring tragedian, Junius Brutus Booth.
It has been written that he liked happy endings (his King Lear didn't go mad and lived to see Cordelia get married), realistic endings (as Othello, Booth almost smothered his Desdemona for real) and non-endings (Richard III, refusing to be slain by Richmond, chased him off the stage and into the streets).
"Booth Is Back" is also ostensibly about the emergence of Edwin Booth, bastard son of Junius, from cocky upstart to a Prince of Players who tells the audience, "I'm Edwin Booth, and I'm going to give you the damnedest Richard you've ever seen."


Now Get Politics Out of Confirmation Process; Longtime Harassment
To the Editor:
The hearings before the United States Senate Judiciary Committee concerning Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court were indeed personal tragedies for the two protagonists.
These hearings have, however, brought to light the pressures women have lived with in the workplace for generations.
Prior to Prof.
Anita F. Hill's testimony, our society refused to recognize and address these issues.


Proposed Car Exhaust Rules Could Be Burden for Drivers
In a move that would affect tens of millions of car owners and thousands of gas station operators, the Environmental Protection Agency may impose stricter standards on tailpipe emissions testing that could make car inspections at neighborhood gas stations impractical.
The strictest standards that could be imposed would require inspection by machines costing up to $300,000 each, far beyond the reach of most small operators.
Motorists would have to go to high-volume regional inspection stations for a pollution test.


A QUESTION OF MERCY
Richard Selzer's article "A Question of Mercy" (Sept. 22) puts into sharp relief some concerns that arise with issues of "assisted suicide" involving physicians.
Physicians per se are not uniquely qualified to assist in life-and-death decisions.
The relationship that develops between physician and patient, in which the totality of the patient's situation is addressed, may permit the physician to assess whether the patient's desire to end his life is a rational response to the situation and whether all other avenues of relief from suffering have been exhausted.
This clearly was not the case with Selzer and the patient R., who called Selzer in to assist in his suicide.
The contraindication to his assuming this role is not the legal sanction, but the narrow, task-oriented nature of his involvement.
SUSAN B. SHURIN, M.D.
Cleveland


Landlords and Skyscrapers
To the Editor:
Jeff Kisseloff writes, "You won't find an account of  [ Albert ]  Strunsky in these pages, in part because the Strunsky dynasty died with him."


History Preserved in Mobile
FEW American cities can claim a rich and colorful history that includes occupation by three European powers, decades as a wealthy, cosmopolitan port and service as the capital of a vast colonial empire.
Although gilded French carriages no longer rumble along the shady boulevards of Mobile., Ala., and the worldwide cotton trade that created great fortunes has evaporated, a remarkable heritage and passion for tradition make Mobile one of the South's great travel attractions.
Today's visitors can wander along what Baedeker called "broad and quiet streets shaded with magnolias and live oaks" and explore historic districts that shelter a profusion of white-columned porches, ornate iron balconies and showy gardens.
The pageant of Mobile's modern history began in 1559, when the Spaniards founded a colony on traditional Choctaw and Creek lands along Mobile Bay.
Isolation and dissension among the settlers caused the Spanish to abandon their settlement after only two years and return to Mexico, but in 1710 the French moved the capital of their vast province of Louisiana to the same site and built Fort Conde to defend it against Indian forays.
As the capital of France's colonial empire, Mobile flourished, as did its reputation for elegance, formality and inspired revelry.


Sarah Bowman, Executive, Wed
Sarah Mitchell Bowman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hamilton B. Bowman of Duxbury, Mass., was married yesterday to William David Temko, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley L. Temko of Washington.
Judge Frank Kaufman of the Federal District Court in Maryland officiated at the Bel-Air Bay Club in Pacific Palisades, Calif.
Mrs.
Temko, 30 years old, is a vice president of Amblin Entertainment, a film production company in Universal City, Calif.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father owns Olde Cape Cod Stoneware in Hyannis, Mass.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13
Iraq is arming Kurds in Turkey in apparent retaliation for Turkey's cooperation with allied forces during the Persian Gulf war and despite Iraq's harsh treatment of its Kurdish minority.
The development is the first serious instance of Iraq's meddling beyond its borders.
Page 1


Now Get Politics Out of Confirmation Process; Psychiatry Abused
To the Editor:
As a psychologist, I was dismayed by the misappropriation and misuse of psychiatric terminology and principles during the hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court.
The speculative comments regarding Prof.
Anita F. Hill's mental state and personality structure by untrained, nonmedical individuals were egregious and irresponsible statements.


Topics of The Times; Ladies, Man Your Shoes
Dr.
Francesca Thompson was on "Good Morning America" the other day advising women to get into men's shoes.
Feminist backsliding?
Nope, just good medical advice.
Dr.
Thompson, a professor at Columbia University and head of the foot clinic at Manhattan's Roosevelt Hospital, said the only place women can get a running shoe that fits is the men's or boy's shoe department.
The average width of women's feet is three and two-thirds inches; most women's running shoes are narrower than that.
That's because manufacturers readily cater to misplaced vanity -- women's unwillingness to change shoe size for fear of looking clunky.


Foreign Affairs; Power In Europe
France and Germany presented their allies with an unexpected and intriguing proposition last week.
Either it means something, or nothing.
Whichever, it will have far-reaching repercussions for the future of NATO, West European unity and America's voice in Europe.
The French-German idea is to enlarge their existing joint military brigade as a step toward creating a separate West European army.
They propose to house this force under an energized Western European Union, comprised of 9 members of the 12-member European Community.
Most importantly, the Western European Union would report to the E.C. and not to NATO, where American power holds sway.


Can Eastern European Rock Survive Freedom?
"A time of madness, a time of mirrors/ A time of desperation, a time of amazement." With those words from the title song of its first major-label album, "City of Hysteria," the Czechoslovak band Pulnoc might be summing up the persecution and revolution that its members lived through.
For a band just making its worldwide debut, Pulnoc (pronounced PULL-notes) carries a long history.
Its prior incarnation, the Plastic People of the Universe, was the catalyst to the overthrow of Communism in Czechoslovakia.
Pulnoc may be the only rock band ever to have liner notes by its nation's president.
And, like Czechoslovakia, Pulnoc ("midnight" in Czech) has emerged from a dark period, when its role was clear, to an uncertain future of competing in an international free market.


When Psychiatry Is Weaponry
During the hearings on Clarence Thomas, his Republican defenders and Democratic opponents engaged in a struggle to use psychiatry to guide strategy and, in some cases, bolster arguments.
Page 23.


Crime/Mystery; In Short: Nonfiction
TIN FOR SALE  My Career in Organized Crime and the NYPD.
By John Manca and Vincent Cosgrove.
Morrow, $20.


Commercial Property: Communications Landmarks; New Technology, Old Architecture
IF owners and brokers could be entirely believed, you would think every office building in the United States had some "state-of-the-art" feature or other.
But the relentless attention to modern amenities ignores the question of what happens to high-technology buildings when the state of the art has advanced by several decades.
Three such structures in lower Manhattan -- richly colored, dramatically detailed, sharply faceted mesas that have dominated their surroundings for six decades -- were given landmark status this month as early exemplars of American Art Deco by Ralph Walker, of Voorhees, Gmelin &amp; Walker.


For Children, New York City Means Autumn Excitement
Here is a sampling of children's activities, compiled by Dulcie Leimbach, scheduled this fall in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
ALL AGES
November  FAMILY NATURE WALK, informal forays into the grounds of an arboretum, with attention given to the trees, birds and other animals that are making winter preparations; followed by a magic show.
On Nov. 17, 2 P.M., at the Planting Fields Arboretum, Planting Fields Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.
Gate admission: $3 a car.
Information: (516) 922-9201.
December  KWANZA CELEBRATION, with a lecture by a poet and teacher about the holiday's origins and suggestions about how to celebrate it, followed by a performance by Universal Language, a multi-cultural ensemble of dancers and singers.
On Dec. 7 at noon, at the Jamaica Arts Center, 161-04 Jamaica Avenue, Queens.
Admission: $5 for adults and $3 for children.
Information: (718) 658-7400.
"SHARE THE SEASON," a holiday party consisting of performances, games, refreshments and sharing many of New York's multi-cultural traditions.
From 1 to 4 P.M., Dec. 15, at the Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, Manhattan.
Admission: one ornament per family for the museum's tree.
Information: (212) 534-1672, extension 206.
"POR QUE BROOKLYN?," in conjunction with an exhibition of the same name, where David Gonzalez, a Brooklyn storyteller, will tell folk tales about magic and animals from Latin American countries and the borough.
With audience participation.
On Dec. 15 at 2 P.M. at the Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn Heights.
Admission: $2.50 for adults and $1 for children under 12.
Information: (718) 624-0890. 3 AND UP
November  "THE JEWS OF NEW AMSTERDAM," a reading and discussion of a children's book of the same name, detailing the historical passage, in 1654, of 23 Brazilian Jews trying to flee to the Netherlands who ended up in New Amsterdam.
Read by Eva Costabel, the author.
At 2 P.M. on Nov. 3, at the Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, Manhattan.
Free with museum admission fee of $6 a family.
Information: (212) 534-1672, extension 206.
NATIONAL CHILDREN'S BOOK WEEK CELEBRITY READATHON, a reading of well-known children's books in honor of Children's Book Week, a national celebration.
At the Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, on Nov. 16 between 1 and 4 P.M.
Reading, $2; museum admission, $3 a person.
Information: (718) 273-2060.
RODZ PUPPETS, who will tell the story of Oafus, an imaginary wild animal that only wants to "oaf" around in the wilderness, but is stalked by a hunter: with music and audience participation.
On Nov. 23 at noon , at the Jamaica Arts Center, 161-04 Jamaica Avenue, Queens.
Admission: $5 for adults and $3 for children.
Information: (718) 658-7400.
"WILL THE REAL AUDREY DUCK PLEASE STAND UP," a show about ducks and other birds that vie for attention, presented by Susan Linn, a Boston ventriloquist.
On Nov. 23 and 24 at 10:30 A.M. and noon, the Puppet Playhouse, Asphalt Green, 555 East 90th Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $3.50 a person.
Information and reservations: (212) 369-8890.
December  "THE LAND BELOW," a new jazz musical about a group of children who take a subway on Christmas Eve and end up going on an underground adventure where they meet a rat artist and museum mummies.
By Tada, the children's theater company.
At the Tada Theater, 120 West 28th Street, Manhattan.
Dec. 13 through Jan. 19, at 7:30 P.M. on Fridays and 1 and 3:30 P.M. on Saturdays and Sundays, with additional performances for the holidays.
Admission: $7 for adults and $5 for children.
Information and reservations: (212) 627-1732.
"WE LIKE COOKIES," a workshop with a chef who will teach children how to make their own holiday cookies, which they get to take home.
On Dec. 21 at 1, 2 and 3 P.M., at the Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston.
Workshop: $2 plus museum admission of $3 a person.
Information: (718) 273-2060. 5 AND UP
November 1 "BEADWORK, CORNHUSK DOLLS AND CRADLE BOARDS," an exhibition of American Indian objects, including dolls that represent the Six Iroquois Nations and cradle boards made of wood, fur and beads, handmade by Tammy Rahr, a Cayuga Indian.
From Nov. 13 through March 15 at the National Museum of the American Indian, Smithsonian Institution, Broadway at 155th Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $3 for adults, $2 for children 7 and up, free for children under 7.
Information: (212) 283-2420.
STORYTELLING, with stories about myths and legends of the sky told by Gerard Tsonakwa, an Abenaki Indian storyteller.
On Nov. 16 at 10:30 and 11:45 A.M. at the Hayden Planetarium, Sky Theater, Central Park West at 81st Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $8 for adults and $6 for children.
Information: (212) 769-5920 or (212) 769-5900.
"PUERTO RICO: A HISTORY IN PICTURES," a lecture, with slides, to give an overview of Puerto Rico, coordinated for the exhibition "Contrasts: 40 Years of Change and Continuity, Photographs by Jack Delano." On Nov. 17 at 2 P.M. at the Bronx Museum of the Arts, 1040 Grand Concourse, South Bronx.
Free.
Information: (212) 681-6000.
"STAR OF CHRISTMAS," a holiday sky show with a narrative traveling back 2,000 years to explore the skies of the first Christmas.
At the Hayden Planetarium, Sky Theater, Central Park West at 81st Street, Manhattan.
Nov. 27 through Jan. 1, with weekday shows at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M., Saturdays at 11 A.M., 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 P.M. and Sundays at 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 P.M.
Admission: $5 for adults and $2.50 for children.50.
Information: (212) 769-5920 or (212) 769-5900.
December  "HOLIDAY LIGHTS AND CAROLING BUS TOUR," where families can sing traditional carols, hopping on and off a bus, through Brooklyn's Bay Ridge and Bensonhurst neighborhoods.
A tour of the neighborhoods' holiday decorations and Christmas stories will also be included.
Sponsored by the Brooklyn Urban Park Rangers; on Dec. 21 starting at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Reservations: (718) 287-3400. 7 AND UP
November  "SUPER SEED SECRETS," where children 5 to 10 can learn about seeds, which that blow in the wind, grow into plants and can be eaten.
Young explorers will gather and investigate such seeds as milkweed pods, maple samaras and sweet gumballs, dissect them using hand lenses and create seed mosaics.
On Nov. 2 from 10 A.M. to noon.
At the New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx.
Admission: $11 for members and $12 for nonmembers.
Information and registration: (212) 220-8982.
"HOME VIDEOS: EDIT AND ADD," a workshop where participants learn to edit their home videos (VHS-SP speed) by adding special effects and sound effects.
Take your own video camera and a blank tape.
At the Media Center of the Children's Museum of Manhattan, 212 West 83d Street, Nov. 2 at 1:45 P.M.
Workshop fee: $1.
Museum admission: $4 for adults and children.
Information: (212) 721-1234.
ZOO CLUB, for children 8 to 12 who "share a fascination and love for wildlife," with a focus on animal survival, with games and other participatory activities.
Meetings: Nov. 2, Dec. 7 and Jan. 11, with three additional meetings between January and June.
Sessions 10 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. or 1:30 to 4 P.M. at the Bronx Zoo, Bronx River Parkway and Fordham Road.
Fee: $90 for members, $95 for nonmembers for all six meetings.
Registration: (212) 220-6854.
"PRODUCTS OF THE TROPICAL FOREST," a workshop where children ages 8 and up can learn about products derived from tropical forests, like chocolate, chewing gum, medicines and bananas.
With a preparation of tropical ice-cream sundae.
On Nov. 23 from 2 to 4 P.M. at the Staten Island Zoo, 614 Broadway, West Brighton.
Fee: $4 for members, $6 for nonmembers.
Registration: (718) 442-3100.


Morales Going Home
FERNIE MORALES, who underwent brain surgery after losing a bantamweight title fight on Sept. 21, is scheduled to fly home to El Paso tomorrow.
Morales has been in California since a blood clot was removed from his brain, just hours after he lost the the fight for the International Boxing Federation bantamweight world title to ORLANDO CANIZALES in Indio, Calif.
Morales was in a coma for four days following the surgery.
Morales will get daily rehabilitation treatment as an outpatient at Providence Memorial Hospital in El Paso. (AP)


'Circa 1492': An Enormous, Magnificent Muddle
It would require a better navigator than Columbus to make ultimate sense of the course charted by "Circa 1492: Art in the Age of Exploration," the gigantic and multifarious exhibition at the National Gallery of Art, through Jan. 12.
If not for the sheer quality of the nearly 600 objects from Europe, Africa, the Americas and Asia that have been assembled for the occasion, one might feel an irresistible urge in sections marked I.C.2 or III.E to pull out a map and seek more direct passage to the exit.
But sprawling though it is in conception and size, the show leaves no doubt about at least one of its key points: around the time Columbus undertook his voyages, the level of artistic production elsewhere in the world was comparable to what was being produced at one of the high points of European culture.
In the midst of a widespread re-examination of the meaning of those voyages and of the impact of European colonization of the Americas, this point is not a banal one for the nation's art gallery to make.
By putting, as it does, Benin sculptures and Leonardo drawings, Japanese lacquerware and Aztec stone carvings, Diquis jewelry and frescoes by Botticelli on roughly equal footing, "Circa 1492" argues for an ecumenism that is both timely and welcome.


In Search of a Manager
Milwaukee General Manager SAL BANDO said he might add two Pittsburgh coaches to his list of prospects for the job of Brewers manager.
Bando, who dismissed Manager TOM TREBELHORN a week ago, said he might talk with Pirates coaches GENE LAMONT and TOMMY SANDT.
He has interviewed three candidates and plans to talk tomorrow with Toronto Blue Jays batting coach GENE TENACE. (AP)


Crime/Mystery; Hooker Malone Is Missing: A Serial Mystery
The arm looked real, but it was the blood that did it.
Certainly the blood was real.
A muscular left arm with the sleeve of a New York Yankees jersey on one end and a pitcher's glove on the other.
It lay across the black leather seat of a Porsche 941 parked on Riverside Drive.
Within the pitcher's glove was a bloody baseball and a piece of paper.
Frankie Skoyles didn't bother with the paper.
All he knew was he wanted to get away quick.
It was 11 P.M. and there were still people about.
But first he'd pull the hook on the fire alarm box to bring the law.
He might steal cars for a living, but that didn't mean he wasn't a fan.
The way Frankie saw it, if baseball was a four-season sport, he wouldn't steal cars at all.
Of course he recognized the Porsche, but it was the vanity plate that tipped him off: MALONE, for Hooker Malone, star New York Yankees pitcher, who tomorrow night would start the seventh game of the World Series against Cincinnati.
Not that Malone had been a star so far.
He had won Game 1 by a single run, then clutched in Game 4, got pulled in the fifth inning and the Yankees had lost by three.
But that morning in The Post he claimed to be "psyched" and in The Times he said he was "prepared." He'd been seeing a shrink and was eager.


CAMBODIAN TREATY TO BE SIGNED SOON
After tortuous negotiations, Cambodia's four warring factions have at last agreed to sign a peace accord here on Wednesday to end their 13-year conflict and prepare the devastated nation for free elections.
The agreement will require the United Nations to play perhaps its biggest peacekeeping role ever, with thousands of foreign soldiers and civilians due to assume responsibility for monitoring a cease-fire, disarming combatants, organizing elections and insuring that they are fair.


King Hoping for Fight Before Trial
Evander Holyfield's defense of his heavyweight title against Mike Tyson, originally scheduled for Nov. 8 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev., will apparently take place in January.
"We're considering the week of Jan. 20," Don King said today.
King, the promoter for Tyson, who sustained a rib-cage injury that forced the postponement, spoke at a Las Vegas news conference that could be viewed here by close-circuit broadcast.
The news conference was also attended by Tyson.


Perspectives: The Police Station on 67th St.; 6-Year Construction Nears the End
AS construction headaches go, the Police Precinct 19 project on East 67th Street never reached the migraine level of far bigger public jobs.
But troubles there were, and in a conspicuous location filled with sidewalk critics and irate neighbors.
Troubles mean delay.
Six years after demolition for new construction began, completion is at hand.
Key participants are willing to play Monday morning quaterback.


Squatters in City Buildings Face Eviction by the Landlord
Until recently, New York's strategy for dealing with squatters in dozens of city-owned buildings has been to look the other way unless they were endangering themselves or others, or unless the city wanted the building back.
Now, city officials say, looking the other way is becoming impossible.
For one thing, almost none of the hundreds of buildings that ended up in city hands after their owners walked away rather than pay taxes or satisfy tenants are left.
Most have either been sold to developers or promised to nonprofit community groups.
For another, several buildings with squatters inside have caught fire or collapsed recently.
Last month, after a 31-year-old firefighter died of injuries suffered in a Brooklyn building supposedly set ablaze by a squatter, Mayor David N. Dinkins declared that all squatters and vagrants would be removed from city-owned buildings where they were fire hazards.


LOVE AND LEARN
I was struck by the irony of the author declaring herself a feminist, yet announcing that having a "crush" on a male student not only has made her a better person (defined as someone who devotes more care to looking "terrific all the time") but also has made her a better teacher (by encouraging her to pay more attention to her female students now that they have become her sexual "rivals.")
Welcome to the world of post-feminist feminism, where women grow "more animated" and "healthier" when they are mooning over men and learn to notice and appreciate other women in a professional setting only as their competitors for male favor, as collections of "firm curves, smooth skin, shiny hair."


A Hardscrabble Game And a Syracuse Rally
The Syracuse players called it the most gut-wrenching game they had played all season.
Pittsburgh's head coach said it was like two heavyweights "fighting tooth and nail, toe to toe" for 60 minutes.
The accounts of this afternoon's game between Syracuse (6-2) and Pittsburgh (5-2) may vary, but there was general agreement by both sides that the Orangemen's last-minute 31-27 victory over Pittsburgh this afternoon was a midseason classic.


Making a Difference; On a Soapbox for Chips
No one ever accused T. J. Rodgers, president and chief executive of the Cypress Semiconductor Corporation, of avoiding the soapbox.
The chip industry's most outspoken maverick, Mr.
Rodgers routinely blasts larger companies as litigious dinosaurs and lectures Congress on the futility of subsidizing producers who can no longer compete on their own.
Last week, Mr.
Rodgers won a long-running battle with one of those companies.
The International Trade Commission ruled that Cypress and four other United States chip companies had infringed on a semiconductor packaging technology patent held by Texas Instruments.
But the commission also ruled that an alternative process the companies are now using does not infringe, effectively nullifying Texas Instruments' efforts to block imports of chips designed by the five companies but manufactured in other countries.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
SHADOWS
By Dennis Haseley.
Illustrated by Leslie Bowman. 74 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $12.95. (Ages 8 to 12)


Frances Daniels Weds Brodie Cobb
Frances Stewart Daniels, the daughter of Edwin A. Daniels Jr. and Sidney Erwin Daniels, both of Baltimore, was married yesterday in Garrison, Md., to Brodie Lyle Cobb, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Brodie Cobb of Dallas.
The Rev.
William P. Baxter Jr. officiated at the Episcopal Church of St.
Thomas.
Mrs.
Cobb, 30 years old, graduated from Tulane University, as did her husband.
She is a freelance events manager in San Diego.
Her father is the executive director of the Rouse Company Charitable Foundation in Columbia, Md.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
MARCO POLO: His Notebook.
Written and illustrated by Susan L. Roth.
Doubleday. $14.95. (Ages 7 and up) The source of this fictional diary is "The Travels of Marco Polo." In short journal entries this handsome slim volume captures some of the Italian explorer's great adventures as he and his father and uncle traveled all the way through Asia on a journey that took 24 years.
The mostly black-and-white illustrations are in the style of period woodcuts and drawings.


Headliners; Case Unclosed
After re-investigating a 1989 explosion that killed 47 sailors aboard the battleship Iowa, the Navy has concluded that it was not, after all, necessarily a crime of the heart.
Naval investigators had originally found that Gunner's Mate Clayton M. Hartwig "most probably" caused the explosion with an act of suicidal sabotage brought on by the sailor's despondency over a failed relationship with a shipmate.
But Evelyn Hartwig could not believe her son was at fault and was convinced that the Navy could not prove he was.
After Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations, agreed last week, saying there was no clear and convincing proof of Mr.
Hartwig's guilt, he apologized to the Hartwig family.
"They gave us the words I wanted to hear," said Mrs.
Hartwig.
But with the mystery once again unsolved, other grieving families were dissatisfied.
"All we want to know is what happened to our sons," said one mother.
"We want to know why they died."


Forum to Air Sexual Bias in Courts
TERMING the issue of sexual harassment "just the tip of the iceberg," Justice Samuel G. Fredman of State Supreme Court has announced that the Westchester court system will consider that subject and related matters at a public forum this week.
After nearly a year of planning, the Committee to Promote General Fairness in the Courts has scheduled the forum for Tuesday at 7:30 P.M. in the Ceremonial Courtroom of the Courthouse, at 111 Grove Street in White Plains.


Candidates Seek to Turn Voter Anger To Advantage
THIS is the year of the "fed up" candidate in New Jersey's legislative races.
With the recession maintaining its hold on the economy and many voters still upset over Gov.
Jim Florio's quick enactment of a $2.8 billion tax program after his election two years ago, many candidates -- including some incumbents -- are trying to appeal to voters by adopting an angry, anti-government posture.


Is It 'Punk'? No. Is It 'Old Punk?' No. 'New Wave?' No, but Feel It Rocking!
Every week a small but fervent band of alternative-music devotees in their early 20's makes a circuit of Manhattan clubs, most of them open only one night out of seven.
"I go out every night," said Rona Geller, "because I live with my parents." Duane Monsky said: "I'm a slacker. I have no job, no money, nothing. But I like to go out and hear music."


Defending Stephen King
To the Editor:
I am a well-educated individual who reads Voltaire, Colette and Flaubert.
I also read Stephen King.
Joe Queenan, who reviewed Mr.
King's "Needful Things" (Sept. 29), should get off his pretentious high horse.


For Children, New York City Means Autumn Excitement
Here is a sampling of children's activities, compiled by Dulcie Leimbach, scheduled this fall in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
ALL AGES
November  FAMILY NATURE WALK, informal forays into the grounds of an arboretum, with attention given to the trees, birds and other animals that are making winter preparations; followed by a magic show.
On Nov. 17, 2 P.M., at the Planting Fields Arboretum, Planting Fields Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.
Gate admission: $3 a car.
Information: (516) 922-9201.
December  KWANZA CELEBRATION, with a lecture by a poet and teacher about the holiday's origins and suggestions about how to celebrate it, followed by a performance by Universal Language, a multi-cultural ensemble of dancers and singers.
On Dec. 7 at noon, at the Jamaica Arts Center, 161-04 Jamaica Avenue, Queens.
Admission: $5 for adults and $3 for children.
Information: (718) 658-7400.
"SHARE THE SEASON," a holiday party consisting of performances, games, refreshments and sharing many of New York's multi-cultural traditions.
From 1 to 4 P.M., Dec. 15, at the Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, Manhattan.
Admission: one ornament per family for the museum's tree.
Information: (212) 534-1672, extension 206.
"POR QUE BROOKLYN?," in conjunction with an exhibition of the same name, where David Gonzalez, a Brooklyn storyteller, will tell folk tales about magic and animals from Latin American countries and the borough.
With audience participation.
On Dec. 15 at 2 P.M. at the Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn Heights.
Admission: $2.50 for adults and $1 for children under 12.
Information: (718) 624-0890. 3 AND UP
November  "THE JEWS OF NEW AMSTERDAM," a reading and discussion of a children's book of the same name, detailing the historical passage, in 1654, of 23 Brazilian Jews trying to flee to the Netherlands who ended up in New Amsterdam.
Read by Eva Costabel, the author.
At 2 P.M. on Nov. 3, at the Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, Manhattan.
Free with museum admission fee of $6 a family.
Information: (212) 534-1672, extension 206.
NATIONAL CHILDREN'S BOOK WEEK CELEBRITY READATHON, a reading of well-known children's books in honor of Children's Book Week, a national celebration.
At the Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, on Nov. 16 between 1 and 4 P.M.
Reading, $2; museum admission, $3 a person.
Information: (718) 273-2060.
RODZ PUPPETS, who will tell the story of Oafus, an imaginary wild animal that only wants to "oaf" around in the wilderness, but is stalked by a hunter: with music and audience participation.
On Nov. 23 at noon , at the Jamaica Arts Center, 161-04 Jamaica Avenue, Queens.
Admission: $5 for adults and $3 for children.
Information: (718) 658-7400.
"WILL THE REAL AUDREY DUCK PLEASE STAND UP," a show about ducks and other birds that vie for attention, presented by Susan Linn, a Boston ventriloquist.
On Nov. 23 and 24 at 10:30 A.M. and noon, the Puppet Playhouse, Asphalt Green, 555 East 90th Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $3.50 a person.
Information and reservations: (212) 369-8890.
December  "THE LAND BELOW," a new jazz musical about a group of children who take a subway on Christmas Eve and end up going on an underground adventure where they meet a rat artist and museum mummies.
By Tada, the children's theater company.
At the Tada Theater, 120 West 28th Street, Manhattan.
Dec. 13 through Jan. 19, at 7:30 P.M. on Fridays and 1 and 3:30 P.M. on Saturdays and Sundays, with additional performances for the holidays.
Admission: $7 for adults and $5 for children.
Information and reservations: (212) 627-1732.
"WE LIKE COOKIES," a workshop with a chef who will teach children how to make their own holiday cookies, which they get to take home.
On Dec. 21 at 1, 2 and 3 P.M., at the Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston.
Workshop: $2 plus museum admission of $3 a person.
Information: (718) 273-2060. 5 AND UP
November  "BEADWORK, CORNHUSK DOLLS AND CRADLE BOARDS," an exhibition of American Indian objects, including dolls that represent the Six Iroquois Nations and cradle boards made of wood, fur and beads, handmade by Tammy Rahr, a Cayuga Indian.
From Nov. 13 through March 15 at the National Museum of the American Indian, Smithsonian Institution, Broadway at 155th Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $3 for adults, $2 for children 7 and up, free for children under 7.
Information: (212) 283-2420.
STORYTELLING, with stories about myths and legends of the sky told by Gerard Tsonakwa, an Abenaki Indian storyteller.
On Nov. 16 at 10:30 and 11:45 A.M. at the Hayden Planetarium, Sky Theater, Central Park West at 81st Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $8 for adults and $6 for children.
Information: (212) 769-5920 or (212) 769-5900.
"PUERTO RICO: A HISTORY IN PICTURES," a lecture, with slides, to give an overview of Puerto Rico, coordinated for the exhibition "Contrasts: 40 Years of Change and Continuity, Photographs by Jack Delano." On Nov. 17 at 2 P.M. at the Bronx Museum of the Arts, 1040 Grand Concourse, South Bronx.
Free.
Information: (212) 681-6000.
"STAR OF CHRISTMAS," a holiday sky show with a narrative traveling back 2,000 years to explore the skies of the first Christmas.
At the Hayden Planetarium, Sky Theater, Central Park West at 81st Street, Manhattan.
Nov. 27 through Jan. 1, with weekday shows at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M., Saturdays at 11 A.M., 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 P.M. and Sundays at 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 P.M.
Admission: $5 for adults and $2.50 for children.50.
Information: (212) 769-5920 or (212) 769-5900.
December  "HOLIDAY LIGHTS AND CAROLING BUS TOUR," where families can sing traditional carols, hopping on and off a bus, through Brooklyn's Bay Ridge and Bensonhurst neighborhoods.
A tour of the neighborhoods' holiday decorations and Christmas stories will also be included.
Sponsored by the Brooklyn Urban Park Rangers; on Dec. 21 starting at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Reservations: (718) 287-3400. 7 AND UP
November  "SUPER SEED SECRETS," where children 5 to 10 can learn about seeds, which that blow in the wind, grow into plants and can be eaten.
Young explorers will gather and investigate such seeds as milkweed pods, maple samaras and sweet gumballs, dissect them using hand lenses and create seed mosaics.
On Nov. 2 from 10 A.M. to noon.
At the New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx.
Admission: $11 for members and $12 for nonmembers.
Information and registration: (212) 220-8982.
"HOME VIDEOS: EDIT AND ADD," a workshop where participants learn to edit their home videos (VHS-SP speed) by adding special effects and sound effects.
Take your own video camera and a blank tape.
At the Media Center of the Children's Museum of Manhattan, 212 West 83d Street, Nov. 2 at 1:45 P.M.
Workshop fee: $1.
Museum admission: $4 for adults and children.
Information: (212) 721-1234.
ZOO CLUB, for children 8 to 12 who "share a fascination and love for wildlife," with a focus on animal survival, with games and other participatory activities.
Meetings: Nov. 2, Dec. 7 and Jan. 11, with three additional meetings between January and June.
Sessions 10 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. or 1:30 to 4 P.M. at the Bronx Zoo, Bronx River Parkway and Fordham Road.
Fee: $90 for members, $95 for nonmembers for all six meetings.
Registration: (212) 220-6854.
"PRODUCTS OF THE TROPICAL FOREST," a workshop where children ages 8 and up can learn about products derived from tropical forests, like chocolate, chewing gum, medicines and bananas.
With a preparation of tropical ice-cream sundae.
On Nov. 23 from 2 to 4 P.M. at the Staten Island Zoo, 614 Broadway, West Brighton.
Fee: $4 for members, $6 for nonmembers.
Registration: (718) 442-3100.


Rating Maris On Baseball Merit
To the Sports Editor:
Charles R. Allen Jr. ("The Man Behind the Asterisk: Another Side of Maris," The Times, Sept. 29) seems to believe that because Roger Maris fought anti-Semitism (an effort that we can all admire), he therefore belongs in the Baseball Hall of Fame.
I see no connection between hypothesis and conclusion.
We don't normally elect outfielders who hit .260 lifetime, with 1,325 hits and 275 home runs, to the Hall of Fame.
One record-breaking feat does not an immortal make, however admirable his off-the-field activities.
DAVID M. BLOOM Levittown, L.I.


BROOKLYN'S SECRET GARDEN
IF OUT-OF-TOWN GUESTS find that the stress of the city calls for a day in the country, but I cannot take them because my car has been stolen, we head for the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Set near Grand Army Plaza, next to the Brooklyn Museum, the garden is considered by some who should know to be one of the great botanical gardens in the world -- and by others the best kept secret in New York.
The gardens span some 50 beautifully designed and meticulously maintained acres.
Their wonders are seasonal and a brochure is available informing the visitor of what is in splendor when.
In fall, poplars and birches turn golden, berries abound.
In early spring the hill of the daffodils would give Wordsworth pause.
The valley of the lilacs -- violet, white, deep purple -- awakes even the most jaded New York nose.
The Japanese garden, with its ducks and footbridges and Shinto shrine, is always a place for contemplative repose.
And in summer I have stood amazed at the promenade of azaleas and walked like a queen through the rose garden.


CAMPUS LIFE: Tulsa; Schools in U.S. And Russia Set Up An Exchange Plan
The Russian city of Zelenograd has just about everything an entrepreneurial wannabe could want: an electronics industry ready to convert from military production to consumer products; a work force willing to join a free market economy, even a business school.
What it doesn't have is a B-school curriculum that teaches Western marketing and management skills.
That is what four delegates from Zelenograd came to the University of Tulsa last weekend to get.
"This university knows American business very well, and its curriculum and syllabus answers all questions on the free market system," said Anatoly Larionov, director of the Zelenograd Business School and a member of the delegation.
"That's why we came here."


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League  NEW YORK JETS -- Placed Freeman McNeil, running back, on injured reserve.
Activated Mike Haight, guard, from injured reserve, and A.B.
Brown, running back, from the physically-unable-to-perform list.


Sunday Dinner; Going Chinese? 1,000 Choices Contend
New York City has the largest Chinese population in the nation, and a corollary to that is a large and ever changing crop of Chinese restaurants.
Chinatown restaurants tend to be Cantonese in style; in contrast, uptown Manhattan spots are Szechuan, Hunan, Pekingese or some blend of the three.
Here is a sampling of restaurants. .
David K's
1115 Third Avenue, at 65th Street, in Manhattan, (212) 371-9090 -- The food at this Chinese restaurant, on the whole, is pure and clean tasting with hardly any deep frying, a minimal use of fats and oils and no monosodium glutamate.
The front room, with its glass wall facing busy Third Avenue, is more bustling than the larger back room, with its colorful fabric-covered banquettes and easy lighting.
Commodious wicker chairs in both rooms as well as pretty china and heavy silverplate table service make for an elegant setting.


With Islanders' Turmoil, Captain Has Heavy Burden
He likens his 11th season as an Islander to having to "put my head to the grindstone." He's captain of the team he has played with for his entire professional career.
But with the moribund franchise for sale and with the holdout of his assistant captain, Pat LaFontaine, depriving the club of its sole superstar, the dubious honor of this captaincy, and the job it represents, has begun to wear somewhat thin on Brent Sutter.
"As long as I'm wearing this uniform, I'm going to do everything in my power to help us win," said Sutter, who has 8 points after six games, "but all the unknowns make it hard. I don't know what's going to happen here, but I want it to happen soon: I'm not prepared to wait four, five or six years."


German Train Is for Hire
The Red Prussian is the new name given to the train that was used by officials of the East German Government and is now being offered by the German railroad network as a party or meeting train.
There are 36 cars from which to choose, says Germanrail, and any number of them can be combined to accommodate groups of from 25 to 300 people.
There is no scheduled service, but the Red Prussian can be attached to any regularly scheduled train or routed independently anywhere in Europe for one or several days for board meeting, conference or gala ball.
The cars, including seven sleeping and six dining cars, are "tastefully decorated," heated and air-conditioned, Germanrail says.
More information: (212) 308-3100.


Political Talk
Oh, That Senate
Being a Senator means having to explain your vote, or maybe having to explain why you missed a vote.
And sometimes it even means having to explain that you cannot vote.


Corrections
An article on page 17 of the Arts and Leisure section today about rappers in movies misstates the involvement of the directors Doug McHenry and George Jackson with two movies.
They co-produced "Krush Groove" and were not involved with "House Party."


Tourists From Abroad Discover Mid-America
Aided by a weak dollar and bargain-basement air fares, visitors from overseas are flocking to the United States in numbers that have set records five years in a row.
But what has startled travel experts is that more and more overseas visitors are turning up in states like Kansas and Nebraska, Kentucky and Utah.
Having seen the theme parks and the major cities, these tourists -- especially repeat visitors, who last year made up 76 percent of all overseas visitors -- are traveling to Indian reservations, staying at dude ranches, hiking through remote national parks and finding their way to places far off the beaten track.


Icons or Eyesores?
To the Editor:
Chronic nostalgia, as Stephen Drucker notes in "Billboards: Yesterday's Pollutants, Today's Nostalgia"  [ Sept. 29 ] , is indeed a dangerous condition.
It is dangerous not only because it blinds us to yesterday's reality but because it blinds us equally to today's.


New Yorkers, etc.
It's bad enough that rainy days are usually miserable and bone-chilling and result in frizzed curly hair and bedraggled straight hair.
It's bad enough that people have to jump puddles and avoid the often torrential sprays that drivers seem to aim at pedestrians.
It's bad enough that shoes are ruined and coats spattered.
Most of these things have to be borne; they're either fate or beyond individual control or a little of both.
But there is one aspect of rainy days that has nothing to do with fate.
It is also not beyond individual control, although that doesn't mean a thing because individuals, even the nicest, are generally either oblivious to what they are doing or unconcerned.
Who can worry about umbrellas when the world and the country and Congress and the city are in such a mess?
The prevailing attitude is that umbrellas are just another urban hazard, and a minor one at that, and come on, lighten up.
What matters a jab here and a stab there?
The jabs and stabs aren't fatal, they aren't even serious.


Sampling Singapore's Grand Buffet
ASIA HAS THREE GREAT EATING cities: Tokyo, Hong Kong and Singapore.
You go to Tokyo for chic and for variety -- a high-tech sushi bar one night, a superb French restaurant the next -- and depart sated but impoverished.
Hong Kong is all neon and grit, a place where you can sample every conceivable variety of Cantonese and Sichuan cuisine, and a bit more, while joining in the frenzied speculation about whether the city's spirit can survive its return to China in 1997.
But it is in Singapore that every flavor in Southeast Asia seems to blend easily into a single bowl.
Since this city-state of 2.7 million people broke off from Malaysia 26 years ago to become one of the most remarkable industrial success stories of the 20th century, its population has been a melange of Chinese, Malaysian, Indonesian and Indian.
And so has its food.


Congress Still Torn on Gun Control by Complex Regional Divisions
The gun control debate on Capitol Hill has evolved into an annual political fight that is a more reliable barometer of the divisions between urban and rural interests than of those between Republicans and Democrats.
This week, the murders of 23 people in Killeen, Tex., cast a new pall over the debate, as members of the House agonized aloud over gun provisions in a sweeping anticrime bill that would have banned the manufacture of certain semiautomatic firearms.


High-Minded Message
To the Editor:
Perhaps I missed some part of James Gorman's article on what made the original "Star Trek" (and "The Next Generation") series so popular  [ "It's a Wonderful Galaxy," Sept. 15 ] .
But I don't think he mentioned the intrinsic hope for global peace and justice that arose from watching the crew (and the cast), which included a capable black female at a computer, a Russian ensign, an Asian helmsman, a Scottish chief engineer and a "half-human, half-Vulcan temple of logic." And all of this in 1967 at the height of the civil-rights struggle and the cold war.
HEDWIN NAIMARK  Ann Arbor, Me.


Death Takes a Holiday, In an Apple Tree
George C. Scott has just turned up at Circle in the Square in "On Borrowed Time," unless it is Santa Claus on a late-summer sabbatical.
The raspy voice that sounds rather like pebbles in a Cuisinart leads me to believe that it is Mr.
Scott.
But the thatch of hair and the whiskers -- the color of snow and sunshine -- argue for Santa.
That would also explain the potbelly, although it's not so much a potbelly, really, as a barrel chest that has settled with time and contentment.
And the blue eyes, bluer than the worn work overalls he's wearing, blue as cornflowers by a country roadside, have to be considered as corroborating evidence.


'Unique Individualists' Show
ONCE upon a time the term "master" reflected the consensus of the cognoscenti.
But today, the designation too often means that the artist has been put out to pasture, there to graze safe from criticism, or else that there is nothing left to say about him.
A minor example of this devaluation is "New Jersey Masters," at the Noyes Museum here.
The show's release says that "Masters ascend from the ranks of the ordinary" much as "cream rises to the top of milk." In his brochure introduction, the show's curator, Mel Leipzig, calls the 10 artists he has chosen "unique individualists," presumably to distinguish them from the ordinary kind.


Aguilera, a Quick Study, Now at Head of the Class
If Rick Aguilera has one regret as he forges on in his still relatively new field of relief pitching, it's that he did not take advantage of a sage veteran like Jeff Reardon when he had the chance.
"I wish I could have picked Jeff's brain while he was here," Aguilera said with a genuine air of regret in his voice.


How a Trip to India Turned a Professor Into a Collector
Samuel Eilenberg's first trip to Bombay in 1953, to teach mathematics for a semester, transformed him as a collector.
"There I really saw Indian and Southeast Asian art for the first time and fell in love with it," he said recently.
"I particularly liked the metalwork."
Over the next 35 years, Mr.
Eilenberg pursued Asian bronzes in India, Pakistan, Indonesia and Thailand as well as in Europe.
Although limited in income as a professor of mathematics at Columbia University, he bought hundreds of exquisitely detailed metal and stone artifacts -- deities with many arms, creatures depicted as half human, half bird, an elephant-headed god and a voluptuous goddess with clubs and spears in her hair.
These images are among the 187 bronze and stone objects exhibited in "The Lotus Transcendent: Indian and Southeast Asian Art From the Samuel Eilenberg Collection," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art through next June.


U.S. and 4 Other Big Arms Makers Adopt Guidelines on Sales
The United States, the Soviet Union, China, Britain and France have agreed to share information with one another about their sales of tanks, artillery, military aircraft, ships and some missile systems to countries in the Middle East.
The United States Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs, Richard A. Clarke, said on Friday that the five countries had also agreed on guidelines for the export of conventional weapons anywhere in the world.


Love Potion


In Ancient Edinburgh, a Past Recaptured
CITY?"
"Edinburgh."


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have a flagstone patio on top of a poured-concrete garage.
Some of the flagstones have come loose, and I have been told that the concrete has to be chiseled to a depth of about one inch if the stones are to be cemented again.
I also have been told there are new glue-type products that can be used.
A.
Mastic adhesives suitable for this purpose have been available for some time, but probably the strongest adhesive is a two-part epoxy cement.
There are dozens of brands on the market.


How to Avoid Bare Patches in Spring
THOUGH it may seem academic to many gardeners, it should be pointed out that there is a huge difference between fall and spring gardens.
What seems prolific and filled with foliage now will be barren and empty come spring.
All this is another way of saying to think spring when planting bulbs now.
Too many gardeners, especially those who are new to the experience, forget that many of the plants they see now will not be there in spring, because the plants have reputations as lazy risers.
And if there are no plants to fill these voids, the bare spots will remain until the late risers begin to push up from the soil.


Arms Scientists Report Pressure to Skip Conference
The Department of Energy is pressuring scientists at two Federal centers for warhead design to shun multinational seminars on arms control to avoid undermining Government negotiations, several American scientists said Friday.
Energy Department officials have told scientists at the centers, the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California and the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, that they could attend such seminars on their own time and at their own expense.
But scientists said the agency's underlying message went beyond discouraging participation in any scientific conference with Soviet or Chinese scientists.


CLASS STRUGGLE
The main point of the controversial California textbook reforms seems to be to avoid at all costs what is disparagingly referred to as a "Eurocentric" approach in the history and social-studies curriculum.
But why should Eurocentrism be decried?
Non-Europeans have made significant contributions to American life, but it remains a fact that this country was founded by people of Western European, predominantly English stock who bequeathed to us our language and basic social and political institutions, and thus created the matrix within which American society still functions.
More than that, Europeans more than any others have shaped the modern world.
Let the anti-Eurocentrists visit the United Nations, and they will hear speakers from every continent frame their discourse on political, legal, economic and scientific matters in terms and concepts that originated in Europe.


Stardom, a Glitzy Steppingstone to Mediocrity
I once read a book where a guy said: "If a fly can walk on the ceiling upside down, why can't I? I'm bigger yet."
You may think that guy was crazy; I think he was probably just a celebrity.
Because all these high-paid actors and athletes and singers keep trying to walk on the ceiling upside down.
Not satisfied with doing what they do well, they want to branch out and try something they do lousy.
And I'm not just talking about Roseanne Arnold wrestling the national anthem to its knees.


Washington Adds Monument Honoring Officers Who Died
This city of monuments to former Presidents, former generals and veterans of former wars has a new monument, this one to the thousands of law-enforcement officers who have died in the line of duty.
The monument consists of two low curving marble walls inscribed with the names of the dead officers.
In the center, is a pool of water and a cluster of pillars.
The monument was dedicated on Tuesday.


When Medical Costs Benefit Employers
To the Editor:
While there is undoubtedly merit in encouraging employees to safeguard their health, some plans described in "Rewarding Employees for 'Wellness' " (Managing, Sept. 15) fail to take into account that some medical costs may benefit an employer.
For many people who must live with a chronic illness, minimal medical support allows them to work at full capacity.


Sports of The Times; Minnesota Now Sports Stage, U.S.A.
IT'S nearly winter here.
Most tree limbs are stark against the sky.
Only a few still hold their yellow leaves.
Snow reports for areas of Minnesota and Wisconsin are on the radio.
Cold winds blow in from the prairie.
But the World Series between the Minnesota Twins and the Atlanta Braves opened last night in the 70-degree comfort of the Metrodome.
Traditionalists despise domes.
When baseball is played on plastic grass, it's more billiards than baseball.
"This ball park," Bobby Cox, the Braves' manager, was saying, "is more different than any other ball park."


For Children, New York City Means Autumn Excitement
Here is a sampling of children's activities, compiled by Dulcie Leimbach, scheduled this fall in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
ALL AGES
November  FAMILY NATURE WALK, informal forays into the grounds of an arboretum, with attention given to the trees, birds and other animals that are making winter preparations; followed by a magic show.
On Nov. 17, 2 P.M., at the Planting Fields Arboretum, Planting Fields Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.
Gate admission: $3 a car.
Information: (516) 922-9201.
December  KWANZA CELEBRATION, with a lecture by a poet and teacher about the holiday's origins and suggestions about how to celebrate it, followed by a performance by Universal Language, a multi-cultural ensemble of dancers and singers.
On Dec. 7 at noon, at the Jamaica Arts Center, 161-04 Jamaica Avenue, Queens.
Admission: $5 for adults and $3 for children.
Information: (718) 658-7400.
"SHARE THE SEASON," a holiday party consisting of performances, games, refreshments and sharing many of New York's multi-cultural traditions.
From 1 to 4 P.M., Dec. 15, at the Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, Manhattan.
Admission: one ornament per family for the museum's tree.
Information: (212) 534-1672, extension 206.
"POR QUE BROOKLYN?," in conjunction with an exhibition of the same name, where David Gonzalez, a Brooklyn storyteller, will tell folk tales about magic and animals from Latin American countries and the borough.
With audience participation.
On Dec. 15 at 2 P.M. at the Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn Heights.
Admission: $2.50 for adults and $1 for children under 12.
Information: (718) 624-0890. 3 AND UP
November  "THE JEWS OF NEW AMSTERDAM," a reading and discussion of a children's book of the same name, detailing the historical passage, in 1654, of 23 Brazilian Jews trying to flee to the Netherlands who ended up in New Amsterdam.
Read by Eva Costabel, the author.
At 2 P.M. on Nov. 3, at the Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, Manhattan.
Free with museum admission fee of $6 a family.
Information: (212) 534-1672, extension 206.
NATIONAL CHILDREN'S BOOK WEEK CELEBRITY READATHON, a reading of well-known children's books in honor of Children's Book Week, a national celebration.
At the Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, on Nov. 16 between 1 and 4 P.M.
Reading, $2; museum admission, $3 a person.
Information: (718) 273-2060.
RODZ PUPPETS, who will tell the story of Oafus, an imaginary wild animal that only wants to "oaf" around in the wilderness, but is stalked by a hunter: with music and audience participation.
On Nov. 23 at noon , at the Jamaica Arts Center, 161-04 Jamaica Avenue, Queens.
Admission: $5 for adults and $3 for children.
Information: (718) 658-7400.
"WILL THE REAL AUDREY DUCK PLEASE STAND UP," a show about ducks and other birds that vie for attention, presented by Susan Linn, a Boston ventriloquist.
On Nov. 23 and 24 at 10:30 A.M. and noon, the Puppet Playhouse, Asphalt Green, 555 East 90th Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $3.50 a person.
Information and reservations: (212) 369-8890.
December  "THE LAND BELOW," a new jazz musical about a group of children who take a subway on Christmas Eve and end up going on an underground adventure where they meet a rat artist and museum mummies.
By Tada, the children's theater company.
At the Tada Theater, 120 West 28th Street, Manhattan.
Dec. 13 through Jan. 19, at 7:30 P.M. on Fridays and 1 and 3:30 P.M. on Saturdays and Sundays, with additional performances for the holidays.
Admission: $7 for adults and $5 for children.
Information and reservations: (212) 627-1732.
"WE LIKE COOKIES," a workshop with a chef who will teach children how to make their own holiday cookies, which they get to take home.
On Dec. 21 at 1, 2 and 3 P.M., at the Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston.
Workshop: $2 plus museum admission of $3 a person.
Information: (718) 273-2060. 5 AND UP
November  "BEADWORK, CORNHUSK DOLLS AND CRADLE BOARDS," an exhibition of American Indian objects, including dolls that represent the Six Iroquois Nations and cradle boards made of wood, fur and beads, handmade by Tammy Rahr, a Cayuga Indian.
From Nov. 13 through March 15 at the National Museum of the American Indian, Smithsonian Institution, Broadway at 155th Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $3 for adults, $2 for children 7 and up, free for children under 7.
Information: (212) 283-2420.
STORYTELLING, with stories about myths and legends of the sky told by Gerard Tsonakwa, an Abenaki Indianstoryteller.
On Nov. 16 at 10:30 and 11:45 A.M. at the Hayden Planetarium, Sky Theater, Central Park West at 81st Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $8 for adults and $6 for children.
Information: (212) 769-5920 or (212) 769-5900.
"PUERTO RICO: A HISTORY IN PICTURES," a lecture, with slides, to give an overview of Puerto Rico, coordinated for the exhibition "Contrasts: 40 Years of Change and Continuity, Photographs by Jack Delano." On Nov. 17 at 2 P.M. at the Bronx Museum of the Arts, 1040 Grand Concourse, South Bronx.
Free.
Information: (212) 681-6000.
"STAR OF CHRISTMAS," a holiday sky show with a narrative traveling back 2,000 years to explore the skies of the first Christmas.
At the Hayden Planetarium, Sky Theater, Central Park West at 81st Street, Manhattan.
Nov. 27 through Jan. 1, with weekday shows at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M., Saturdays at 11 A.M., 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 P.M. and Sundays at 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 P.M.
Admission: $5 for adults and $2.50 for children.50.
Information: (212) 769-5920 or (212) 769-5900.
December  "HOLIDAY LIGHTS AND CAROLING BUS TOUR," where families can sing traditional carols, hopping on and off a bus, through Brooklyn's Bay Ridge and Bensonhurst neighborhoods.
A tour of the neighborhoods' holiday decorations and Christmas stories will also be included.
Sponsored by the Brooklyn Urban Park Rangers; on Dec. 21 starting at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Reservations: (718) 287-3400.
7 AND UP
November  "SUPER SEED SECRETS," where children 5 to 10 can learn about seeds, which that blow in the wind, grow into plants and can be eaten.
Young explorers will gather and investigate such seeds as milkweed pods, maple samaras and sweet gumballs, dissect them using hand lenses and create seed mosaics.
On Nov. 2 from 10 A.M. to noon.
At the New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx.
Admission: $11 for members and $12 for nonmembers.
Information and registration: (212) 220-8982.
"HOME VIDEOS: EDIT AND ADD," a workshop where participants learn to edit their home videos (VHS-SP speed) by adding special effects and sound effects.
Take your own video camera and a blank tape.
At the Media Center of the Children's Museum of Manhattan, 212 West 83d Street, Nov. 2 at 1:45 P.M.
Workshop fee: $1.
Museum admission: $4 for adults and children.
Information: (212) 721-1234.
ZOO CLUB, for children 8 to 12 who "share a fascination and love for wildlife," with a focus on animal survival, with games and other participatory activities.
Meetings: Nov. 2, Dec. 7 and Jan. 11, with three additional meetings between January and June.
Sessions 10 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. or 1:30 to 4 P.M. at the Bronx Zoo, Bronx River Parkway and Fordham Road.
Fee: $90 for members, $95 for nonmembers for all six meetings.
Registration: (212) 220-6854.
"PRODUCTS OF THE TROPICAL FOREST," a workshop where children ages 8 and up can learn about products derived from tropical forests, like chocolate, chewing gum, medicines and bananas.
With a preparation of tropical ice-cream sundae.
On Nov. 23 from 2 to 4 P.M. at the Staten Island Zoo, 614 Broadway, West Brighton.
Fee: $4 for members, $6 for nonmembers.
Registration: (718) 442-3100.


Susan Parnes, A Banker, Wed
Susan Dana Parnes, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Irving H. Parnes of New York, was married last evening to Stephen Peterman Farber, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Farber of South Orange, N.J.
Rabbi David Lincoln performed the ceremony at Park Avenue Synagogue in New York.
Mrs.
Farber, 27 years old, graduated from Horace Mann School and the University of Rochester.
She is a manager in community business banking at Citibank in New York.
Her father, who was a surgeon with the New York City Police Department, is an assistant clinical professor of surgery at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, where he is an attending surgeon.


Sarah Jorquera, Lawyer, Is Wed
Sarah Victoria Jorquera, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Humberto Jorquera of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to David John Kulowiec, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Kulowiec of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
John Adam officiated at the chapel of the Roman Catholic Convent of the Sacred Heart.
The bride and bridegroom are associates at the New York law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts.
Mrs.
Kulowiec, 30 years old, graduated from Wellesley College and Columbia University Law School.
Her father is a consultant to utility companies.


Crime/Mystery; In Short: Nonfiction
FATAL AMBITION  Greed and Murder in New England.
By William Sonzski.
Onyx/Penguin, Paper, $5.50.


Camera
Television owners can now take lessons in 35-millimeter photography, play golf at Pebble Beach or enlarge still pictures by using an interactive compact disk system introduced last week by the Philips Company.
The unit, called the Imagination Machine, uses disks that look like standard audio compact disks, but are multimedia, combining digital sound and video images.
It accepts single disks that contain up to two hours of programming, in which viewers are asked to make choices or define where they want to go.
A thumbstick remote control is used for making such decisions.


WORLD SERIES


She Changed Partners and Danced
GINGER
My Story.
By Ginger Rogers.
Illustrated. 450 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $22.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Williston, Vt.; Planners Help On Affordables
DEVELOPERS in Vermont are turning to an unlikely source -- town planning boards -- for help in building modestly priced, low-profit housing.
The boards' traditional requirements, like impact fees and restricted sewer allotments, once made "affordable" housing anathema to builders.
With housing starts in moderate- and higher-priced homes near a standstill, developers are scrambling to stay in business with low-cost offerings.
More town planners are encouraging this by helping reduce site development costs, ordinarily a much higher percentage of total costs than in expensive housing.


Data Bank/October 20, 1991
Business Inventories
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
1.5
1.5
1.5
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$34.1
$35.2
$38.8
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$40.9
$41.1
$34.8
Consumer Price Index
Sept.
Aug.
July
Monthly percent change
0.4
0.2
0.2
Industrial Production Index
Monthly percent change
0.1
0.0
0.6
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
79.7
79.8
80.0
Housing Starts
Thousands of units, annual rate
1033
1056
1049
Cash Wheat Price
Oct. 18
Oct. 11
Oct. 4
No. 1 K.C., per bushel, weekly close
$3.70
$3.61
$3.50


Second Thoughts On Soviet Aid Plan
In persuading the financial leaders of the West last week to back his radical plan for Soviet economic reform, Grigory A. Yavlinsky, a top Kremlin economist, recalled his recent experience explaining to officials from the Soviet republics how the United States Federal Reserve system operated.
When he had completed his presentation, he said, he took a question.
"O.K.," asked an official, "we understand the reserve system. Could you now tell us about the main one?"


Sunday Menu; Grilled Chicken Dish Allows for Stand-Ins
This recipe calls for chicken, but you can substitute flank steak, pork tenderloin or shrimp.
Grilled vegetables, sweetened by the grilling, are a fine foil for meat, poultry or strongly flavored seafood.
And the dish is just as good cold.
Chicken, Peppers and Onion on the Grill  1 tablespoon olive oil  1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar  1 teaspoon dried oregano  Freshly ground black pepper to taste  6 ounces skinless, boneless chicken breasts, quartered  1 pound red, yellow and/or orange bell peppers, washed, seeded, trimmed and cut into quarters  6 ounces red onion, peeled and cut into eight wedges.
1. If using broiler, preheat.
2.
Mix the oil, vinegar, oregano and pepper in bowl large enough to hold the remaining ingredients.
3.
Stir in the chicken and peppers and mix to coat.
Rub the cut sides of the onions in the marinade to coat with mixture.
4.
If using large stove-top grill, prepare it.
Broil or grill the vegetables and chicken on both sides until the chicken is cooked through and the vegetables are tender.
The vegetables will take about 10 minutes, the chicken about 7 minutes, depending on the size of the pieces.
Do not worry if the onion falls apart; its flavor is not affected.
5.
To serve, cut peppers and onions into julienne strips and serve over chicken pieces.
Yield: 2 servings.
Mushroom-Flavored Rice  1/2 cup long grain rice  5 medium shallots  1 teaspoon olive oil  1 tablespoon minced fresh oregano  2 teaspoons lemon juice  1/8 teaspoon salt.
1.
Bring rice and 1 cup of water to boil in heavy-bottomed pan.
Reduce heat to simmer; cover and cook a total of 17 minutes, until rice is tender and water has been absorbed.
2. Meanwhile, peel shallots and mince in food processor.
3. Heat oil in nonstick skillet and saute shallots in hot oil until they are soft.
4.
Wash, trim and mince mushrooms in food processor.
Add to shallots with oregano and cook a few minutes, until mushrooms release their liquid and are cooked.
5. Stir in lemon juice and salt. Stir in cooked rice.
Yield: 2 servings.


Talking: Auctions; Buying From Blueprints
WHILE early auctions of residential property tended to offer housing that was already built, an increasing number are putting on the block homes that are only partly built or even still on the drawing boards.
One reason for the change is that lenders have been repossessing more partly built projects from defaulting developers.
Another is that lenders are demanding a substantial number of pre-construction sales before they will advance funds for building even to a financially strong developer.
Yet another is that developers are discovering that offering a few units at auction in the initial phase of a project is a good way to test the market.


Bright and Crisp, Autumn Ushers In a Quickened Pace
There's an internal shift that takes place in the fall, sort of like everything else in nature.
The birds are flocking south, their mating over for the time being. (Do they take a break from the kids in winter? Knit sweaters? Read books?)
The leaves turn brilliant colors, as their chlorophyll fades away and nutrients move into the roots, revealing the reds and yellows that have been there all along, like hidden parts of a personality.
If the days are bright and the nights cool, sugars maufacture anthocyanins that deepen the leaves to scarlet or purple.
We don't understand exactly what triggers this intricate fugue, but it's genetically programmed, and hormones are the conductors.


Moscow: Light and Shadow
THE TREASURES OF BROODING, CIRCULAR mother Moscow are more covert than those of linear, glacially elegant Leningrad.
Like wildflowers thrusting through layers of broken cement, Moscow's splendors still show the marks of Napoleon's ravages, lie hidden under heaps of Stalin's rubble, reveal the past decades' indifference and sloth.
Yet precisely because of its secretiveness, because of the very perseverance it demands, I find this messy, labyrinthine city far more seductive than Czar Peter's gorgeous, upstart artifact up north.
For 15 years I have gone back to Moscow for a score of different reasons -- research, literary conferences, pleasure.
In the current climate of chaos and uncertainty, merely pleasurable travel is hardly possible to engage in.
It is not a time in history solely to seek out beauty.
We also search, these days, for those sites that might help to decode the curse that has doomed Russia to its cyclic phases of anarchy and self-destruction.
And on such trips we hunt for those details -- be they sociological, folkloric, or iconographic -- that yield some further clues to the enigma of Russia's recurring apocalypse.
Assuming that all enlightened travelers will visit the Kremlin churches, the Bolshoi Theater, the Pushkin Museum and the greatly enlarged, splendid new Tretyakov Gallery, I offer some additional Moscow sites that can deepen one's sense of this city's ancient beauty, of its chaotic present and cryptic future.
KOLOMENSKOYE ESTATE
A vast park and outdoor museum -- set on rolling hills with superb views -- in the northern outskirts of Moscow, Kolomenskoye was for centuries the favorite summer residence of the czars.
Along with Izmailovo Park and the Arbat -- the heart of the old capital, which is now a beautifully restored walkway closed to traffic -- Kolomenskoye is one of the Muscovites' favorite places for Sunday strolling.
A number of ancient wooden buildings from different sites in Russia have been brought here, including the log cabin inhabited by Peter the Great while he learned the ship-building trade in Archangelsk.
The glorious 16th-century Church of the Ascension of Christ is the only one I know of in Moscow in the medieval "tent" style, a multilayered, arched surfacing of white stone derived from the swagged contours of nomads' tents.
It is one of Kolomenskoye's three sanctuaries, two of which are open for worship.
As a visit to the Kolomenskoye sanctuaries will attest, the hundreds of working churches in Moscow seem constantly engaged in baptisms, weddings and funerals.
Most religious offices in the capital are crowded to capacity; many of the worshipers are men under the age of 40 -- a sign that the current religious renaissance is not restricted to women and is not the fad some Westerners think it to be, but a constant and irrepressible trait of the Russian psyche.
There has also been an enthusiastic return to archaic health practices in the Soviet Union.
In Kolomenskoye you will see Muscovites leaning against trees, by the hour, to improve their well-being by absorbing nature's energy.
This is an ancient custom, linked in Russian folk culture with astrology, according to which every birth sign has its tree; the tree assigned to a Sagittarius, for instance, is said to be the linden, a Libra's is an oak.
THE CENTRAL MARKET
There is no clearer evidence of the corruption and inefficiency plaguing every level of Soviet life than this immense and colorful indoor food market on Tsvetnoy Boulevard, near the Tsvetnoy Boulevard Metro stop.
Reminiscent of Paris's Les Halles, it is the largest of several markets in the city whose products are grown on private farm plots and distributed by private means.
Its wizardly abundance of victuals is in grotesque contrast to the denuded shelves of state-owned stores.
Here one is confronted with two-foot high heaps of lush vegetables and fruit from southern provinces and, in spring and summer, from the Moscow countryside -- eggplants, green lettuce, tarragon, dill, strawberries, melons and some of the world's most delectable dried mushrooms.
The majority of traders are women.
Rosy-cheeked dairy farmers dressed in pristinely white smocks call out praises of their yogurt, buttermilk, cheeses.
Other farmers of the Moscow region display dozens of tiny suckling pigs, lined up in neat pink rows.
Quality veal, beef, roast chicken also abound year round.
The only hitch is that as at any other privately run outlets, the prices at the Central Market -- as much as 10 times higher than those of state-owned stores -- are only affordable to the new Soviet entrepreneurial elite, to heftily paid Party bureaucrats and to foreign residents.
In what I call the Soviet fourth world, there is a notable lack of the means of distribution by which the bounties of Georgia, Armenia, Central Asia and other regions might reach more than a handful of privileged citizens in the produce-starved northern cities.
Given the primitivism of the highway system, the nonexistence of refrigerated trucks and the widespread graft of the Soviet black market, 90 percent of the produce shipped from the south to St.
Petersburg orMoscow is said to rot or to be stolen on the way.
AN INSTRUCTIVE AND VARIED 15-MINUTE MIDTOWN WALK
Go up Tverskaya Street (formerly Gorky Street) from Mokhovaya Street (formerly Marx Prospekt) for three blocks and turn left, through an arch, onto Nezhdanov Street; on the first building to the left you will see a memorable bas-relief heroic head of the visionary dramatist Vsevolod Meyerhold that commemorates the site of his home.
It was here, in 1938, after he had made an impassioned public plea for Soviet artists' right to experimentation, that Meyerhold was arrested, to be taken to his exile and death on the grounds of "mysticism and neglect of Socialist Realism."
A few hundred yards on the right beyond Meyerhold's former house, facing a small green square, stands the beautiful little Church of the Resurrection, built in the Muscovite Baroque style of red-and-white stone.
Inside, one can visit the icon of St.
Pantaleon, "healer of desperate cases," to which many Muscovites come to pray during the illnesses of their loved ones.
Bear right at the church and keep bearing right for a few hundred yards until you see, through a vacant lot, the tall green trees of Tverskoy Boulevard, innermost of the great circular thoroughfares that girdle Moscow.
Cross over to Tverskoy and you will pass, immediately on your right, the very popular New Moscow Art Theater, a handsome 1970's building of neo-Bauhaus style, the most powerful example I know of Soviet contemporary architecture.
Just beyond the theater, as you approach Pushkin Square, is Moscow's new Americaland.
On the right is a tall building, surmounted by a 20-foot-tall neon Coca-Cola sign, which houses the offices of several hundred foreign firms and calls itself "Pushkin Plaza." And on the left is one of the newest wonders of the Soviet scene, the U.S.S.R.'s first McDonald's.
The interior decor of Moscow's McDonald's, where only rubles are accepted, is as interesting a phenomenon as the remarkable cheerfulness and efficiency of its Soviet employees.
It typifies the mythically exotic, tropical image most Soviet people have of the United States. ("You have palm trees at your home, yes?" many a Soviet citizen has asked me upon learning that I live somewhere between New York and Boston.) McDonald's walls are covered with rapturous images of palm-studded beaches on which reclining blond couples sun themselves, picnic baskets at their side filled with mounds of mangoes, papayas, kiwis.
This equatorial image of our coveted land of plenty, fashioned over the decades by the nation's collective psyche, is an attribute that Soviet citizens are as eager to maintain as they are loath to hear of our Calcutta-like train stations, our growing AIDS epidemic and our inner-city slums.
CHURCH OF THE TRINITY IN NIKITNIKI
Set on Nikitnikov Pereulok, a tiny street a few blocks from the Rossiya Hotel and close to the Nogin Square subway station, this graceful structure of red-and-white brick was built in the 17th century by a wealthy merchant family, the Nikitkovs.
It stands next to their former home in the most ancient area of old Moscow, Kitai-gorod, the former merchants' quarter.
The church's frescoed walls, replete with vivid-hued and beautifully preserved scenes from the Old and New Testaments, were painted at that delicate moment when Muscovite artists became acquainted, three centuries after the fact, with Italian Trecento art.
They offer a meeting of Western concepts and Russia's iconic tradition, with the latter still prevailing.
The rich colors that define the rows of horizontal narrative paintings on the church's walls -- ochers, umbers, deep reds and blues -- are animated by forceful diagonal design and dramatically syncopated rhythms; saints and other sacred figures move with equal energy across the sanctuary's vaulted ceilings.
Yet this is a site that even my Moscow-bred friends tend not to know about, and which I came upon quite by chance in 1988, as I was sizing up the headquarters of the K.G.B., a half-block away.
MAYAKOVSKY MUSEUM
The esthetic of the early 20th-century avant-garde movements -- Futurism and Constructivism -- that inspired the Russian Revolution's greatest poet are dazzlingly recreated in this new space at Serova Proezd 3/6, a few hundred yards from Lubyanka (formerly Derzhinsky) Square.
The renovated museum, opened to the public in the spring of 1990, occupies the house where Vladimir Mayakovsky spent his last months.
On its uppermost floor the little bedroom-study in which he committed suicide in 1930 is preserved intact with its original furnishings.
He acted out of disillusionment, so recent scholarship implies, with the failures of the Revolution's original promises.
The interior of the museum, designed on a spiral plan by a team of young Soviet architects, is itself a bold and brilliant Futurist construction that provides a superb setting for a large collection of Mayakovsky memorabilia.
One can study here the famous propaganda posters Mayakovsky designed for the first Soviet regime; his satirical drawings; original manuscripts of his poetry and the first editions of his books; photographs, correspondence and portrait busts of the poet and his friends.
These elements, set at eccentric, gravity-defying angles to each other, bizarrely juxtaposed with mural-size photographs of the Revolutionary period, ensnare the visitor into a vortex of brilliant colors and constantly startling historical associations.
The entire venture not only attests to the Soviet people's admirable veneration for their men of letters but it also evidences their amazing advances in museology, which one can further admire at the new Tretyakov Gallery, and at those many other art exhibits mushrooming throughout Moscow's church grounds and private galleries that the traveler can only learn about, alas, by hearsay.
NOVODEVICHY CONVENT
There are few sites in Moscow more faeric than Novodevichy, a 16th- and 17th-century complex of churches and parks set in a bend of the Moscow River, a few miles from Red Square, and surrounded by its original battlement of snow-white stone.
One of the jewels of Muscovite architecture, Novodevichy was a place for ladies of noble birth to spend their last days -- not always out of choice. (The elder half-sister of Peter the Great, Princess Sophia, was banished here in 1698 by her brother for supporting the Streltsy revolt, and lingered in solitary confinement in a tower until her death six years later.)
The iconostasis of the Smolensk Cathedral, which stands at the center of the Novodevichy complex, was decorated by the greatest Muscovite artists of the 16th and 17th centuries.
Most of these paintings are now stored, but they often appear for weeks or months at a time in various indoor spaces of the convent.
In the typically secretive, capricious Moscow manner, no announcement of these admirable exhibits is ever printed or posted.
And to learn where such a display might be hung one must forage for oneself throughout the Novodevichy complex, banging at doors and asking whoever seems likely to know.
Upon a recent visit, having been flatly told by three Novodevichy guards that no such exhibit ever occurred on the grounds, I put the same query to a group of young painters who were working at their easels by the wall of the convent.
They pointed to a dingy-looking, unmarked building at the side of the Cathedral.
And indeed, there, inside, was as glorious an exhibit of 17th-century icons as one could see anywhere in the world, the paintings restored to jewel-like perfection and beautifully hung in a series of small, immaculate white rooms.
The Novodevichy cemetery at the southern side of the convent complex, equally hard to get into, is also worth a visit.
This is one of those rare Moscow "holy sites" that continued to remain sacrosanct throughout the most secular, revolutionary times.
Buried within its walls are some of Russia's most venerated artists, including Gogol, Chekhov, Scriabin and Mayakovsky, as well as Khrushchev and Stalin's wife, Nadezhda Alliluyeva.
All of them are commemorated by fascinating statuary -- Gogol's melancholy portrait bust is particularly moving, and Chekhov's grave is surmounted by a curious little house-shaped sculpture that recalls the funeral statuary of Etruscan times.
On a quiet evening, its reflection blazing on a calm, swan-filled lake, the setting sun flaming on its gilded domes, Novodevichy has the eerie magic of those Russian folk tales -- resonant with luminous green dragons, wood sprites and witches, damsels metamorphosing into sorcerous birds -- pictured on the fabled black lacquer Palekh boxes.
No site of Moscow is more serene and timeless in its beauty, and none offers a more ironic contrast to the chaos and uncertainty currently plaguing the world outside its walls.


Integration Without Violence
Incidents of bigotry in New York City, from taunts to assaults, are now so frequent that confrontations seem almost inevitable as the city's racial mix shifts and whites adjust to being the new minority.
Two Brooklyn neighborhoods imploded this summer.
In Canarsie, a real estate office that showed homes to blacks was firebombed three times, a Pakistani-owned supermarket was burned out twice and several people were beaten.
In Crown Heights, riots broke out after a black child was struck and killed by a Hasidic man driving in a rabbi's motorcade.
In both areas, rapid shifts in ethnicity contributed to the climate of violence.


C. W. Havens and Grace Lee Wed
Grace Esther Lee, a lawyer, and Christopher William Havens, an executive, both in New York, were married last evening.
The Rev.
John H. Hendrickson, a Presbyterian minister who is the bridegroom's uncle, officiated at the Abigail Adams Smith Museum in New York.
Ms.
Lee, who is 35 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from the State University of New York at Stony Brook and Brooklyn Law School.
She is a daughter of Frank H. Lee, who owns an insurance agency in New York bearing his name.
Her late mother, Dr.
Esther Pei-Cheng Lim, was an anesthesiologist at Union Hospital in the Bronx.


Suits That Broaden Choices for Work
At a time when the jacket has become the backbone of the working woman's wardrobe, it is not always easy to find an honest-to-goodness suit, unless, of course, you can afford the likes of Chanel.
Although department stores carry suit collections by people like Kasper, Tahari and Albert Nipon, they tend to devote much more space to sportswear.
There are plenty of blazers and cardigans and scuba jackets and what-all, but they must be put together with the right skirt or pants to make an outfit.


U.S., Wary of European Corps, Seeks Assurance on NATO Role
The United States has sought assurances that NATO's position as the bulwark of Western security will not be undermined by French-German moves to give Europe an independent defense capability through the creation of a multinational army corps.
But while Britain has criticized the French-German initiative as a potential threat to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney was more diplomatic when he spoke to reporters on Friday after NATO defense ministers discussed the issue at a meeting in a Sicilian resort, Taormina.


Mutual Funds; Falling Back on Stock Funds
Yields on money market funds and certificates of deposit have fallen so low that frustrated investors will look at anything -- even stocks.
The seven-day compound yield for taxable money funds fell to 5.14 percent as of last Tuesday, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report in Holliston, Mass.
Equity-income funds, which invest in dividend-paying stocks, provide yields of about 5 percent plus the possibility of price appreciation in their fund shares.


Devils' Bright Start Is Just a Memory Now
The Devils' marvelous start, with four victories, credited primarily to effective team defense, has gone by the wayside in less than a week.
The defense, which looked particularly strong in three of the four victories, has been a mass of confusion in the three losses that have followed the four victories.
On Friday night, when Coach Tom McVie decided to rest Slava Fetisov, the Devils' defense was in complete disarray in a 6-5 loss to the Capitals in Landover, Md.


Crime/Mystery; Poetry and Poison
THE MINUS MAN
By Lew McCreary. 249 pp. New York: Viking. $18.95.


Mercer Outlasts Morrison's Big Flurry
For three rounds on Friday, Tommy Morrison's blows went rat-a-tat off Ray Mercer, the World Boxing Organization heavyweight champion.
They were heavy-handed punches, thrown in smart combinations, often Tyson-like hooks to the body that turned into uppercuts to the head.


CAMPUS LIFE: Amherst; 'Need-Blind' Policy On Admissions Is Reconsidered
The president of Amherst College, Peter R. Pouncey, and Jane E. Reynolds, dean of admissions, met last week with about 100 students, faculty members and administrators to discuss changing the college's admission and financial aid policies because of budget deficits.
The college officials said they were responding to growing campus concern over the future of "need-blind" admissions and the way financial aid policy decisions are made.
Under the need-blind policy, an applicant is considered for admissions without regard for whether he or she can pay.
Those accepted who cannot afford the fees are then given financial aid based on need.


Bright and Crisp, Autumn Ushers In a Quickened Pace
There's an internal shift that takes place in the fall, sort of like everything else in nature.
The birds are flocking south, their mating over for the time being. (Do they take a break from the kids in winter? Knit sweaters? Read books?)
The leaves turn brilliant colors, as their chlorophyll fades away and nutrients move into the roots, revealing the reds and yellows that have been there all along, like hidden parts of a personality.
If the days are bright and the nights cool, sugars maufacture anthocyanins that deepen the leaves to scarlet or purple.
We don't understand exactly what triggers this intricate fugue, but it's genetically programmed, and hormones are the conductors.


2 Fifth Avenue Winners Put Their Style on Display
A stylish American speedster and an even more stylish British boulevardier won their Fifth Avenue Miles in style yesterday, pulling away from their fields well before the 62d Street finish line and holding off late challenges from determined rivals.
Taking advantage of a slow early pace, Alisa Hill, the 1991 Pan American champion in the 1,500 meters and a self-described speed runner from Upland, Calif., broke away from Leah Pells of Canada at the three-quarter mark and crossed the line ahead of Laimute Baikauskaite of Lithuania to win the elite women's race in 4 minutes 31.57 seconds.


Now Get Politics Out of Confirmation Process; The Burden of Proof
To the Editor:
William Safire still doesn't get it ("No Ambush Allowed," column, Oct. 10).
He thinks that when he describes a man accusing a woman of "sleeping her way to the top" that he has the gender equivalent of a woman accusing a man of sexual harassment.
But Mr.
Safire doesn't understand our societal norms.


Aleka Akoyunoglou Wed in Indiana To S. H. Blackwell, a Fellow Student
Aleka Alexandra Akoyunoglou and Stephen Hardwick Blackwell, graduate students at Indiana University, were married yesterday in Nashville, Ind.
Shelby Keaton, the Clerk of Brown County, Ind., officiated at the home of Jerzy Kolodziej and Mary Helen Ayers.
Mrs.
Blackwell, 24 years old, graduated from Northwestern University and received a master's degree in Slavic linguistics from the University of Illinois.
She is a doctoral student in applied linguistics.
Her mother, Mrs.
George Akoyunoglou of Athens, is a biochemist at the National Research Center there.
Her father, the late Dr.
Akoyunoglou, was a biochemist and a founder of the center.


Allison Hobbs, A Nurse, Weds
Allison Marie Hobbs, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Hobbs Jr. of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday in Potomac, Md., to Thomas Edson Giles, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ralph Giles of Wilmington, Del.
The Rev.
Robert Mohan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Mercy Church.
Mrs.
Giles, 25 years old, graduated from Boston College and received a J.D. in health law from Widener University.
Later this month, she is to start work as a nurse at Emory University Hospital in Atlanta.
Her father is a computer network analyst at the National Education Association in Washington.
Her mother is a dental hygienist in Bethesda.


Tandem Bikes Needn't Reinforce Sexism
To the Editor:
One could argue that tandem bicycles are "ageist" as well as sexist ("Sexism Rides a Bicycle Built for Two," letter, Oct. 2) since children as well as women are usually assigned to the back seat, known as the "stoker's" position.


Mourned for a Year, Slain Girl Receives Graveside Birthday
Half of the 100 neighbors and relatives who came to remember Jessica Guzman yesterday were children, and they marched under a crowd of pink balloons to her grave.
It would have the Bronx murder victim's 12th birthday.
"She's going to have one every year," said her mother, Milagros Guzman.
Tears slipped from her eyes and her voice was almost inaudible.
"I will always celebrate her birthday every year to the day I guess I will die."


Evan J. Katz Weds Jeanne Gorfinkle
Jeanne Susanne Gorfinkle and Evan Joshua Katz were married yesterday at the Bel Age Hotel in West Hollywood, Calif.
Rabbi Mark A. Golub, an uncle of the bride, officiated.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated from Bennington College and is studying for a master's degree in fine arts at the Parsons School of Design in Los Angeles.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert J. Gorfinkle of Hingham, Mass.
Her father founded and heads Edwards department store in Lexington, Mass.
Her mother, Constance Gorfinkle, is the arts reporter and film critic for The Patriot Ledger in Quincy, Mass.


Cuomo Says He's 'Looking at' 1992 Race
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo took yet another tiny step today in his long and tortuous journey toward deciding whether to run for President.
After a speaking engagement in Chicago, Mr.
Cuomo said publicly for the first time that he was "looking at" the race, and that he felt he had "until sometime in November" to make a decision.


CABINET IN ISRAEL VOTES APPROVAL FOR PEACE TALKS
The Israeli Cabinet gave final, unconditional agreement today for Israel to take part in a Middle East peace conference that will put the nation in direct negotiations with most of its hostile Arab neighbors for the first time since independence in 1948.
Soon after the Cabinet warily but overwhelmingly endorsed the peace talks, with only three negative votes among the 20 ministers, the small, far-right Tehiya party announced that it would quit the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir when the conference opens in Madrid on Oct. 30.


Pro Bono Work For New York
New York City's problems are providing advertising agencies with opportunities for pro bono campaigns.
The Crime Stoppers program of the New York City Police Foundation has selected Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss, New York, to advertise a telephone call-in service that provides rewards for reporting violent crimes.
Ads are expected to appear at the start of the new year.


Critics Gain Time to Fight Bank Merger
The Federal Reserve Board has decided to give critics of bank-lending policies more time to marshal their arguments as it considers the proposed merger of the Chemical Banking Corporation and the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Corporation.
The Fed late last week said it would collect public comment on the merger until Nov. 22, a month longer than originally planned.


Bank Sues Salomon and Travelers
A Philadelphia savings bank has accused Salomon Brothers Inc., the Travelers Corporation and some top executives at both of colluding to deprive the bank of money it is owed by four real estate partnerships.
The dispute involves real estate partnerships that had attracted investments from more than 200 of Salomon's most prominent current and former employees and comes as the Wall Street firm is struggling mightily to rebound from its admission that it behaved unlawfully in several recent Treasury auctions.
Secret Negotiations
The Meritor Savings Bank in Philadelphia, in a little-noticed lawsuit filed in June in Philadelphia County Common Pleas Court, contended that the Salomon group was secretly negotiating to release Travelers and its Prospect Company investment unit from obligations that would insure that the partnerships' loans to Meritor are repaid.


Foul Play Likely in Baby's Illness
The head of poison control for New York City said yesterday that chemists had still not identified the caustic contaminant in jars of baby food bought at an East Harlem bodega and fed to a baby girl who fell critically ill last week.
But he said tampering was "the most plausible" explanation.
Dr.
Richard S. Weisman, director of the Health Department's poison control center, said in an interview that accidental contamination was the second most likely cause and that spoilage was the most remote.
He said tests of the jars were continuing.


Ms. Yang Weds Calvin R. Wong
Vivian W. Yang, the daughter of Yonghui Yang and Huiyan Feng of Shanghai, was married yesterday to Calvin R. Wong, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Wong of Melrose, Mass.
The Rev.
Karl Gillmeister, a Presbyterian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the United Nations Chapel in New York.
Ms.
Yang, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, is a sales representative at Xerox in New York.
She graduated from Shanghai International Studies University and received a master's degree in communication from Arizona State University.
She is studying writing at Columbia University.
Her parents are English professors in Shanghai; her father at Fudan University, her mother at East China Normal University.


Economic Calendar
Below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday None Tuesday Budget Deficit...Sept.
Wednesday Auto Sales...Mid-Oct.
Thursday Durable Goods...Sept.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday None


Review/Opera; Bill T. Jones's 'Mother of Three Sons'; Considering The Modern Using The Mythic
There is a lot of sexual ugliness at the New York City Opera this season.
No sooner had the gang rape in its production of "Die Soldaten" faded into memory, than "The Mother of Three Sons" on Saturday night showed a blind man being forced to rape his own mother in a whorehouse.
Just in the nick of time he was killed by his mute brother wielding a large cane.
But we are not supposed to have too much sympathy for the mother in this case: her sins include disdain for her children's diverse handicaps and a sexual preference so perverse that she has her infant daughter killed because she wants only sons.
In fact, in the American premiere of this new opera, conceived and directed by the choreographer Bill T. Jones, it was hard to know just what to feel or think, so miscellaneous was its impact.
The 90-minute work was commissioned for the 1990 Munich Biennale Festival where it received its first performance.
The request was for a "black blues opera" that would that put contemporary conflicts in mythic contexts.


After Judging Thomas, Senators Face the Public
The Senate Judiciary Committee's heated hearings into Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court and whether he was guilty of sexual harassment reverberated well beyond Capitol Hill.
Record numbers of viewers watched the televised sessions for hour after riveting hour, and by the end of the inquiry, judgment was being passed not only on Judge Thomas but also on members of the Judiciary Committee, the judicial nominating process and the Senate generally.


Burden of Chicago Sun-Times: Being No. 2
At The Chicago Sun-Times, the national recession and widespread advertising drought have added pressure to the newspaper's fundamental handicap of being No. 2 to the dominant Chicago Tribune in advertising and circulation.
And last week, the paper narrowly averted a strike that would have strained its finances even further.


Drug Ring Paid Noriega Millions, Witnesses Say
The Medellin cartel paid Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega millions of dollars as part of a vast scheme to launder the Colombian group's profits from cocaine trafficking, a succession of witnesses testified last week at the deposed Panamanian dictator's trial here.
A former Panamanian customs official, Maria Magdalena Morales, said Wednesday she saw up to $10 million in drug profits unloaded, with the protection of the Panamanian military, from a single flight at the airport where she worked.
On Tuesday the bodyguard of a man described as General Noriega's business partner testified that he had secretly transported money from the United States directly to the general at his home and office.


No Pickup Expected For Hiring
The nation's manufacturers say that while production has risen in recent weeks for many products, the pickup is so modest and uncertain that hiring new workers -- an essential step if the nation is to shake off the recession -- might be delayed indefinitely.
In interviews with more than 20 executives at the semiannual directors meeting of the National Association of Manufacturers, which ended in Atlanta on Saturday, the story was essentially the same: production for home consumption, apart from exports, is 1 percent to 3 percent above the summer's levels.


Rapper's Message On Haute Couture
It is not exactly a crime wave, but police officers and the professional sports establishment are concerned about various incidents this year that have involved team-oriented apparel, primarily that of the Los Angeles Raiders.
One shopping mall in southern Florida has banned the sale of Raiders-connected gear such as jackets and caps.
The Raiders' apparel boasts a menacing pirate's face, replete with eye patch, and a black-and-silver color scheme, which has come to symbolize the team's long-standing unruly image.
Police officials say that because of this symbolism, youth gangs across the country, in addition to other people, have adopted Raiders gear.
In 1988, when WAYNE GRETZKY joined them, the Los Angeles Kings switched their colors from purple and gold to black, silver and white.
Now that team's apparel has also been linked to criminal activity.
Tomorrow night, N.F.L.
Properties, which oversees the National Football League merchandise agreements, will sponsor the first in a series of anti-crime lectures in California by rap singer KRS-One.
His first talk will be at the University of San Francisco.
He will be traveling to schools and colleges across the country with his message.


Abroad at Home; Breaking the Logjam
No one who knows the Middle East will celebrate yet.
The substance of a successful negotiation, the give-and-take needed to make it work, is still hard to envisage.
But there are going to be negotiations, starting next week in Madrid, and that is remarkable enough.
For the first time in its 43 years as a state, Israel will meet face-to-face with each of its Arab neighbors -- and with representative Palestinians.
All the issues between them will be on the table: peace, security, land, people.
It is going to happen now because of George Bush and James Baker.
Secretary of State Baker spent much of the last five months wheedling and pushing the intractable parties.
But his success was possible only because the President had the vision and the courage to commit himself to this conference.
Mr.
Bush seized the moment, after the Persian Gulf war, for a new effort at Arab-Israeli peace.
He understood that some fundamental power relationships had changed.
Those changes, still going on, offer hope for an onset of reason in the Middle East.
The end of the cold war has had an immediate impact on the region.
Soviet military support for Syria has ebbed, making President Assad look to improved relations with the United States.
Israeli and American fear of Communist influence has abated, making possible a joint Soviet-American invitation to Madrid that in the past would have caused alarm.
The decline in Soviet power is also having a profound impact on U.S.-Israeli relations.
It has weakened, or removed, one basis for the close ties of recent decades and for massive U.S. aid: the idea that Israel was a strategic asset for America in a vital part of the world.
The gulf war showed that U.S. armed forces could act in the Middle East without Israel.
In that war, indeed, Israel was a complication rather than an asset in U.S. military calculations.
Americans are still committed to help Israel, for reasons of history and conscience.
But it is clear that a more detached relationship is developing, one in which America will more freely weigh its own values and interests.
The Economist wrote last month:
"Americans still express their moral commitment to Israel's survival; but Israel's moral case grows steadily weaker as it refuses to extend to the Palestinians the right of self-determination that has become a cornerstone of the emerging world order. A peace which left Israel ruling over millions of voteless Palestinians has become unthinkable."
Israelis are increasingly aware that they cannot expect unconditional support from the United States -- that they can maintain the vital American connection only by paying attention to American interests.
President Bush made that bluntly clear when he postponed consideration of loan guarantees: too bluntly, most Israelis thought, but they understood the larger point.
In this new relationship, the territories occupied by Israel since 1967 are the crunch.
U.S. policy is to end Israeli control of the West Bank and Gaza and their more than 1,500,000 Palestinian inhabitants.
Prime Minister Shamir and much of his Government are committed to creeping annexation of the territories.
A new political choice is therefore shaping up for Israel: Keep the occupied territories or keep American support.
Economic realities are also pushing Israel to make a choice about the occupied territories.
The reasons are explored in depth by Bernard Avishai in the forthcoming November-December issue of the Harvard Business Review.
The $10 billion sought from the United States in loan guarantees is to build housing for Soviet immigrants to Israel.
But if those immigrants are to have jobs, Mr.
Avishai says, Israel will need two or three times that much in investment capital from the world.
And Israel will have to change its protective economic policies and become part of the global market, using its special scientific and intellectual talents.
But there will be no large-scale foreign investment, Mr.
Avishai writes, and no long-term contracts with Israeli firms, while the world sees insecurity over the issue of the occupied territories.
"Israel can have the Whole Land of Israel or it can have a piece of the global economy."


Saying He'd Toss Baby Off Roof, Man Is Shot
A man put his baby daughter on the edge of a 19-story building in the Bronx and threatened to push her off Saturday, then was shot by the police to end the rooftop stand-off, officers said.
The man, Alfred Taliaferro, 24 years old, of 177 Willis Avenue in the Mott Haven section, had stood on the edge of the same roof once before in the last two weeks, threatening to jump himself, the police said.
This time, he was distraught over a custody battle for his 1-year-old daughter, they said.


Corrections
An obituary on Friday about Eliot Benson, a securities analyst in Washington, misidentified one daughter and misstated the residence of another.
The daughter in New York City is Jennifer Benson; another daughter, Sherry Bronson, lives in Sunland, Calif.


Tyson, Women And Trouble
Back when Mike Tyson was a 17-year-old amateur boxer, his mentor, Cus D'Amato, persuaded the fighter's managers to buy Tyson the car of his dreams, a white Cadillac with a blue top.
On evenings in Catskill, N.Y., Tyson would sit out in the driveway in the car and listen to the radio, sometimes falling asleep in the front seat.


INSIDE
Twins Lead Series, 2-0
Minnesota beat the Atlanta Braves, 3-2, with the help of a disputed call by an umpire.
SportsMonday, page C1.
Corruption in Kenya
Western donors have cut aid to Kenya, saying that corrupt top Kenyan officals are keeping much of the money, diplomats say.
Page A9.
Hospital Chief Might Resign
Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo, the president of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation, is said to be negotiating his resignation.
Page B1.
More Goods, Not More Jobs
While production has risen for many products, the gains are so modest that new hiring might be delayed indefinitely.
Page D1.
Let's Make a Deal
Brash brokers across the Soviet Union are working 12-hour days to match buyers and suppliers of boots and bricks, blue jeans and computers, wheat and oil.
Page D1.


Jonathan Meltzer Weds Amy Tucker
Amy Lynne Tucker, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry Tucker of New York, was married last evening to Jonathan Matthew Meltzer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Meltzer of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., and Palm Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Mrs.
Meltzer, a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, is an agents' assistant at the William Morris Agency in New York.
Her father, a senior vice president of Oppenheimer &amp; Company, the Wall Street brokerage, is the president of the Richard Tucker Foundation, named after the bride's paternal grandfather, the late operatic tenor.
Her mother, Joan Tucker, is the executive director of university relations at Pace University.


Quotation of the Day
"Grab your toiletries, Pamela. Anything you need. Fast! Run!" -- Joel Barnett, atop his house in Oakland.  [ A11:1. ]


Wright Exhibition Stays On
The American Craft Museum has announced that the exhibition "Frank Lloyd Wright: Preserving an Architectural Heritage" has been extended through Jan. 19.
The exhibition of furniture, art-glass windows and other decorative designs by the architect was to have closed next Sunday.
The museum is at 40 West 53d Street.


Seeking the Serum to Cure Hospital Emergency Room Crises; Need for Supervision
To the Editor:
The recent tragic death of Yankel Rosenbaum in the State University of New York-Downstate-Kings County Hospital emergency room harkens back to the Libby Zion tragedy at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center and highlights, once again, serious flaws in the system of graduate medical education that have a deleterious effect on patient care.
The public and the press continually refer to residents as doctors.
While residents have graduated from a medical school and some may be licensed, they are all enrolled in a graduate medical education program called a residency.
The system of graduate medical education must be changed so that it is understood by the professors, directors of clinical services, the trainees and the public that resident "doctors" are graduate medical students and cannot be permitted to provide independent patient care services without a clearly accountable supervisory scheme.
The 405 regulations, which were developed in part as a response to the Libby Zion tragedy, need to be vigorously enforced.
While media focus has been on the provisions preventing sleep deprivation of residents, the regulations of greatest import and least mentioned are those with regard to supervision.
The committee that made the recommendations for the 405 regulations said, "It cannot be overemphasized that the intent of the committee is to increase the responsibility of the attending physicians in the supervision of residents."
Medical educators endorse the precept that doctors are not qualified to practice medicine until they finish at least the minimum of three years of graduate medical education required by many specialties for board certification.
BERTRAND M. BELL, M.D.
Professor of Medicine Albert Einstein College of Medicine Bronx, Oct. 9, 1991


Let the U.S. Deliver on Its Duty to Haiti; Fading on Aristide
To the Editor:
The United States Government has condemned the overthrow of Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the hugely popular President of Haiti.
But now it says that President Aristide's return should be conditioned on negotiations with the militarily, politically and economically powerful sectors of the country, and upon a pledge of respect for human rights by the Aristide Government.
While negotiations and respect for human rights are commendable goals, no one should have any illusions that our Government is concerned with achieving either democracy or human rights in Haiti.


Review/Music; Out of Obscurity, at 64, Touching the Heart of Jazz
It's rare to find a full-blown talent lurking in the woods, out of sight.
Ability, perhaps to be unduly optimistic, is often rewarded, and obscurity is just as often a function of an artist's diplomatic ability as it is of public reception.
So to hear the saxophonist and composer Jimmy Heath's extraordinary concert at Cooper Union on Friday night, opening the American Jazz Orchestra's season, was both a revelation and a rebuttal of the larger cultural system meant to reward talent.
Mr.
Heath, who teaches at Queens College, is clearly one of the finest arrangers and composers working in jazz.
And, at 64 years old, he's just beginning to receive his due.
The concert made a case for detail and play as co-workers in the activity of the imagination.
Mr.
Heath took several of his better-known compositions -- "C.T.A." and "Ginger Bread Boy" -- and arranged them for a full orchestra.
Counter lines intertwined; the entire orchestra became a running dialogue on the melodies; textures moved quickly from full to thin and pitch intricacies colored simple phrases.
It all added up to a series of works that seemed to draw on virtually the entire history of jazz orchestration and all its esthetic tricks and ploys.
And there was a freedom to his compositional hand, a willingness to indulge in pleasure, that symbolized the ability to subordinate work to the imaginative process.


One Too Many Diving Headers?
Omni magazine reports that soccer can be as dangerous to your health as boxing.
It cites an article in The American Journal of Sports Medicine that claims symptoms in some soccer players are similar to those seen in boxers, as a result of repeated blows to the head, over time. . . .
Once again, educators will make up the single largest running contingent by occupation in the New York City Marathon.
In the 1991 event, on Nov. 3, teachers and administrators will make up more than 4 percent of the runners, 1,146 of 25,000.


Georgia Saw Enough Of Nashville's Skyline
Three unbeaten teams -- Florida State, Miami and Washington -- kept their undefeated status this weekend with impressive victories.
But while Florida State (7-0) was thrashing Middle Tennessee State, 39-10, and Miami (6-0) was routing Long Beach State, 55-0, Washington had a tougher time.
The Huskies (6-0) needed late-game heroics to escape with a 24-17 victory over previously undefeated California (5-1).


After Judging Thomas, Senators Face the Public
The Senate Judiciary Committee's heated hearings into Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court and whether he was guilty of sexual harassment reverberated well beyond Capitol Hill.
Record numbers of viewers watched the televised sessions for hour after riveting hour, and by the end of the inquiry, judgment was being passed not only on Judge Thomas but also on members of the Judiciary Committee, the judicial nominating process and the Senate generally.


Again, Reports a Hostage May Be Freed
The stalled machinery of a comprehensive prisoner exchange in the Middle East was set into motion once again Sunday, when a United Nations office in Beirut said an American hostage in Lebanon is expected to be freed sometime today..
One of the groups holding two Americans hostage released a statement early today in the Lebanese capital saying that it would free one of its prisoners in the next 24 hours.
The group, Islamic Holy War for the Liberation of Palestine, holds two of the five Americans, Alann Steen and Jesse Turner.
The statement was accompanied by a Polaroid photograph of Mr.
Turner.


In Senate Campaign, Ferraro Picks Up Where She Left Off
The sky is streaked with violet and the cocktails have turned watery by the time Senator Paul Simon of Illinois, a late arrival, clambers onto the deck to introduce the guest of honor.
"She made history," he says.
And then he adds, as if as an afterthought: "And she is going to make history!"
Through the dimness, Geraldine A. Ferraro flashes her familiar smile.
A shiver of emotion passes through the crowd.
The first woman to run for Vice President of the United States from a major party is running for public office again, hoping to win a Senate seat from New York next year.
Everywhere she goes -- Democratic fund-raisers in Washington, campaign stops in New York -- she generates tremendous feeling.
But is it excitement, or just nostalgia?
Running for Same Seat
When Walter Mondale summoned her to Minnesota to be his running mate in 1984, Ms.
Ferraro had been planning to run for the same Senate seat she is running for today -- the one held by the Republican Alfonse M. D'Amato.
As she explains it, she is simply picking up where she left off.
"Everybody's gone on with their lives," she said recently.
"It's time for me to get on with mine."
Yet to many New York politicians, there is something almost poignant about Ms.
Ferraro's latest campaign, a "you can go home again" optimism that defies most electoral experience -- especially her own.
The last time Ms.
Ferraro was considering a Senate race, she was an up-and-coming but relatively obscure Congresswoman from Queens.
Now, at age 56, she has a permanent place in American history texts, and her candidacy for any office is a national event.
But fame for Ms.
Ferraro came with unpleasant side effects.
In 1985, her husband, John Zaccaro, a real estate developer, pleaded guilty to scheming to fraudulently obtain bank financing.
Three years later, her son, John Jr., was convicted of selling cocaine to an undercover agent.
Both events received extensive coverage, and they continue to exert an undeniable drag on her candidacy.
At a recent campaign speech delivered to a standing-room-only crowd at Columbia University, Ms.
Ferraro said she thought crime was the biggest problem facing New York State.
After the speech, a young woman asked with some embarrassment how Ms.
Ferraro could be an effective voice against crime given her own family's experience.
Ms.
Ferraro brushed aside the question, saying that her husband and son, now in law school, had "paid their debt to society." But as she travels across the state, the question always seems to be lurking just beneath the surface.
"There's a lot of interest in her out there," said one prominent New York State Democrat.
"But I can't put my finger on a lot of support for her." Passion for Politics
"Gerry," he added, "has a passion for this stuff that overcomes a lot of other factors."
This passion may be hard for many to understand.
In her book about her Vice-Presidential race, Ms.
Ferraro wrote that if she had known the pain the campaign would cause her family she would have asked Mr.
Mondale to choose another running mate.
Now, though, Ms.
Ferraro maintains that neither she nor her husband nor her three children ever regretted the race.
"The good times so outweighed the bad," she said.
"Who else had the opportunity to do what we did?"
Ms.
Ferraro's propensity to talk about her feelings and experiences -- even if in contradictory terms -- makes her unusual among politicians; she gives an impression of openness at a time when many other candidates seem pre-programmed.
Rapport With Voters
"She distinguishes herself by having a real rapport with voters," said Madeleine Albright, a friend and foreign-policy adviser of Ms.
Ferraro's.
"People sense a personal warmth in her."
Ms.
Ferraro says she is running for the Senate because she believes in public service, and thinks she can make a difference.
"The thing I look forward to is being able to have a voice in the policies that affect this country," she said in a recent interview.
Clearly, she also misses Washington.
"I'm so anxious to get back here," she confided recently to a Washington reporter.
In her years in the House, Ms.
Ferraro was known as a moderate Democrat with a keen insider's understanding of Congress; after just three terms she was already close to many in the House leadership.
In the years since she left Washington, Ms.
Ferraro has satisfied her political urges by campaigning for other Democratic candidates.
If she has any doubts about becoming a candidate herself again, after a seven-year hiatus, she does not show them.
Facing a crowd of potential voters, she seems relaxed and confident, happy to be back on the stump.
Traditional Democratic Issues
In her campaign, Ms.
Ferraro says she plans to emphasize traditional Democratic issues like education and health care, and women's issues, like abortion rights, which she favors.
The recent hearings on the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court -- and the charges of sexual harassment leveled against him -- have heightened public consciousness about women's issues, and Ms.
Ferraro has not hesitated to take advantage of this.
When Anita F. Hill came forward to testify against Judge Thomas, Ms.
Ferraro praised her for her courage and disclosed that she too had once had a boss who made advances to her -- when she was 18 and working as a part-time typist.
Beyond raising such issues, though, Ms.
Ferraro does not offer many concrete proposals for dealing with them.
Her campaign speeches tend to be heavy on lofty goals and low on practical details.
"I want to go to Washington for the same reason I ran for Vice President," she told the audience at Columbia.
"I believe it is time to give the country back to the people." Other Democrats Running
More than a year before the election, it is difficult even to guess about her chances of making it back to Washington because of the crowded Democratic field.
In addition to Ms.
Ferraro, there are three other Democrats who would like the nomination.
They are Robert Abrams, the New York Attorney General; Elizabeth Holtzman, the New York City Comptroller, and Representative Bob Mrazek of Long Island.
On many issues, it is hard even to tell the candidates apart; in the past, as Ms.
Ferraro herself frequently notes, she has supported all of her present opponents.
Six years ago, for example, after she decided not to run against Mr.
D'Amato, she invited Mr.
Abrams to breakfast and urged him to make the race instead.
He declined.
"Bobby's a good person," Ms.
Ferraro said, acknowledging the awkwardness of now running against him.
"But I can be the more effective person."
In this confusing four-way race, Ms.
Ferraro has the obvious advantage of nearly universal name recognition, and the money that that attracts.
Federal election filings show that she led her rivals in fund-raising for the first six months of the year, although she also led them in spending.
Negative Feelings Expressed
Some recent polls, which are considered highly speculative, show Ms.
Ferraro to be gaining on Mr.
Abrams, who is generally considered the front-runner for the nomination.
But the polls also show voters have stronger negative feelings about Ms.
Ferraro than they do about her opponents.
Ms.
Ferraro candidly acknowledges her high negatives, and speaks openly -- indeed disconcertingly so -- about how she plans to combat them.
"When we did our focus groups, we found out there are people who don't like me -- it's hard to say, but they don't," she said in an interview at her Manhattan campaign office.
"When we pressed it," she continued, "when we said what do you know about her, they said 'We know she ran for Vice President, we know she had all this personal stuff.' When we said to them: 'Did you know her father died when she was 8, that she attended college on a scholarship, that she went to law school at night?' When you went back to them, their opinions moved." Heavy on Personal History
Not surprisingly, Ms.
Ferraro's stump speech, still in its formative stages, leans heavily on her personal history -- on her painful childhood, her hard-won college education and her struggle to attend law school at night.
Still, it is precisely Ms.
Ferraro's personal history that has prompted many New York Democrats to question whether she is the best candidate for the party to put up against Senator D'Amato next November.
Mr.
D'Amato, a second-term Republican, has been badly bruised by a series of recent ethics investigations (Over the summer, the Senate Ethics Committee rebuked him for the way he managed his office but declined to censure him.) Some Democrats fear that Ms.
Ferraro's own experience would make it difficult for her to exploit the Senator's most obvious vulnerabilities.
"There is a concern among active Democrats that the Achilles heel for D'Amato is the ethics problem," said Ed Szczesniak, chairman of the Onondaga County Democratic Party.
"So the person with the greatest opportunity for success is the person who is quote-unquote squeaky clean." Ms.
Ferraro, he said, lowering his voice, "comes with baggage."
Many Democrats are also concerned about the "spoiler" effect that Ms.
Ferraro's candidacy could exert.
Political analysts say they believe she will draw support away from Ms.
Holtzman in New York City and Mr.
Abrams upstate, making it difficult for any candidate to enter the general election with a clear mandate.
And recently, some feminists have gone so far as to urge either Ms.
Ferraro or Ms.
Holtzman to drop out of the race to avoid splitting the women's vote.
For her part, Ms.
Ferraro dismisses these worries as "shallow," and as for the concern that she is not the best candidate to challenge Senator D'Amato, Ms.
Ferraro insists it is unfounded.
"Everybody knows everything about me, and everything they know is good," she says, adding, If you're Al D'Amato, how do you attack someone's family?"


Marchers Remember Bronx Girl Found Slain a Year Ago


Citing Corruption by Kenya Officials, Western Nations Are Canceling Aid
Corruption among top Kenyan Government officials has become so pervasive that Western donors, no longer confident that their assistance is reaching the people it is intended for, are cutting their aid programs, Western diplomats and economists say.
Further, corruption is a deterrent to new investment in Kenya, economists and foreign officials say, and a Bush Administration official says the American Embassy here has told Washington in a report that it believes that President Daniel arap Moi and some of his top aides and relatives are the main offenders.


Review/Music; Kurt Masur Courts Philharmonic's Younger Set
There was nothing particularly wrong with the Young People's Concert presented by Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic on Saturday afternoon at Avery Fisher Hall.
Mr.
Masur welcomed the audience of children and their guardians as "old friends," asked a few players to demonstrate their instruments and then offered a programmatic introduction to Dvorak's "New World" Symphony before playing the work in its entirety.
Mr.
Masur urged his young charges to imagine what it must have felt like to come to New York in the 1890's from rural Czechoslovakia, how Dvorak must have felt "a little homesick" but also had exciting "new impressions" of the New World.
He demonstrated the Indian song of the second movement and what he called the triumphant "anthem of America" played by the brass in the final movement.
The conductor was gentle (he urged silence between movements by talking about how different a symphony is from a television program) and he was kind (a bit perturbed by a missing second trombonist, the conductor said it felt like someone missing a tooth).
And the children I went with were ready to hear the finely performed music again (a 10-year-old boy said it was "great"; a friend's son said he was ready to forget about "New Kids on the Block" and as for a music critic's 8-year-old daughter, she liked the loud exciting sections, was reminded at one point of the "Nutcracker Suite," was bored by the talk, and liked one advantage of compact disks: "you can fast forward some parts.")


Volcano Ash Is Smothering Vast Area of Argentina
Clouds of fine ash sent aloft in the eruption of a Chilean volcano two months ago have settled on a vast, sparsely populated area of southern Argentina, choking off grasses, starving to death hundreds of thousands of sheep and threatening to turn much of Patagonia -- a delicate ecosystem of arid steppe -- into a desert wasteland.
While no human lives are known to have been lost in the eruption of the Hudson Volcano in the Chilean Andes on Aug. 12, scientists and Government officials are just now beginning to realize the extent of its potentially permanent ecological damage across an area five times the size of Connecticut.


Benjamin Mintz, Sports Administrator, 70
Benjamin Elliot (Ben) Mintz, a longtime Cornell University sports administrator, died at Tompkins Community Hospital in Ithaca, N.Y., on Saturday.
He was 70 years old.
Mr.
Mintz, who was born in Ithaca and graduated from Cornell in 1943, served as the Cornell sports information director from 1949 until his retirement in 1976.
He was inducted into the Cornell Athletic Hall of Fame in 1983.


Joe Who? Young Leads 49ers' Rout of Lions
There were doubts and whispers ever since the season started, and even Steve Young seemed to play as if he were in the imposing shadow of Joe Montana.
But today, with Montana mending and with his own confidence building by leaps and bounds, Steve Young finally stepped forward.
By his own description, Young played a mistake-free game.
And with the exception of some occasional penalties, so did the San Francisco 49ers, who shut down Barry Sanders and the run-and-shoot offense of the Detroit Lions, 35-3, at Candlestick Park.


James R. Karoli Marries Ellen Love Hochman
Ellen Love Hochman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Hochman of Boynton Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to James Richard Karoli, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
James Karoli.
Rabbi Jacob Israel officiated at the Stouffer Hotel of Westchester in White Plains.
The bride, who is keeping her name, graduated from New York University and received a master's degree in Latin from Columbia University and an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is the vice president of marketing for the Maier Group, a home video company in New York.


U.S. Says Mob Is Drying Up In New York
New York's five Mafia families, who survived years of Federal attack, have deteriorated in recent months to the point that three are virtually out of business and two are crumbling, many law-enforcement authorities and experts say.
After 60 years of illicit expansion, the combined racketeering power and wealth of New York's five traditional families is going the way of their counterparts in most other cities around the country, who have succumbed to a decade of aggressive Federal prosecution, the authorities say.


Review/Television; Sports to Defeat? That's a Job for Danielle Steel!
With a major sports event, the World Series, on CBS these days, NBC is hauling out its proven counterprogramming weapon: Danielle Steel.
As the schedule turns out, only one of this week's two Steel adaptations, Wednesday's "Danielle Steel's 'Daddy' " at 9 P.M., will go up against baseball.
But tonight's "Danielle Steel's 'Palamino,' " also at 9, can still test its mettle against professional football on ABC.
Sports for the men, romance for the women -- get it?
Sounds simple-minded, admittedly, but last season's adaptations of Steel novels held their own quite impressively against baseball and football super-events.
One became the second-highest-rated television movie of the season.
Ms.
Steel is a force, and not only on the best-seller lists where, according to the Guinness Book of Records, she once racked up a run of 381 consecutive weeks.


A High-Tech Watergate
As a former Federal prosecutor, Massachusetts attorney general and U.S.
Attorney General, I don't have to be told that the appointment of a special prosecutor is justified only in exceptional circumstances.
Why, then, do I believe it should be done in the case of Inslaw Inc., a small Washington-based software company?
Let me explain.
Inslaw's principal asset is a highly efficient computer program that keeps track of large numbers of legal cases.
In 1982, the company contracted with the Justice Department to install this system, called Promis, in U.S.
Attorneys' offices.
A year later, however, the department began to raise sham disputes about Inslaw's costs and performance and then started to withhold payments.
The company was forced into bankruptcy after it had installed the system in 19 U.S.
Attorneys' offices.
Meanwhile, the Justice Department copied the software and put it in other offices.


Greenwich Village Journal; After 25 Years, Writers' Bar Is Place of Landmarks
The hand-lettered sign by the door of the quintessential Greenwich Village writers' bar says, "Tuesday, Oct. 22, the Lion's Head will be closed from 4 P.M. to midnight for a private party." What it does not say is what all the regulars know: the invitation-only affair is to be a celebration of the bar itself, on its 25th anniversary.
So maybe the Clancy Brothers will stop by with their guitars, the way they did not long ago, the night they put on an impromptu before-, during- and after-dinner concert.
Maybe Timothy Hutton will be there.
Or Bill Murray.
Or Jackie Mason.
Or Norman Mailer, who depended on the Lion's Head as a kind of campaign headquarters when he ran for Mayor in 1969.
Or Pete Hamill.
Or his brother John, a screenwriter who is working on the film version of a novel by one of their other brothers, Denis.


Howard R. Swearer Is Dead at 59; Led Brown University in the 80's
Dr.
Howard R. Swearer, who became president of Brown University in troubled times but revitalized the campus and advanced its ranking as one of the nation's leading schools, died Saturday at home in Thompson, Conn.
He was 59 years old and died of cancer, the university said.


Need Is Generally Seen For Nudging Economy
With the economy showing few signs that it is doing little more than limping along, some analysts are becoming increasingly convinced that a measured dose of fiscal stimulus is needed to insure a modest recovery.
That view is also held by the Bush Administration, which last week made plain its intention to introduce a number of measures it contends will stimulate growth.


Murphy's Law Takes the Court
The International Squash Players Association threw a competitive party in New York last week and everybody came.
The only problem was that the court planned for the United States Open couldn't be erected in time.
So, the event, a $60,000 men's professional tournament that attracted the best players in the world, was forced to start a day late.
The final, between brothers RODNEY and BRETT MARTIN from Sydney, Australia, ended up being played Saturday afternoon instead of Friday night. (Rodney won.)


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:  Agouron Pharmaceuticals Inc., 2 million shares.
Paine Webber Group Inc.
Barefoot Inc., 2.5 million shares.
William Blair.
BE Avionics Inc., 3 million shares. Paine Webber.
Century Federal Financial Corp., 2.75 million shares, Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Collective Bancorp Inc., 1.3 million shares.
Lehman Brothers.
Damon Corp., 6.2 million shares.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Dateq Information Network Inc., 800,000 shares.
Chicago Corp.
Duracell International Inc., 12 million shares.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Finlay Enterprises Inc., 6.05 million class A shares.
Montgomery Securities.
Gaylord Entertainment Co., 9 million shares.
First Boston Inc.
Goody's Family Clothing Inc., 3 million shares.
First Boston Inc.
Hoenig Group Inc., 1.5 million units (2 shares, 2 warrants) J. E. Sheehan &amp; Co.
Latin America Equity Fund Inc., 4 million shares, Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Leewards Creative Crafts Inc., 2.3 million shares.
Prudential Securities Group Inc.
Mitek Surgical Products Inc., 900,000 shares.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist Inc.
Noise Com Inc., 1 million shares. F. N. Wolf &amp; Co.
Old Dominion Freight Lines Inc., 2 million shares. Alex. Brown &amp; Sons Inc.
Total Compagnie Francaise des Petroles S.A., 2.9 million total ordinary B shares, global offer, including 1.5 million shares offered in the United States by Lehman Brothers.
Tnc Media Inc., 800,000 shares.
R.
G.
Dickinson.
United Wisconsin Services Inc., 1 million shares.
Robert Baird &amp; Co., Milwaukee.
Utilicorp United Inc., 5 million shares. Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Source: MCM CorporateWatch


Big Jury Award Against Upjohn
An Illinois man who said the loss of his left eye was caused by the improper use of the drug Depo-Medrol has won a $127.6 million jury award from its manufacturer, the Upjohn Company.
The Cook County Circuit Court jury decided on Friday that the man, Meyer Proctor, should receive more than $3.1 million in compensatory damages and $124.6 million in punitive damages.


Rock and Pop Stars Find a New Market In Children's Books
In the 1960's and 70's, rock stars had literary pretentions on a grown-up scale.
Bob Dylan's "Tarantula," for one, read like an attempt to combine "Finnegans Wake" and Gertrude Stein.
Now, with the graying of the original rock generation, the main literary influences seem to be "The Little Engine That Could" and "Where the Wild Things Are."


Essay; Reading Mario's Mind
When I was in Tokyo last month, they asked me what the possibility was that I would run for President.
I told them that question was too easy.
If they had asked me, "Do you think there is a possibility that while the Governor of New York is in Japan there will be an earthquake and a typhoon in two days?" I would have said, "Not likely." But of course -- there was an earthquake and a typhoon in those two days.
So the unlikely sometimes happens.
But I can't get away with this cuteness routine forever.
I've been saying I have no plans to run, and no plans to make plans, but now it's a year to Election Day and it's time to stop playing Hamlet and start playing for keeps.


Westinghouse's Sour Experience
In real estate circles, Westinghouse Electric's real estate lending business is regarded as one of the great disasters of the 1980's, up there with boom-and-bust savings and loans and oil-patch banks.
And many analysts say the worst is not over.
Never mind that twice this year, the big Pittsburgh-based company has been forced to reconcile itself to huge losses from misguided loans by its Westinghouse Credit subsidiary for suburban hotels, motels, apartments and office buldings.
Two weeks ago, it earmarked $1.68 billion as a reserve against additional loan losses, bringing to $2.66 billion its total addition to reserves this year.


The Ghost Gallops On to Newsstands
In this year of special memories (Joe and Ted, Mickey and Roger and Bobby and Ralph), Sports Illustrated has jumped in with a special issue, out today, called "Classic." A dour Red Grange, in black-and-white, stares out from the cover.
"We've never done it before, but we've been thinking about it for some time," said DAVID BAUER, the editor of the issue.
Inside, stories include one rating the best quarterback in the history of collegiate football (STEVE YOUNG of Brigham Young gets the nod), and one asking the rhetorical question "Could Cousy Play in Today's N.B.A.?"


Ms. Chiarella Is a Bride on L.I.
Roberta Lynn Chiarella, the daughter of Dorothy Chiarella of Bayside, Queens, and the late Joseph A. Chiarella, was married yesterday to Richard Brian Philpott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard G. Philpott of Rochester.
The Rev.
Richard R. McKeon Jr., an Episcopal priest, officiated at the North Hills Country Club in Manhasset, L.I.
Ms.
Chiarella, who is 36 years old and is keeping her name, is the vice president of creative services and public relations for Yves Saint Laurent Parfums in New York.
She graduated from the Parsons School of Design.
Her mother is a marketing manager for the New Projects Group, a cosmetics marketing concern in Manhattan.
Her father owned Ad Graphics, an advertising agency in New York.


Soviet Commodity Markets Thrive
"Thirty thousand rubles commission for three minutes' work," Vitaly Shorin, one of Moscow's brash new breed of commodity brokers, said with a grin as he signed a contract to sell a million rubles' worth of television sets and videocassette recorders.
At a time when central planners no longer tell enterprises what to sell or whom to sell to, Mr.
Shorin works breathless 12-hour days matching buyers and suppliers of boots and bricks, blue jeans and computers, wheat and oil.
A year ago when he began working at the exchange, fewer than 10 commodities exchanges existed in the Soviet Union.
Now more than 400 are flourishing, from Moscow and Kiev to Ulan-Ude and Vorkuta.


Chief of New York's Hospitals Is Said to Be Ready to Quit
Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo, the president of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation, plans to resign, friends and associates say, in the middle of a series of inquiries into both his personal conduct and the operations of the largest public hospital system in the country.
Dr.
Carrillo was plucked by Mayor David N. Dinkins in April 1990 from the relative obscurity of a medical practice in Cambridge, Mass., to head a hospital system with a $2.7 billion budget and 51,000 employees, at a time when the system faced potentially crippling budget cuts.


Review/Opera; Bill T. Jones's 'Mother of Three Sons'; Moon, Sun and a Loss of Innocence
Bill T. Jones, as both choreographer and director, has taken some time-honored devices and given them an original twist in "The Mother of Three Sons." This is not the first opera that places dancers center stage and the singers to the sides or in the pit.
Mr.
Jones, in fact, appears to be reinventing the wheel, tentatively at first but finally with power.
The fact that the principal singer and the plot's protagonist -- Ruby Hinds -- is nearly always on stage differentiates this dance opera slightly from those in which all the dancers are on the sidelines.
In this instance Mr.
Jones is not burdened with having to tell a story; his dances do not move the action forward so much as distill it.


New Campaigns
*
The first advertising by the Leo Burnett Company, Chicago, for the Sony Corporation of America account that it won in May is being introduced during the CBS telecast of the World Series.
A commercial for Sony's Trinitron XBR television ends with only the word "Sony," a device that will be repeated in other spots and in print advertisements. *
The campaign is the agency's first since winning ESPN's account last month.


B-2 Will Stabilize Nuclear Deterrence
To the Editor:
I was disappointed by "B-Zero" (editorial, Oct. 1), contending that the B-2 Stealth bomber is superfluous and has no role to play in the country's defense strategy.
The fact is that the B-2 has two critical roles to play.
One is to help us make nuclear deterrence more stable even as we make our deterrent force smaller.
President Bush's recent initiative shifts us away from reliance on the fast-flying, multiple-warhead intercontinental ballistic missiles that have been the most vulnerable and unstable part of the nuclear deterrent and toward less vulnerable submarine-launched ballistic missiles and slower-flying bombers.


Researchers Exhume Doctor's Grave To Resolve Part of Huey Long Legend
Just after dawn today, men with shovels and a backhoe began digging in the Weiss family plot in Roselawn Cemetery.
After almost three hours of careful digging, a rusted steel vault was uncovered, and its dome was lifted to reveal a collapsed cypress coffin.
Inside the coffin were the remains of Dr.
Carl Weiss, who has long been believed to be Huey P. Long's assassin, and, a scholar hopes, the answer to one of Louisiana's major mysteries.


Unlikely Hero For Twins
When the Twins won the 1987 World Series, their third baseman was Gary Gaetti.
But when Gaetti joined the California Angels as a free agent after last season, the Twins signed Mike Pagliarulo, once the Yankees' third baseman.
And as spring training began, the Twins didn't know what to do with Scott Leius, a rookie infielder who grew up in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
"We wanted to keep Scott," said the Twins' manager, Tom Kelly, "but we had a hard time finding a spot for him. He probably would not have made the team if Pags hadn't been in a slump in spring training."


Costly Dolphin Fumble Saves the Oilers
Oilers 17, Dolphins 13
MIAMI, Oct. 20 (AP) -- Will the Miami Dolphins ever give the ball to Sammie Smith close to the goal line again?
For the second straight week Smith fumbled the ball near the opponent's end zone, today on a first-and-goal at the Oiler 1 with 3:10 left in the game.
Houston's Lamar Lathon hit the arm of a diving Smith, the ball rolled forward, and Cris Dishman recovered in the back of the end zone to save the victory for the Oilers (6-1).


Review/Theater; 'Heller's Wonderhouse': Back to Old Vaudeville
There is New Vaudeville and there is the old vaudeville, and then there's "Andre Heller's Wonderhouse," a variety show featuring some of the most ancient cliches and tired theatrics in show business.
A clown plays a tune by ringing dozens of tiny bells; the "king of paper sculpture" turns out to be a man who makes paper dolls and trees, and a Wagnerian-sized woman purses her lips and whistles Offenbach.
All that is missing from Mr.
Heller's penny-ante arcade at the Broadhurst Theater is for someone to hold his hand in front of a spotlight and project a bunny rabbit shadow puppet on a screen.
Just wait.
Almost any one of these eight acts might have been suitable as a warm-up routine for the Ed Sullivan show or as an entertainment for a 7-year- old's birthday party (probably the 7-year-olds would prefer Penn and Teller).
All of the performers have a certain facility at their crafts, albeit of a very limited kind, but, taken together, they cancel one another out.


PROTECT CHILDREN, POPE TELLS BRAZIL
In an impassioned address as he neared the end of a 10-day tour of Brazil, Pope John Paul II inveighed today against the abandonment and killing of children born to lives of poverty and hazard in the slums that coil about this country's cities.
Then, at a meeting with several hundred schoolchildren dressed in dazzling white, he sang along with them, pressed among them to bless them and exhorted their elders to practice "responsible parenthood."


Karen Rosen Has Wedding
Karen Rosen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald S. Rosen of Pine Brook, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Simon Borg, a son of Mary Alice Borg of New York and Dr.
Donald C. Borg of Princeton, N.J.
Rabbi Alan Silverstein officiated at the Palisadium in Fort Lee, N.J.
Mrs.
Borg, 33 years old, graduated from Pratt Institute.
She and her husband, a graduate of Harvard University, received master's degrees in communication arts from the New York Institute of Technology.
She is a product manager for Letraset, a computer graphics concern in Paramus, N.J.
Her father recently retired as a patent lawyer.
Her mother, Madge Rosen, is a group social worker at the Jewish Community Center in Newark.


From Suburbs, New Aid for the Homeless
The wind cut through Central Park just after midnight and the group of homeless men surged around 17-year-old Rory B. Quinn.
In another setting, the teen-ager from Hastings-on-Hudson, a place where the problems of the streets often seem far away, might have been frightened.
Instead, he asked in the early morning hours yesterday, "Do you need a blanket?"


McCraw to Be Met Hitting Coach
Working toward the completion of their coaching staff under their new manager, the Mets have hired Tom McCraw as their hitting coach.
The club did not announce the appointment, but a baseball executive familiar with the Mets' planning said they had asked for and received permission from the Baltimore Orioles to speak with McCraw.
He was the Orioles' hitting coach the last three years after having served the previous three years as a roving minor league hitting instructor in the Mets' organization.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9
Israel will attend a peace conference on the Middle East, as its Cabinet gave final and unconditional approval to participation in a meeting that will put the nation in direct negotiations with most of its hostile neighbors for the first time since 1948.
Page A1
A chance for a Mideast hostage swap was set into motion again when a U.N. office in Beirut said an American hostage in Lebanon is expected to be freed soon.
Israel is also reportedly prepared to release Arab prisoners held by an Israeli client militia.
A8
Iraq is balking at U.N. conditions for the sale of $1.6 billion in oil and the emergency purchase of food and medical supplies, saying the terms are overly intrusive.
International relief organizations in Iraq report a rise in malnutrition, infant mortality and infectious diseases there.
A8
Early vote hurts Turkish president A8
Corruption in Kenya limits aid given by Western countries, which are no longer confident that their assistance is reaching the people it is intended for.
The increasing corruption under President Daniel arap Moi has also made businesses leery of investing in the country.
A9
Mobutu ousts foe and renews chaos in Zaire A6
Part of Argentina is being choked by the clouds of fine ash sent aloft by the eruption of a Chilean volcano two months ago.
Hundreds of thousands of sheep are starving to death and Patagonia -- a delicate ecosystem of arid steppe -- could turn into a desert wasteland.
A1
Pope tells Brazil to protect its children A7
Cambodian refugees in Thailand will be moved by the Khmer Rouge into malarial, mine-strewn streches of the Cambodian jungle.
The refugees and observers fear that the repopulation plan will be used to control voting in elections called under a U.N. peace plan.
A3
Quake kills hundreds in Indian region bordering Nepal A5
Polish bishops try to regain their political role A7  National A10-14
A scientific version of the land rush could begin in genetic research if the Federal Government obtains patents on hundreds of human genes before knowing what role they play in the body.
In the past, researchers have applied for such a patent only after determining the gene's role and its potential uses.
A1
Lobbying on silicone breast implants reached a new intensity when 400 women with the implants came to Washington to argue against a ban.
F.D.A officials are considering a ban on the implants for safety reasons, but they say they must also weigh the procedure's popularity.
A1
David Duke won a place in a runoff for Louisiana's governor and said he was a new leader of the Republican Party's conservative mainstream.
In Washington, Republicans disavowed the former grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan and said he would receive no support from them.
A1
A second look at Huey Long's death is being conducted by a scientist who exhumed the body of the man commonly thought to have assassinated the popular Louisiana boss.
A10
A calamitous fire in Oakland Hills ruined hundreds of houses, forced panicked evacuations and turned day tothe blackest night for miles.
Oakland Emergency Services said ten people had been killed by the fire on a day of record-breaking heat and gusting wind in northern California.
A1
Manufacturing leaders are skeptical about the recovery.
In interviews, officials from the nation's leading manufacturers said a modest 1 to 3 percent rise in production was too small to justify hiring new employees -- an essential step if the nation is to shake off the recession.
D1
The Clarence Thomas hearings have had a lingering effect on the Senators who played a significant role in the televised spectacle.
The offices of many Senators have been inundated with phone calls, letters and telegrams.
A14
Senators comments on harassment could help rights bill A14
Drug ring paid Noriega millions, witnesses say A13  Regional B1-5
Geraldine Ferraro's campaign for the Senate generates tremendous feeling at fund-raisers in Washington and campaign stops in New York.
But the reaction raises a question for the first woman to have run for Vice President: Is that excitement, or just nostalgia?
A1
Bronx and Queens to vote again in two City Council primaries B2
Candidates in Yonkers have cooled their passions since it has become difficult to rage against a Federal judge's desegregation order.
Most of the public housing ordered by the court is nearly built, and the candidates for mayor are resigned to its construction.
B1
New York City's hospitals chief plans to resign, friends and associates of Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo say.
He is in the middle of inquiries into both his personal conduct and the operations of the largest public hospital system in the country, with a $2.7 billion budget and 51,000 employees.
B1
Concern for the homeless is growing in some quarters, in what many say is a response to the public backlash against increasing numbers of homeless people in the streets.
Westchester volunteers who hand out blankets at night are one example of this.
B1
New York's five Mafia families are fading because of aggressive Federal prosecution, the authorities say.
The families are in disarray, experts say, hurt by convictions and indictments of top leaders, murderous internal disputes, and members who have become Government witnesses.
B1
Greenwich Village Journal: A bar following one strain of New York City's social life is celebrating its 25th anniversary.
There are landmarks: the round table Mayor Koch used to occupy, the jukebox where playwright Lanford Wilson listened to one song incessantly.
B3
An appeal for peace in Crown Heights stirs few residents B3  Business Disgest D1
Sports C1-10
Baseball: Twins take 2-0 Series lead C1
Hrbek, the ultimate Twin C3
A controversial play at first base C3
Avery emerges as a star C4
Mets hire McCraw as a hitting coach C5
Basketball: A losing homecoming for Riley C2
Boxing: Is Tyson sexual aggressor or victim?  C1
Column: Vecsey on the SeriesC4
Anderson on Tyson-Holyfield rematch C10
Features: Sidelines C2
Question Box C10
Football: Jets defeat Colts, 17-6 C1
Oilers top Dolphins C6
Young leads 49ers to rout of Lions C6
Jets sputter en route to victory C7
Even Giants take swings at Hostetler C8
Redskin general manager makes mark C8
A dearth of upsets in college football C8
Hockey: Rangers lose to Edmonton C2
Rowing: Penn Athletic Club wins on Charles C8
Triathlon: American is an ironman C10  Arts/Entertainment
"The Mother of Three Sons": Modern using the mythic C13
A loss of innocence C13
Theater: "Heller's Wonderhouse" C15
Music: Robert Wilson at cathedral C13
Classic folk of Hungary C15
Philharmonic for the young C14
Marina Lima from Brazil C14
Word and Image: Rock stars and children's books C13  Obituaries B10
Howard Swearer, former president of Brown University  Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A16
Get guns off the street
A French-German army?
Tiny babies, big problems Letters A16
William Safire: Reading Mario's mind A17
Anthony Lewis: Breaking the logjam A17
Elliot L. Richardson: A high- tech Watergate A17
Marcia Millman: Needed -- a Federal Kinsey Report A17


Khmer Rouge's Plan to Move Refugees Back Into Cambodia Creates Panic
The letters from the Cambodian refugees, written in a panicked scrawl and pushed into the hands of foreign relief workers along the Thai-Cambodian border, say the old, terrible fear has returned.
"The ghost of 1975 is coming back," one frantic letter said, referring to the year that the Khmer Rouge overran Cambodia and began a nearly four-year reign of terror that left more than a million Cambodians dead in a total population of seven million and ended with an invasion by Vietnam.
"Please help me!" the writer said.  "I cannot stay. I don't know how I can escape."


Sports of The Times; Big Herby Plays Heavy in Sumoball
KENT HRBEK has been noting slight signs of complacency among the fans of the Upper Midwest, so last night he gave the people something different under the dome.
The beefy home boy brought sumo wrestling to the World Series as the Twins outrassled the Braves, 3-2, on a homer by Scott Leius in the eighth inning for their sixth straight home victory in two World Series in the Metrodome.


Polish Bishops Try to Regain Their Political Role
Poland's Roman Catholic bishops moved today to reassert their role in national politics, urging the faithful to vote in elections next Sunday for candidates who espouse Christian values and oppose abortion.
In a letter read aloud at the St.
Francis Church in this rural hamlet and at every other Mass in Poland today, the bishops counseled Catholics to support "only those political groups that favor protection of life from the moment of conception, that respect family rights and that demonstrate by their activities deep concern about Poland and respect for its tradition stemming from Christian roots."


Not the Typical College Kicker
JASON HANSON of Washington State has already made it in two worlds that are not often compatible -- academics and athletics: Earlier this season, he set a National Collegiate Athletic Association field-goal record, kicking one 62 yards without a tee.
And that kick sailed through goal posts that the N.C.A.A. made almost 5 feet narrower for this season.
Hanson, a senior, has a grade-point average of 3.78 out of a possible 4.0.
He also handles his team's punting and place-kicking.
He earned G.T.E.
Academic all-America honors as a place-kicker in 1989 and then as a punter last year.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Navratilova Set Back Anke Huber of Germany upset Martina Navratilova, 2-6, 6-2, 7-6 (7-4), in the final of the Women's Tennis Association tournament in Filderstadt, Germany.
The victory by the 16-year-old Huber spoiled Navratilova's bid to equal Chris Evert's record of 157 tournament triumphs.
It was only the second tournament victory for Huber and her biggest so far.
Her first was last year at Schenectady, N.Y. (AP) Lendl Defeats Wheaton: Ivan Lendl overpowered David Wheaton, 6-3, 7-5, 6-1, yesterday and won the Marlboro Championships in Hong Kong for the second consecutive year in the exhibition event.
Lendl, ranked fifth in the world, broke Wheaton in the third and ninth games in the first set.
He had a tougher time in the second set, but won it with a service break in the 12th game.
Lendl dominated the third set, breaking Wheaton three times. (AP) Stich a Winner: Michael Stich defeated Jan Siemerink of the Netherlands, 6-4, 6-4, 6-4, to win the CA Trophy tournament in Vienna.
By achieving a break in each set, Stich had the advantage of taking the set with his own service.
He did so almost effortlessly as Siemerink never came near breaking his service. (AP) FOOTBALL Ismail Zips to Victory Raghib Ismail raced 69 yards for his first professional punt-return touchdown, giving the Toronto Argonauts a 34-27 victory over the Calgary Stampeders in a Canadian Football League game yesterday in Toronto.
Ismail caught the punt on the right sideline, cut across the field, got great blocking and went into the end zone untouched with 1 minute 44 seconds remaining. (AP) GOLF Ballesteros Fights Back Seve Ballesteros equaled Gary Player's record of five world match-play titles yesterday with a 10-birdie, no-bogey performance that gave him a 3-and-2 victory over Nick Price in Virginia Water, England.
Battling the flu, a bad back and a painful foot, Ballesteros rallied from three down after only four holes against Price.
They were tied at the halfway point of the 36-hole match, and Ballesteros went ahead at the 20th hole and never trailed after that. (AP) Coody Holds On: Charles Coody shot a one-under-par 71 yesterday to withstand a charge by Lee Trevino and capture the Transamerica senior championship in Napa, Calif. (AP)


After Judging Thomas, Senators Face the Public
The Senate Judiciary Committee's heated hearings into Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court and whether he was guilty of sexual harassment reverberated well beyond Capitol Hill.
Record numbers of viewers watched the televised sessions for hour after riveting hour, and by the end of the inquiry, judgment was being passed not only on Judge Thomas but also on members of the Judiciary Committee, the judicial nominating process and the Senate generally.


Seeking the Serum to Cure Hospital Emergency Room Crises
To the Editor:
I commend your Oct. 8 editorial addressing what has become a crisis in this city's hospital emergency rooms, and the emergency that prevails at Kings County Hospital.
The hospital lies within my Congressional district, and I have participated over recent years in many community efforts to improve staffing and care, only to see these attempts at a cure fail for lack of the one serum that could do the job: adequate financing.


Who's On First? Not Gant
The scene about to unfold had the potential of a classic World Series confrontation.
David Justice of Atlanta at the plate.
Runners on first and third.
Two outs.
Top of the third.
Minnesota's Kevin Tapani on the mound, trying to preserve a 2-1 lead in Game 2.


Miss Gardner, Student, Wed
Elisabeth Zane Gardner, a third-year law student at New York University, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Eric Ostrow, an associate at the New York law firm of Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel.
Rabbi Richard Chapin performed the ceremony at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Ostrow, 26 years old, graduated from Yale University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan D. Gardner of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Her father is an executive vice president of the New York advertising agency of Della Femina McNamee.
Her mother, Janet Gardner, is a writer and an editor.


CHRONICLE
For the first year or so after she retired in 1989 as general director of the New York City Opera, BEVERLY SILLS cast about, seeking the kind of life she had been too busy to lead when running the opera.
"When you leave full-time work, you look around to see what you're missing, so I went to a lot of fashion shows and chaired four charity balls," she said the other day by telephone from her home in New York City.
"But that is not my life style."


A Hostage Release Is Expected
A United Nations office in Beirut said an American hostage in Lebanon was expected to be freed sometime today.
Page A8.


Dividend Meetings


Corrections
A report on Oct. 7 about the wedding of Ellen Meshnick and Paul Immerman misidentified the school from which he received his law degree.
It is Brooklyn Law School.


Jets' Victory Looks Anything but Pretty
After the game here this afternoon was over and Jets quarterback Ken O'Brien was about to limp to the bus on his sore right ankle, he was asked if his team's victory over the Colts defined the term "winning ugly."
"No, winning is always pretty, pretty," O'Brien said.
"I'd always rather win a game like this than to lose one, 101-100."


Brush Fire Kills 10 in Oakland; Thousands Flee
A calamitous brush fire swept through expensive neighborhoods in hills of Oakland today, killing 10 people, forcing panicked evacuations and turning day to the blackest night for miles around.
An Alameda County Supervisor, Don Perata, said the coroner's office had confirmed the deaths of 10 people, including that of an Oakland police officer.
The Oakland Emergency Services Command Center said five of the dead were from one family, and the Mayor of Oakland said some firefighters had been killed.
Sixty-eight people were taken to hospitals suffering from smoke inhalation and burns, officials said.
Most were treated and released, but officials said they expected the number of injured to continue to rise.
Houses Destroyed
The Mayor of Oakland, Elihu Harris, said at a news conference that an estimated 200 houses had been destroyed but that an accurate count was impossible.
But Mr.
Perata said at a separate news conference later that the estimate was "ridiculously low."
Mayor Harris said: "Firefighters find themselves overwhelmed. This fire continues to spread and continues to cause chaos."
By late tonight, officials said that 3,200 people had fled their homes, the fire had spread across 1,700 acres in the east Oakland hills section of the city and it was still burning out of control.
Fire raged unchecked at nightfall, when the airplanes and helicopters fighting the blaze were grounded until morning.
After darkness fell, a band of orange some 10 miles long stretched across the starless, smoky sky.
Flames shot hundreds of feet high in the hills, groves of oily eucalyptus trees exploded and houses were swallowed in flame one at a time.
The blaze jumped from house to house, moving rapidly in a southwesterly direction, and threatened Piedmont, a small town made up mostly of multimillion-dollar homes.
The fire began at 11 A.M. today and is believed to be the rekindling of a small grass fire that began Saturday in the east foothills of the city.
Both the City of Oakland and the County of Alameda have declared a state of emergency this afternoon.
After arriving from Sacramento by helicopter, Gov.
Pete Wilson also declared a state of emergency in the area and placed the National Guard on alert.
On an afternoon of record-breaking heat and gusting wind, the fire raced through the dry canyons, engulfed the ridges, leapt across highways and defied the efforts of more than 200 firefighters from as far away as Mendocino, on California's north coast.
Hotel Is Evacuated
Within a few hours at least 45 homes in the exclusive hillside neighborhoods had been destroyed, and a huge condominium complex with stunning views of San Francisco Bay was enveloped in fierce flames.
The Claremont Hotel, an elegant confection in the hills of Oakland near the Berkeley border, was evacuated early in the blaze, as were several dormitories, and fraternity and sorority houses on the southeastern side of the campus of the University of California at Berkeley.
Several recreation areas on the ridge were also evacuated.
A few blocks below the Claremont Hotel, curiosity seekers, with handkerchiefs over their mouths and radio headphones on their ears, watched the flames crest the ridge and inch ever lower on the hillside, devouring homes in their wake.
With no sign that the 30-mile-an-hour winds were abating and with the temperature near 90 degrees, it was evident this afternoon that the devastation would be vast.
In some cases, people had only minutes to evacuate their homes.
The fire moved so quickly through the tinder dry hills, parched after five years of drought, that areas apparently safe one minute were deadly the next.
Police cars crawled through the winding streets, sirens blaring, begging homeowners to evacuate and go to emergency centers that were set up in nearby schools.
One such center was opened and closed in a matter of hours as the fire neared.
The Red Cross reported that 800 people had come to the five shelters it had set up.
A Chaotic Scene
The fire closed highways and tunnels, stopped service on certain lines of the region's subway system and caused power failures in Oakland and Berkeley that affected 9,000 customers.
Ash and debris rained down and so darkened the sky that streetlamps were turned on for miles around at midday.
Across the bay in San Francisco, a dark cover hung over Candlestick Park and a drizzle of ashes fell on the field during the football game between the 49ers and the Detroit Lions.
Explosions were heard around the area, which radio reports said were the result of transformers bursting into flame.
Roadblocks and official command posts were hastily assembled, moved and then reassembled elsewhere as the wall of flames moved down the hill and toward the more densely populated neighborhoods of Oakland and Berkeley.
"Up there on the ridge line it's taking out houses, pop, pop, pop," said Tracey Prevo, who was helping friends evacuate.
"Once the force of the blaze comes close, there's nothing a hose can do."
Some people wailed with fear as they loaded their cars or searched for their relatives.
One elderly woman driving toward her daughter's home was turned back by the police. 'Oh My God!'
"Is Contra Costa Road burning?" she asked, referring to her daughter's address.
The policeman nodded silently.
"Oh my God! Oh my God!" the woman cried.
As a long stream of evacuating cars moved down from the hills, helicopters clattered overhead, dumping buckets of water from nearby Lake Temescal and Lake Merritt.
On rooftops throughout the area, homeowners with masks or scarves over their mouths hosed down their roofs.
"Grab all the clothes in the closet, throw them in the van," shouted Joel Barnett, atop his house, to his wife below.
"Grab your toiletries, Pamela. Anything you need. Fast! Run!" Burns and Smoke Inhalation
Hospitals were put on alert as patients arrived suffering from burns and smoke inhalation.
Health officials warned of the danger of carbon monoxide fumes from the burning of synthetic furniture and of the risk from inhaling the smoke of burned poison oak.
Robert C. Maynard, the publisher of The Oakland Tribune, was forced to leave his home with only the clothes on his back, an extra pair of dungarees and a camera.
"It seemed to me early on that the community was outmanned by the fire from the very start," Mr.
Maynard said, amid the crack and bang of the flames and the whoosh of the wind.
Borrowing a Truck
Nearby, Brian and Kathy Kelleher loaded a borrowed flat bed truck with mattresses, boxes of compact disks, a tent and sleeping bags, mementos and "baby things" for the child they are expecting in two months.
"You hear about the Santa Ana winds, and what they do in Southern California, but we're not used to it," Mr.
Kelleher said.
"But this is the equivalent of the Santa Ana. People are in disbelief. They're not reacting fast enough."
Among those who lost their homes was Betty Ann Bruno, a television reporter who shared her grief and disbelief with viewers within moments of realizing that the house she had lived in for 30 years was gone.
"I kind of knew what this was like, because I've covered things like this," Ms.
Bruno said.
"But it's hard to find the words to express it when it happens to you. It's numbing. I don't even want to start dealing with it emotionally."
Today's fire apparently was a flare-up of a lesser blaze on Saturday, reported to be started by a lighted cigarette, that raced through the grasslands at the margin of Alameda and Contra Costa counties.
Prolonged Drought
This was expected to be a terrible fire season, because of the prolonged drought.
But unusually cool and gray weather held the fires in check until now, the hottest and windiest time of the year in Northern California.
Electrical failures shut down pumps, causing water to be cut off to the Rockridge section of Oakland near the Berkeley border.
Portable pumps restored some water flow, but water pressure in the area remained dangerously low.
Firefighters dragged 3,000 feet of hose into hills from functioning hydrants in an unsuccessful attempt to save homes in the area.
Officials reported that water used to fight the fire completely drained one reservoir, already low because of the drought.
The blaze was the worst in California since the brush fire in June 1990 that raged through the hills above Santa Barbara, destroying 560 structures.


Judith A. Kirschenbaum Is Married
Judith Ann Kirschenbaum, an assistant District Attorney in Brooklyn, and Dr.
Serle Kevin Levin, a resident in anesthesiology at New York Hospital, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Henry Sosland officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Levin, 27 years old, graduated from Brandeis University and received a law degree from Boston University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Kirschenbaum of New City, N.Y.
Her father, known as Freddie Roman, is a comedian.


U.S. SEEKS PATENT ON GENETIC CODES, SETTING OFF FUROR
In a move that has set off an international scientific furor, the Federal Government is seeking to patent hundreds of human genes before knowing what role they play in the body.
Courts have for years allowed researchers to patent human genes, and such patents are a mainstay of biotechnology companies.
Some of the most lucrative new drugs on the market, including those that promote human growth, fight anemia and prevent heart attacks, are produced with patented genes and generate hundreds of millions of dollars in annual sales.


Nervous Times On Flatbush Ave.
ARNIE RAMIREZ, who says that losing has made him a nervous person, didn't want his Long Island University players taking their 4-1 victory over St.
Peter's of Jersey City on Saturday for granted.
So at 9 o'clock yesterday morning, he had them back at practice.
Ramirez likes to recall that it took PELE a month to score his 1,000th goal after scoring his 999th.
But Ramirez, one of the United States' most successful collegiate soccer coaches, never imagined he would have to wait so long to record his 200th victory at L.I.U.


Jets-Colts: Mediocre Beats Dreadful
The Jets and the Colts played predictable roles this afternoon, and the outcome of their game was no surprise, either.
The Jets, using a little flash in the passing game and showing very little spark in the rushing attack, defeated the Colts, 17-6, before a mostly emotionless crowd of 53,025 spectators here at the Hoosier Dome.
The Jets improved their record to 4-4 and the Colts dropped to 0-8.
The Jets playoff hopes remain strong, while Indianapolis' season is quickly turning to dust.
The Jets will have a bye next weekend and return to action Nov. 3 against Green Bay at Giants Stadium.


Arab Woman Shot After Stabbing Israeli Policeman


Dr. Mark A. Edelman Weds Ms. Naturman
Beryl Leora Naturman and Dr.
Mark Alan Edelman were married yesterday at Congregation Agudath Shalom in Stamford, Conn., by Rabbi Joseph Ehrencranz.
Mrs.
Edelman, 28 years old, graduated from Ithaca College.
She is an account executive at McGavren Guild Radio, a radio advertising concern in New York.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Naturman of Stamford.


Some See Lever for Rights Bill in What Senators Said About Harassment
After deploring sexual harassment during the debate on Clarence Thomas's Supreme Court nomination, the Senate is about to consider legislation that would enable victims of the practice to sue and collect damages.
When the Senate takes up the long-stalled civil rights bill, probably on Wednesday, women's groups and other civil rights organizations hope to use the attention stimulated by the accusation of harassment made by Prof.
Anita F. Hill against Judge Thomas to spur the Senate into dealing broadly with the issue.


TURKEY'S LEADERS TRAIL OPPOSITION
President Turgut Ozal's eight-year domination of Turkish politics, which saw a radical transformation to free-market economics and the establishment of a close working relationship with the United States, appeared to be in jeopardy today as early results pointed to his party's defeat in Sunday's parliamentary elections.
A loss could usher in a weaker coalition government that might thwart some of the economic reforms and policies that have raised Turkey's profile among Western nations.


Sports of The Times; Here Comes Tyson, Ready or Not
TO assure his $15 million guarantee, Mike Tyson, ready or not, knows that he must fight by the week of Jan. 20 or maybe never again.
If convicted of rape in his Indianapolis trial scheduled to begin Jan. 27, he could be sentenced to as much as 63 years in prison.
Evander Holyfield knows that he must fight then or risk losing his $30 million guarantee for what is projected as a $100 million extravaganza.


Another Lag in Corporate Giving
Corporate donations to charitable causes edged up 2 percent last year, to $6 billion, the third consecutive year of sluggish industry giving, according to a survey released yesterday.
The slump was seen as partly reflecting the recession's drag on corporate profits.


For Glavine, It's Two Pitches Too Many
Tom Glavine will remember two pitches from tonight.
One was in the first inning, one was in the eighth inning, and both landed in the left-field seats.
The dozens of other strikes he threw were rendered meaningless by the two that took off into orbit at the Metrodome.
There was the changeup to Chili Davis with two out in the first and a runner on base.
The pitch curved back over the plate.
Goodbye.
Then there was the fastball on the first pitch in the eighth to Scott Leius with the score tied, 2-2.
It was fat and rested on the middle of the plate.
Good night.


Review/Music; Robert Wilson Seeks an Old Ideal for a Cathedral
"As a student at the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn," the theatrical director Robert Wilson wrote recently, "I designed a model for a city that consisted of an apple with a crystal cube in its center. This cube represented a window to a world wherein, ideally, people from all social backgrounds, regardless of political, religious or philosophical beliefs, could congregate to exchange ideas and learn from one another."
The Big Apple today is surely no one's idea of a model city.
But it does offer, as Mr.
Wilson suggested, at least one forum of the sort he described, the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine on Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street.
In recent decades, under the imaginative leadership of the Rev.
James Parks Morton, the cathedral has recaptured some of the social, political and cultural relevance and even centrality that urban cathedrals and village churches held in simpler times.


Dance in Review
'Cave of the Heart' Martha Graham Dance Company City Center
Martha Graham's "Cave of the Heart," a turbulent haiku of a dance drawn from the legend of the Greek princess Medea, contains a juicy dream of a role for strong female dancers who can act.
Christine Dakin seized her chance on Thursday nightwhen the Martha Graham Dance Company presented the piece, which is set to a score by Samuel Barber that is as powerful as the dance itself.


Dance in Review
New American Ballet Ensemble  Marymount Manhattan Theater
It is disheartening to wonder why a choreographer bothered.
But that was the general effect of a program presented by the New American Ballet Ensemble on Saturday night at the Marymount Manhattan Theater.


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on Wednesday about an Oktoberfest celebration on Friday misstated the location of the New Haven Brewing Company.
It is in New Haven, not Norwalk.


Riley for Governor? Sorry, Not Just Yet.
Pat Riley, the local boy who made good, tonight returned to the scene of his earliest success for speeches, awards, photographs and a lot of handshaking.
He also found time to coach the Knicks, who lost to the Nets, 101-98, in an exhibition game at the Knickerbocker Arena here.
Like most exhibition games, this one featured equal parts inspiration and desperation, with a large amount of perspiration, as both squads continued to work themselves into regular-season shape.
But this turned into an exciting game.


Bridge
At the first world championship, in Budapest in 1937, the Women's Team title was won by Austria.
That country had to wait 54 years for a comparable triumph: they won the European title in Killarney, Ireland, in June, and took second place in the NEC Venice Cup in Yokohama, Japan, earlier this month.
Britta Widengren, a 78-year-old Swedish expert, a resident of Vienna who played in Yokohama as a replacement for one of the Killarney winners, is apparently the oldest person ever to win a gold or silver medal in a world championship.


Miss Kaplan Has Wedding
Deborah Michele Kaplan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard M. Kaplan of Teaneck, N.J., was married yesterday to Howard Mark Falkow, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Falkow of Margate, N.J.
Rabbi Louis Sigel officiated at the Sheraton International Crossroads in Mahwah, N.J.
Mrs.
Falkow, 22 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her husband.
She is an administrative assistant at Zenith Laboratories in Northvale, N.J.
Her father is a lawyer.
Her mother, Carol Kaplan, is a special-education teacher in the New York City school system.


Corrections
A headline in some copies of Business Day on Saturday misidentified a company reporting a drop in earnings for the third quarter.
The Owens- Corning Fiberglas Corporation of Toledo reported a 22.9 percent drop in earnings.
Corning Inc., formerly the Corning Glass Company, of Corning, N.Y., had previously reported that its earnings rose 3.3 percent for the quarter.


Books of The Times; One Cat Is Contrite, Another Calculating
Particularly Cats . . . and Rufus By Doris Lessing Illustrated by James McMullan. 129 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $20.
The Cat Who Went to Paris By Peter Gethers Illustrated. 194 pages.
Crown. $15.
"The cat is the only non-gregarious animal," observed Francis Galton, the English scientist, in the late 19th century.
"It is retained by its extraordinary adhesion to the comforts of the house in which it is reared." Galton's attitude persists to this day, particularly among people who prefer dogs for their responsiveness to people.


Library Becomes Camelot for a Day


Statistical Solace For Barry Bonds
It's too soon to tell who the hero of this World Series will be.
But he won't necessarily be one of the Twins' or the Braves' regular-season hitting leaders.
In fact, some great Hall of Famers have been less than stellar in the Series.
Pitching seems to dominate the fall classic.
Following are the career batting averages of selected stars compared with their Series averages:


Coming Back; Get Guns Off the Street
Last year, gunfire killed 1,559 New Yorkers, including numerous innocents hit by bullets meant for others.
The gunfire did something else, just as destructive in its own way: It raised the fear level among seven million New Yorkers.
Hoodlums with guns have long been part of New York City.
But suddenly the guns are more ubiquitous and powerful, the hoodlums younger and more volatile.
Citizens who might once have challenged someone smoking on the subway hesitate now, for fear of a lethal response.
Guns are drawn over aggressive driving, casual insults, petty thefts.


Few in Crown Heights Join Marchers for Unity
The 250 marchers came yesterday with an appeal for peace and unity for the divided black and Jewish communities of Crown Heights.
But for the most part the residents of the Brooklyn neighborhood, who have made their own uneasy peace since the violence of two months ago, did not join in.
Framed by falling golden leaves, crisp autumn air and the stately features of Victorian homes that line Eastern Parkway, the marchers represented a disparate collection of civil rights and religious groups.
They chanted slogans about justice and fairness that have been often heard, but not always heeded, in the neighborhood.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Motorola Inc., Schaumburg, Ill., has filed for up to $500 million in debt securities, including some warrants.
No underwriter has been named.


Metro Matters; The Ins and Outs: G.O.P. Chances In Council Races
Decades ago, Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia said there was no Democratic or Republican way to clean the streets.
If the Clarence Thomas confirmation process proved that the parties can throw out the garbage differently, they often disagree even more over how to collect it.
Their differences are usually defined by ideology, political independence and party affiliation.
New York is a two-party town: the ins and the outs.
Most Republicans are out, with the freedom of nothing left to lose.
Democrats are in, and most have been reluctant to buck municipal unions that provide campaign contributions and votes.
As a result, garbage is collected largely the way organized labor wants: by government, rather than by private industry, and with collection routes that many consider inefficient.


Trade Group Head Sees Deeper, Longer Slump
"No one I talk to in the advertising business sees the remotest sign that we're out of the economic slough of despond," John O'Toole, president of the American Association of Advertising Agencies, said in a speech to the trade organization's 53d annual Western Region Convention in San Diego over the weekend.
Mr.
O'Toole listed the differences between this recession and previous ones that "point to a deeper and longer recession." Among them, he said, were the severe decline in advertising revenues being suffered by the media and the decision of advertisers to divert money normally spent on consumer promotions to trade promotions.


Computer Industry Gathers Amid Chaos
The nation's largest computer exhibition will open here Monday against a backdrop of widespread industry turmoil caused by rapidly advancing technologies and sputtering sales.
The chaos has sent computer makers and software publishers scurrying in search of safe harbors, entering unpredictable alliances, viciously slashing prices and gambling on untried products.


Accounts
*
DeBeers consumer and advertising division, London, to J. Walter Thompson Southeast Asia, Hong Kong, for its estimated $10 million Southeast Asia account previously handled by Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide.
The move consolidates DeBeers's Asian advertising at Thompson, which already handles Japan and Australia.


Between Headline and Book A Perilous Decision Lies
First the headlines blaze across the front of newspapers: "Kennedy Shot," "Nixon Resigns," "U.S. Attacks Iraq," "Gruesome Grave of Milwaukee Murderer's Victims," "Gorbachev's Out," "Gorbachev's Back," "Sex Charges Against Thomas."
Then the book publishers begin to wonder: How will one of the headlines look on the front of a book?


Bentsen Calls For Tax Cuts And I.R.A.'s
Senator Lloyd Bentsen, chairman of the Finance Committee, called today for a tax cut intended to provide relief for middle-income taxpayers and provide a stimulus to the economy.
The measure by Senator Bentsen, Democrat of Texas, would reduce taxes by $72.5 billion over the next five years by allowing a tax credit of $300 for each child 18 years old or younger in a family and restoring the availability of Individual Retirement Accounts to all taxpayers, regardless of income.
The cuts would be paid for by a 5 percent reduction in military spending.
Improved Odds for a Tax Change
Given that President Bush and the Republican leaders in Congress renewed their call just last week for a capital gains tax reduction to create more jobs, Mr.
Bentsen's proposal would appear to improve the chances for passage of some kind of tax legislation this year.
But an aide to Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the Illinois Democrat and chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, said Mr.
Rostenkowski did not expect Congress to be able to act before adjourning in about a month.
Mr.
Rostenkowski is preparing an alternative proposal.
In addition, the Republicans are likely to oppose Senator Bentsen on the ground that he is making a gesture to take advantage of a political issue on which the Bush Administration may be vulnerable.
Mr.
Bentsen denied such political motivations, maintaining in an interview: "I've been saying for months that I would introduce a bill to provide relief for middle-income Americans. I'm concerned very much about a double dip in the recession. The Administration is just now talking about a stimulant."
The White House chief of staff, John H. Sununu, repeated the Administration's preference for a cut in the capital gains tax and incentives for investment in research and development, when he was asked about the Bentsen proposal today on the ABC News program "This Week With David Brinkley."
Mr.
Sununu, speaking of the lagging economic recovery, said, "The problem is that our job growth is not as fast as we would like it." But he asserted that "the turnaround occurred back in May and June."  Seeks to Stimulate Economy
Senator Bentsen issued his proposal in the form of a statement released by his office staff here and discussed it today on the CBS News program "Face the Nation." Later, in a telephone interview from San Diego, he said his plan was not an attempt to pre-empt the Republicans on the question.
"They've been trying to talk their way out of the recession," he said.
His own plan, he said, would "help give a jump-start to the economy."
The committee that Senator Bentsen heads has among its responsibilities the writing of tax measures.
The Texas Democrat said he had discussed his proposals on Friday with both Mr.
Rostenkowski and George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Democratic majority leader in the Senate.
Mr.
Bentsen said that neither had seen details of his plan but that both were in favor of tax relief for middle-income Americans.
Other Ideas for Military Savings
The aide to Mr.
Rostenkowski said that he and the other Democratic leaders in the House were indeed in favor of such tax relief for the middle class but were not in favor of achieving it by using all the expected savings from military spending cuts.
Mr.
Rostenkowski's alternatives, his aide said, would call for using part of the expected military savings to finance some new domestic programs and to help reduce the Federal deficit.
Senator Bentsen said his proposal would encourage Americans to save more, while reducing the taxes of the middle class and stimulating the economy.
His proposed tax cuts and I.R.A. modifications would go into effect Jan. 1, while the reductions in military spending would start next Oct. 1.
Senator Bentsen estimated that the tax credits for families with children 18 years old and younger would cost the Treasury $60 billion over the next five years, while the I.R.A. changes would cost $12.5 billion.
A family of four with an annual income of $35,000 would save $600 on taxes a year, or 25 percent of their tax bill.
Such taxpayers, he said, had seen their taxes rise during the last decade while their income fell by 5 percent, factoring in inflation.
Current law limits tax deductions for I.R.A.'s to individuals with annual incomes under $25,000 and families with incomes under $40,000, and only if they are not covered by a pension plan.
Senator Bentsen seeks to allow all taxpayers to put up to $2,000 a year in I.R.A. accounts and deduct that amount when calculating their taxes.
A Return to Pre-1986 I.R.A.'s
His proposal would return the Individual Retirement Account to the status it held before the Tax Reform Act of 1986.
Under the 1986 changes, the tax breaks on I.R.A.'s were restricted to lower-income people in order to reduce the cost to the Treasury.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, a Democratic member of the Finance Committee, suggested today on the ABC program that he supported the Bentsen proposal, though not with enthusiasm.
"Nothing the matter with it," he said, adding with deliberate understatement that it "would do no harm."
But Senator Moynihan said the larger issue on which the United States ought to be focusing is the mounting interest on the national debt.
"It's eating us alive," he said.


Opponents Aren't Only Ones Taking Swats at Hostetler
The first time the new quarterback coach swung at him, Jeff Hostetler wondered, "What in the world is he doing this for?"
It was for your own good, Jeff.
Jim Fassel, the coach, was making a point.


Council Seats at Stake In Queens and the Bronx
In a rare rerun of the City Council primary two months ago, Bronx and Queens voters will troop to the polls tomorrow in two special Democratic primaries ordered by the courts because the winners could not be determined.
In the Bronx, a special election will give a former State Senator, Israel Ruiz Jr., a second chance to resurrect his political career after a fraud conviction in 1989 forced him out of the Senate.
He faces Sandra Ramos-Alamo, a local school board president who has the county party organization's backing.


Allison Hecht and Shawn Cooper Are Married
Allison Hecht, who graduated in June from Harvard University, and Shawn Jay Cooper, who received a law degree cum laude from Harvard the same month, were married yesterday at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Rabbi David Posner officiated.
The bride's maternal grandfather, Cantor Henry Cooper, assisted.
Mrs.
Cooper, 22 years old, is the daughter of Gail Cooper-Hecht Trief of New York, a theatrical costume designer, and Herbert E. Hecht of San Diego, a retired musical conductor.


New Delhi Journal; Tearful Bride, Just 10, Touches India's Conscience
It was a routine flight, a two-hour hop to New Delhi from Hyderabad in the country's south in a plane jammed with the usual business commuters and some tourists.
But in one row, a young girl sat sobbing, covering her tears with her hands.
Beside her, an unshaven man wearing a checkered Arabian headdress stared blankly out of the window.


Charles Schorin Weds Ms. Ores
Michele Ores, a student at New York Law School, and Charles Schorin, a vice president of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in New York, were married yesterday at Estherwood in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Rabbi Daniel Alder officiated.
Mrs.
Schorin, a graduate of Ohio Wesleyan University, is a daughter of Dr.
Celia Ores of Leonia, N.J., and Dr.
Richard Ores of Teaneck, N.J.
Her father is a general practitioner at the New York Veterans Administration Hospital.
Her mother is a pediatrician at Babies Hospital at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.


Honors
*
Uniworld Group, New York, won the most awards, 14, at the annual Communications Excellence to Black Audiences ceremony held on Friday in New York.
Burrell Advertising, Chicago, followed with 11.


Dance in Review
'Music and Dance From Tashkent, Central Asia' Asia Society
There was more music than dance in the vibrant program called "Music and Dance from Tashkent, Central Asia," presented by the Asia Society on Friday night.


Corrections
Because of a misdirected computer transmission, an article yesterday about Israel's nuclear program omitted a comment from Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's national security adviser.
Interviewed through an aide, Dr.
Kissinger said the issue of nuclear arms production at Israel's Dimona nuclear plant was never raised in the Nixon Administration's early years, and so he was never called upon to state a view on whether Israel should have atomic weapons.
In some editions, the article also erred in describing the biblical story of Samson; he was captured by the Philistines.


Review/Pop; A Brazilian's Melodic Sense
In Brazil, no foreign pop style survives unchanged.
Marina Lima, a Brazilian singer and songwriter who performed Wednesday night at S.O.B.'s, doesn't conceal her North American sources, among them Marvin Gaye, Joni Mitchell and, in a version of his bossa nova "Sign Your Name," Terence Trent D'Arby.
She transforms her models' steady-rolling vamps through her melodic sense, turning short melodies into sensual curves, with a voice that wafts lines like wisps of smoke.


Corrections
The Wine Talk column in The Living Section on Wednesday about Landmark Vineyards in California referred incorrectly to Grand Cru Vineyards.
The winery has filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Act but is still operating.


Oilers' Late Rally Beats Rangers
The Edmonton Oilers did everything wrong, and still won.
They speared two Rangers, and went off for major penalties at the worst of times.
They put too many men on the ice.
In the final minute, they were caught with an illegal stick and finished the game short-handed.
But when the final horn sounded, and when Esa Tikkanen picked himself up from the spot in front of his own crease where he had flung himself, the scrappy, low-budget Oilers had a 4-3 comeback victory at Madison Square Garden and the losers were screaming about replays again.


CHRONICLE
CARY GRANT refused to let the Variety Clubs honor him in any way.
Now the organization, which raises money to aid children and in which Mr.
Grant was active, will give a party tonight in the Cary Grant suite of the Warwick Hotel, where he lived for five years.


After Judging Thomas, Senators Face the Public
The Senate Judiciary Committee's heated hearings into Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court and whether he was guilty of sexual harassment reverberated well beyond Capitol Hill.
Record numbers of viewers watched the televised sessions for hour after riveting hour, and by the end of the inquiry, judgment was being passed not only on Judge Thomas but also on members of the Judiciary Committee, the judicial nominating process and the Senate generally.


Suzi Andiman Weds Scott Fischman
Suzi Andiman, the manager of passenger handling for Amtrak, was married yesterday to Scott Jeffrey Fischman, the chief executive and president of SFC Systems, a security company, both in Washington.
Rabbi Reuben Luckens, an uncle of the bride, and Rabbi Michael Luckens, a cousin of the bride, officiated at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Ms.
Andiman, 36 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of the State University of New York at Albany and has a master's degree in transportation from Northwestern University.
Ms.
Andiman is a daughter of Carol and Samuel Andiman of Valley Stream, L.I.
Her father is a retired New York City elementary school teacher.
Her mother, also retired, managed a health food store.


Let the U.S. Deliver on Its Duty to Haiti
To the Editor:
Across the country, on talk radios and letters to newspapers, many Americans have expressed their displeasure at the sometimes vociferous yet spontaneous marches staged by Haitians and Haitian-Americans in several United States cities in response to the bloody military coup that took place in Haiti on Sept. 30.
It is imperative that the latest events in Haiti, which once again brought death and despair to this impoverished Caribbean island, be placed in their proper perspective.
At first glance, it may seem that Haitians living in the United States are being ungrateful to their host.
But it behooves historians to throw the spotlight on the Haiti-United States connection, which dates back to the American Revolutionary War.


Question Box
Casey After the Bat
Q.
Suppose that Mighty Casey, instead of striking out to end the game, had smote a towering home run over the outfield fence.
But alas, while strutting around the bases, he
tripped, fell, broke a leg and was unable to reach home plate.
Would there have been any joy in Mudville?
In such a game-winning situation
There'd be no lack of celebration.
No egg left on faces
Or runners left on bases.
For once the ball had left the park,
The fans'd no longer be in the dark.
The umpire would cite Rule 5.10 (c-1)
Designed for players too injured to run.
It says when such batters have cleared a fence
The ball is dead and so is the de- fense.
Thus, if the limping Casey could not make it,
A healthier teammate would complete the circuit.
World Series Rookies
Q.
How often have the players later voted rookie of the year in their leagues been on the opposing World Series teams in their rookie years?
A.
Only twice, 30 years apart, in the 42 years both leagues have singled out their top rookies -- and both times a Yankee player was involved.
One was infielder Gil McDougald, a .306 hitter with 14 home runs as the American League's top first-year player in 1951, and a .261 hitter with a grand slam in Game 5 of the World Series that fall.
His crosstown counterpart, outfielder Willie Mays of the New York Giants, earned National League rookie honors with 20 home runs and a .274 batting average.
But Mays only went 4 for 22 (.182), without an extra-base hit, in the Series, which the Giants lost in six games.
In the strike-interrupted 1981 season, another Yankee rookie-of-the-year-to-be, pitcher Dave Righetti, was 8-4 with a 2.06 earned run average when he took the mound as the Yankee starter in Game 3 of the World Series.
His opponent was Fernando Valenzuela of the Los Angeles Dodgers, whose 13-7 record and 2.48 e.r.a. would not only earn him top rookie honors in the National League but also the Cy Young Award that season.
Righetti, who became a relief pitcher in 1984, lasted just two innings.
Valenzuela pitched the distance.
The Dodgers won the game, 5-4, and eventually the Series, 4 games to 2.
Mixed Pitching Success
Q.
Has a pitcher in the majors ever ended a season leading his league in both victories and defeats?
A.
It happened once, and not way back when as you might imagine.
In 1979, Phil Niekro, the knuckleballing right-hander for the Atlanta Braves, won 21 games, tops in the National League, and lost 20, tops in the National League.
The pitchers closest to Niekro in defeats that season were Bob Shirley of the San Diego Padres (8-16 record) and Gene Garber (6-16), Niekro's younger teammate.
The pitcher closest in victories was Joe Niekro of the Houston Astros (21-11), Phil's younger brother and the only other 20-game winner in the league that year.
The knuckling Niekro had a knack for notching victories and defeats.
His 24-year career ended in 1987 with 318 victories, 13th on the career list headed by Cy Young, and 274 losses, fourth on the career list headed by Cy Young.
On that basis alone, Phil Niekro was the closest thing baseball has had to Cy Young in recent years.
An Error of Sorts
Q.
In baseball, a player is generally charged with an error only if a batter achieves a base or a runner advances a base on the misplay.
But suppose a runner taking too great a lead off first base is seemingly picked off by the pitcher's sudden throw to the bag, but manages to get back safely because the first baseman drops the throw.
The runner never advanced.
Should an error be charged?
A.
Absolutely.
If a runner clearly out becomes safe because the fielder did not hold the ball, put the "E" on the scoreboard next to the fielder's position.
Although the runner is still at the same base, he has no right being there.
The first baseman's failure to hold a catchable throw prolonged the life of the runner in the same way that a fielder's failure to hold a catchable foul ball extends the life of a batter.
Both are failures to retire opponents and both are scored as errors.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
Manufacturers say that any plans to hire workers are on hold, because even though production has risen in recent weeks for many products, the pickup is modest and uncertain.
Indeed, several executives at a meeting of the National Association of Manufacturers doubted that an economic revival would last.  [ Page D1. ]


Iraq Refusing to Accept U.N. Plan To Sell Oil for Food and Medicine
With a mixture of defiance and frustration, the Government of President Saddam Hussein has so far refused to accept stringent guidelines laid down a week ago by the United Nations Security Council for the sale of $1.6 billion in Iraqi oil and the emergency purchase of food and medical supplies.
At a time when international relief organizations are reporting a nationwide rise in malnutrition, infant mortality and infectious diseases, the Iraqi position has raised some alarm.


International Mettle Shown in Ironman
s is perhaps appropriate for an event that boasts of its cosmopolitan make-up -- "athletes from 42 countries will participate!" -- finishers from five nations besides the United States placed in the top 10 in the men's triathlon at the 1991 Gatorade Ironman Triathlon on Saturday.
For the third straight year, Mark Allen of Cardiff, Calif., won the 140.6-mile endurance test -- a 2.4-mile swim, a 112-mile bike ride and a 26.2-mile run.
The event has never been won by a non-American, but 18 of the top 25 men came from other countries.
In an American-born sport that is still in its teen-age years, clearly the rest of the world is knocking at the door.


MOBUTU OUSTS FOE AND RENEWS CHAOS
Zaire plunged back into political chaos today when President Mobutu Sese Seko dismissed his arch-foe, Etienne Tshisekedi, as Prime Minister.
Mr.
Mobutu, who appointed Mr.
Tshisekedi as head of the country's first opposition-led Cabinet after anti-Government riots, called on opposition parties to find another candidate.


Jill Breakstone, Student, Is Wed
Jill Patrice Breakstone, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David I. Breakstone of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Alan Goldberg, a son of Della Gittler of Bayside, Queens, and Martin J. Goldberg of Freeport, N.Y.
Rabbi Scott Magit officiated at the Whitehall Club in New York.
Mrs.
Goldberg, 31 years old, graduated from the University of New Hampshire and is studying for a master's degree in social work at Hunter College.
Her father owns G &amp; B Associates, a food brokerage in Great Neck, L.I.
Her mother, Elaine P. Breakstone, owns Breakstone &amp; Associates, an advertising agency in Greenwich, Conn.


Quake Kills Hundreds of People In India Region Bordering Nepal
A powerful earthquake rocked the remote and impoverished foothills of the Himalayas this morning, killing hundreds of people, destroying some villages entirely and flattening buildings in about 500 others.
The 45-second tremor, which was measured at 6.1 on the Richter scale here, roused residents across New Delhi 180 miles away, set dogs barking and provoked a deafening din from the city's bird population.


Louisiana Puts Ex-Klan Leader In Runoff Race
State Representative David Duke, a former grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, won a spot in the runoff election for governor of Louisiana on Saturday, but Republican officials in Washington disavowed him today as a racist who would win no support from the national party.
Mr.
Duke finished second in the open primary on Saturday and today promoted himself as a new leader of the Republican Party's conservative mainstream.
He will face Edwin W. Edwards, a former three-term Governor who is a Democrat, in a runoff election on Nov. 16.
Thanking the Rank and File


Hollywood Journal; City Tosses Bit of Beauty at Its Blight
For decades, illusion has made this town famous.
Now, the ability to blur the line between what is and what seems to be has been enlisted in a campaign to transform Hollywood.
The result can be glimpsed at the corner of Hollywood Boulevard and Western Avenue.
There, the Community Redevelopment Agency of Los Angeles has created what just might be the quintessential Hollywood amenity.
Its sole purpose is to look good.
It is temporary.
And it will be seen primarily by people driving by.


World Economies


Fighting Persists in Croatia; Relief Convoy Ends Mission
Sporadic fighting continued today across the secessionist republic of Croatia, marring a day-old cease-fire.
But there were few big battles like those that have killed more than 1,000 people in Yugoslavia since June.
Heavy fighting was reported around Vukovar in northeastern Croatia, a town besieged by Yugoslav federal troops for almost two months.


Scorsese Film Premiere
The premiere of "Cape Fear," a Martin Scorsese film starring Robert De Niro, Nick Nolte and Jessica Lange, is to take place at the Ziegfeld Theater on Nov. 6 as a benefit for the Film Society of Lincoln Center's new movie house.
The Walter Reade Theater in the Rose Building, 165 West 65th Street, is scheduled to open in late November.
The screening will be followed by a dinner-dance in the ballroom of the New York Hilton Hotel.
Tickets, from $250 to $2,500, also include a new film during one of the inaugural evenings of the Reade theater.
Information: (212) 875-5610.


People
*
Greg Riley, 30, has been promoted to the newly created position of senior vice president and director of account development at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco, from vice president and management supervisor.


Big Soviet Sale Of Gold Denied
The retired Prime Minister of the Soviet Union, Nikolai Ryzhkov, has denied that he oversaw a huge selloff of Soviet gold reserves.
In an interview with the newspaper Moskovsky Komsomolets published Saturday, Mr.
Ryzhkov said the Kremlin ordered the sale of 250 metric tons of gold in 1990, far less than his critics have charged.


Casserly Works Way To Top in Washington
Fourteen years ago, Charley Casserly hopped into his junk heap of a car with the 110,000 miles on it and drove to Washington from Springfield, Mass., in search of a niche with the Washington Redskins.
He found it.
There was coffee to be made and players to be awakened for roll call.
There were errands to be run and phones to be answered.


Bertram W. Subin, 61, Lawyer in Manhattan
Bertram W. Subin, a well-known personal-injury lawyer in Manhattan, died on Saturday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 61 years old.
Mr. Subin, who lived in Scarsdale, died of lymphoma, his family said.


Review/Music; Classic Folk of Hungary
Early in this century, Hungarian classical composers like Bartok and Kodaly collected folk songs and let traditional music transform their own.
Muszikas, which performed on Tuesday night at S.O.B.'s, is six classically trained musicians from Budapest who decided to eliminate the middlemen and play the folk repertory.
After studying recordings and soaking up the music in villages, Muszikas charges into traditional music with the virtuosity it demands and the spunk it thrives on.
Muszikas is a string band, with fiddle, string bass and three kontras, three-stringed violas that supply chords and rhythm.
Its first selection, lasting about 25 minutes, was the kind of rhapsodic outpouring of melody that Liszt tried to approximate, growing from slow, introspective melodies to speeding dance tunes, every phrase crammed with ornamentation above the gruff chords of the bowed bass and kontras.


A Yankee Relic That Is Up to Date
Drive seven miles past the last traffic light, past the red barns and general store of this proud old Yankee town and turn right at the flagpole.
Welcome to the office of The Old Farmer's Almanac, the oldest continuously published American periodical, just entering its 200th year.
But despite the blatant nostalgia of the place -- quilts hanging on paneled walls, a gift shop filled with memorabilia and the "museum" of wacky doodads in the office of the editor, Judson D. Hale Sr. -- this bit of Americana is marching vigorously into its third century, eyes forward.


2 Networks Fight CBS With Shots At Baseball
As the World Series began this weekend, NBC and ABC continued to pursue a strategy intended to divide the television audience -- and make sure that CBS, which has the baseball television rights, loses as much money as possible.
NBC and ABC have been counter-programming against the baseball playoffs and World Series with some at women.


CHRONICLE
Amid ceremony at Scotland's Blair Castle but apparently unaware of his bootlegging ancestry, former President RONALD REAGAN became an Honorary Keeper of the Keepers of the Quaich yesterday, Reuters reported.
The Keepers are a society of connoisseurs of Scotch whisky.
Founded by top distillers, they also help promote the product.


Traffic Alert
42d Street between Park and Lexington Avenues remains closed because of the water main break.


Themes of 80's Excesses Yield to the Basics of the 90's
THOSE still unconvinced that the 1990's are a far cry from the 1980's need only consider the images presented by two icons of the 80's in their advertising for the 90's.
To introduce a line of lower-priced, casual clothing from the Giorgio Armani Corporation -- the Italian fashion concern known for expensive dressy apparel -- a campaign by Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano creates basic nuts-and-bolts imagery featuring, well, nuts and bolts.


4 Issues in This Week's Treasury Auctions
The Treasury has an active schedule this week, starting with today's auction of $21.2 billion in three- and six-month bills.
On Wednesday, the Treasury will offer $13.5 billion in two-year notes, followed by $9 billion in five-year notes on Thursday.
By late in the day on Friday, the bid on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.03 percent, and the six-month bill was at 5.05 percent.


Why Not a French-German Army?
The proposed joint French-German military force the two countries just announced has drawn an unduly wary response from Washington.
"We have an interest in seeing that as the European security identity is developed that it be complementary to NATO and not detract from NATO's missions," declared the State Department spokesman.
But if this idea should materialize, becoming the nucleus of a real European army, it could benefit U.S. security.
America's interest is not to make the most of NATO.
It is to insure that Europeans get along tolerably with each other and never again go to war.
And it is also to have allied military support when needed, as in the Persian Gulf war.
In both these respects the French-German initiative could help.


Under Pressure, U.S. Weighs Ban on Use of Breast Implants
They came to Washington earlier this month to plead their case, 400 women of various ages and stations from 37 states with one thing in common: their breasts had been enlarged with silicone implants.
The women were recruited by plastic surgeons who fear that the implants will soon be taken off the market, destroying a large part of their practices.
The women's message was simple: Implants are important to physical and mental well-being, and women who want them should be free to have them.


Yonkers Public Housing Is Now a Cooler Issue
For years, candidates in this city have either campaigned on strong opposition to a Federal judge's desegregation order or on angry assertions that such defiance was ruining the city.
Today, most of the public housing under the court order is nearly built.
The desegregation plan is still the biggest issue in the mayoral election, but the temper of debate has shifted from red-hot passion to the cooler though bitter tones of resignation.


Tiny Babies, Big Problems
One can see them in neonatal intensive care units all over the country: tiny babies hitched up to a bewildering array of tubes and monitors.
Some are too frail even to wail.
Most will live long enough to leave the hospital; the majority of the very tiniest will have neurological damage; and many will incur staggering medical bills.
The price some of their parents pay in emotional anguish, and that some of the babies may pay in physical pain, is of course beyond reckoning.
Although a neonatal intensive care unit can be a place of joy, the smallest of these babies usually face a grim future -- or no future at all.


Computer Viruses Will Always Remain Force for Ill, Not Good
To the Editor:
Your article discussing researchers' suggestions that computer viruses might be harnessed to perform useful, beneficent tasks, poses the question "Can Computer Viruses Be Domesticated to Serve Mankind?" (The Week in Review, Oct. 6).
The answer is clearly no.
This is why.
A computer virus is a program that copies itself into other programs, and so spreads from computer to computer.
When a program is infected by a virus, the program is changed.
The change can cause problems.
For example:


M.T.A. Offers Plan to Avoid Commuter Lines' Fare Increase
Transit officials said yesterday that they had devised a plan that could eliminate the need for fare increases next year on the Long Island Rail Road and the Metro-North Commuter Railroad.
But they said the plan would not affect scheduled increases in New York City subway and bus fares, which could rise next year to as much as $1.50, from the present $1.15.


Men Dancers, Then and Now
Ted Shawn has been called the father of American modern dance.
He is often referred to as a pioneer of the art form in America, both for his work with Ruth St.
Denis, his wife, and with the popular and influential Denishawn modern dance company and for his championing of male dancers.
That Shawn is being celebrated in the debut season of "Men Dancers: The Ted Shawn Legacy," which runs through Sunday at the Joyce Theater in performances marking the 100th anniversary of his birth.
But Shawn, who died in 1972, is a distinctly minor figure in modern dance today.
His pieces, seldom performed, are thought of predominantly as exercises in unintentional camp, excuses for him to appear center-stage as heavily painted and skimpily dressed Indian and Greek god.
He is a figure of fun, a large, rather comically solemn-looking man who tagged along in St.
Denis's exotic shadow and went his own way when the two fell in love with the same man.


More Women Complain to New York Rights Unit
An executive says her company's senior vice president called her into his office for a meeting -- and then asked her to sit on his lap.
A truck driver for the New York City Sanitation Department says she complained to department officials that some of her male coworkers had made sexually offensive remarks and that one had fondled her.
So far, she says, the agency has not investigated.


Observer; Return With Us Now . . .
Meanwhile, back at the recession leading economists, leading political leaders and leading President George H. W. Bush are at grips with the most vital question of the day.
That question: Is there a recession, and if so, who cares as long as the polls show the election is in the bag?
As we join them, little Jane and Jimmy too have just galloped up to the White House unaccompanied by their usual cohorts, leading 1935 radio cowboy star Tom Mix and Tom's wonder horse Tony.
A leading economist, prone to saying what everybody but the audience has known for days, speaks:


Robert Colangelo, Detective, 60; Was Chief of Bureau for 3 Years
Robert Colangelo, a retired chief of New York City detectives, died on Sunday at Phelps Memorial Hospital Center in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 60 years old and lived in Ossining, N.Y.
Mr. Colangelo died of a heart attack, the funeral home said.
Several high-profile cases were investigated during Mr.
Colangelo's tenure as chief of detectives from January 1987 until his retirement in November 1989, including the killing of Michael Griffith in the Howard Beach racial assault and of Yusuf K. Hawkins in the Bensonhurst racial assault.
Other well-known investigations under his direction were the Jennifer Levin Central Park murder case and the murder of Police Officer Edward Byrne, who was shot while guarding the house of a witness in a drug case.


Appeals Court Upholds Limits For Abortions
A Federal appeals court today upheld most provisions of Pennsylvania's abortion law, one of the strictest in the nation, and set the stage for an appeal to the Supreme Court that could provide the first direct test of the 1973 Roe v.
Wade decision establishing the right to an abortion.
"For the first time since 1973, a Federal court of appeals has directly said that Roe v. Wade is no longer the law of the land," said Kathryn Kolbert, the lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union's Reproductive Freedom Project who argued the case for the plaintiffs, Planned Parenthood of Pennsylvania.


Autopsy of Man Who Killed 23 In Texas Finds No Drugs or Tumor
The gunman who killed 23 people at a cafeteria here last week and then killed himself did not have narcotics or alcohol in his system, nor did he suffer from an aneurysm, according to an autopsy report released today.
The report leaves the authorities still struggling to determine a motive for the killing rampage by George J. Hennard Jr., said Sgt.
Michael DeHart, a spokesman for the Killeen police.


Germiston Journal; What Price School? Precious Pennies and Passion
Somerset School hardly looks like a desirable private school.
The corrugated metal roof has rusted.
A board barely patches the gaping hole in the auditorium's worn floor.
Some windows are broken, the courtyard asphalt has cracked and weeds choke the sports field.
The electricity is shut off, and the teachers have not been paid in two months.
But Somerset School offers hope to some 1,000 high school students who are buying a private education to escape the inferior conditions of the surrounding black townships.
It costs each student $85 a month, which many parents cannot afford, but they scrimp and save for the decent education that apartheid long denied black children.


The Battle for Kyoto's Changing Skyline and Soul
It would be hard to find a country that reveres its traditional design forms more than Japan.
But it has taken a design competition for a new railroad station in this ancient city to awaken many Japanese to how dramatically Kyoto's historic character is being altered by a wave of ultramodern architecture.
An unlikely coalition of Buddhist priests, architects, urban planners and housewives has organized out of concern that old Kyoto has been nearly destroyed by a feverish burst of development during the 1980's.
Futuristic steel and raw concrete structures illuminated with neon have replaced scores of traditional wooden shops and homes in Kyoto's many narrow streets.


Combined Income at 3 G.M. Units Declines 8.6%
The three principal non-automotive subsidiaries of the General Motors Corporation posted an aggregate 8.6 percent drop in earnings today, mostly because of weak results at the GM Hughes Electronics Corporation.
G.M.'s General Motors Acceptance Corporation, the Electronic Data Systems Corporation and GM Hughes Electronics posted aggregate third-quarter net income of $530 million, down from $580 million a year earlier.


Key Injuries Kick Off The Giants' Preparation
Suddenly, the Giants' kicking game, one of the team's consistent strengths, is approaching disarray.
On the first day of practice in preparation for Sunday night's game against the unbeaten Washington Redskins, injuries sidelined Reyna Thompson, perhaps pro football's most dangerous special-teams tackler; place-kicker Matt Bahr and return-specialist Dave Meggett.


Vaginal Infection Tied to Low Birth Weight
A COMMON bacterial infection of the vagina has been linked to a 50 percent increase in the risk of delivering a baby of low birth weight in a large new study in five cities.
The infection, bacterial vaginosis, has also been called Gardnerella vaginitis and non-specific vaginitis.
It is usually caused by a combination of bacteria.


Dow Falls By 16.77, To 3,060.38
Stock prices pulled back yesterday from Friday's record levels, with analysts citing a weak bond market, rising inflation fears and some gloomy corporate earnings.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 16.77 points, to 3,060.38, and the New York Stock Exchange composite index declined by 1.27, to 214.88.


Market Place; Owens-Corning Holders Need a Magnifying Glass
Asbestos costs have once again shocked Wall Street.
But perhaps analysts should have seen it coming.
This time the surprise came at the Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation, which said on Friday that it was quadrupling the amount it had been charging to profits for costs of asbestos claims.


Municipal Saving by Sharing
At a time when all levels of government are looking for ways to cut spending, Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey has a sensible, and sensitive, idea: a Local Partnership Task Force to explore ways for neighboring towns to share costs.
It's not a new concept.
Communities around the country already share expenses for, among other things, police, joint purchases of rock salt, pooled insurance and data processing.
But this is the right moment to push for more, when the attractiveness of saving money can override pride, or the natural resistance to trimming services.


French Approve Merger
The French Finance Ministry said today that it had approved the proposed merger of the retailers Carrefour and Euromarche, provided Carrefour disposed of branches in some areas, a ministry statement said.
The ministry said the merger did not impede competition on a national scale but could cause problems by creating too dominant a position on the local level.


Vietnam Says Hong Kong Can Return 222 Refugees by Force; Broader Accord Predicted
Officials of this British colony said today that the agreement between London and Hanoi to allow the involuntary return of 222 Vietnamese was the first step of what they expect will be a broader accord that will send tens of thousands of Vietnamese back to their homeland.
However, the flow of people still coming in -- nearly 500 a day this month -- and 20,000 so far in 1991 -- means that the swelling of Hong Kong's population will not be stemmed, let alone reversed, until such a broad accord is reached and carried out.
Compared with this year's steady flow, in all of 1990 only 5,000 Vietnamese sought new lives here.
There was "a blip of Vietnamese after the talks," an informant said, because Vietnamese feared that their emigration chances would be cut off by an agreement between London and Hanoi.
Those covered by the accord today are known as "double-backers," Vietnamese who went to Hong Kong, then volunteered to accept United Nations aid payments and return home, only to come back to the colony again.
They are the group of Vietnamese who evoke the least sympathy here.
Officials said they would be returned on chartered flights sometime in November "under normal international arrangements" for illegal immigrants, which means that armed guards will accompany them.
Clinton Leeks, Hong Kong's refugee coordinator, said that an agreement covering all boat people deemed not to be refugees "is still being discussed."
"There are contacts between the British and the Vietnamese almost daily now," Mr.
Leeks said at a news conference with Mr.
Asprey, Hong Kong's security chief.
They called this latest development a "first step" and said they hoped that a full repatriation agreement would be reached soon.
British and Hong Kong officials say the delay in concluding that broad agreement results from Vietnam's demand for more time to arrange for the reintegration of those going back.
A senior official of Hong Kong's Government said that with the announcement today, security had been stepped up in the camps, where some Vietnamese have been demonstrating almost daily, vowing to fight any attempt to return them to their homeland.
The "double-backers," however, are all housed together in a small camp, Nei Kwu Chau, on a remote outer island more than an hour by boat from Hong Kong.
The camp is also some distance from the larger detention centers, where opposition to repatriation is outspoken and organized.
In Nei Kwu Chau, the Vietnamese have been urged to return voluntarily, and that will be intensified now, authorities said, so that the actual number to be forcibly repatriated may wind up being smaller than the 222 agreed to today.
With commercial airlines here reluctant to lease planes for the controversial returns, Hong Kong officials confirm that they are discussing chartering transport planes from an Indonesian company.
--------------------
U.S. Confirms Its Stand
WASHINGTON, Oct. 21 (Special to The New York Times) -- The State Department today repeated its position opposing the forcible repatriation of Vietnamese boat people, but it did not specifically protest Britain's plan to send back 222 Vietnamese emigres now in Hong Kong.
A spokeswoman said the United States understood Britain's decision to send back those boat people who had initially fled to Hong Kong, then agreed to return to Vietnam and finally gone back to Hong Kong.
But State Department officials said they hoped that force would not be used, and they hinted that the Bush Administration would not acquiesce in the involuntary return of other Vietnamese.
"We would not expect force to be used," the spokeswoman said.
President Bush's national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, said in a letter to Senator Claiborne Pell, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, on Oct. 9 that "we remain opposed to forcible repatriation to Vietnam under current conditions in Vietnam." The State Department affirmed that position today.


Racial Gap Detailed on Mortgages
The most comprehensive report on mortgage lending nationwide ever issued by the Government shows that even within the same income group whites are nearly twice as likely as blacks to get loans.
The study, the broad outlines of which emerged last week, was based on 5.3 million mortgage applications received by 9,300 banks and other lenders last year.
It raises questions about whether banking regulators have done an adequate job in dealing with discriminatory lending.
In evaluations by regulators, about 9 out of 10 banks have been rated as satisfactory or outstanding in serving their communities.


Philadelphia Plans Short-Term Notes
The City of Philadelphia this week expects to market $150 million of short-term tax- and revenue-anticipation notes, which are called Trans.
The city's Treasurer, Douglas Smith, said he hoped the current market would allow the issue to carry an interest rate no higher than 8 percent.
A similar series of notes with a 9 1/4 coupon was priced in August 1990 to yield 10.729 percent.


Autonomy Issue Turns Slovak Against Slovak
The louder Fedor Gal preached for a united Czechoslovakia, the more the hate mail rained down, letters with death threats or with anti-Semitic slurs against the boyish-looking university lecturer and his family.
Obscene graffiti were painted in the hall outside his apartment.
When he walked down the street, strangers spat at him.


Belmont Ends on a Declining Note
Belmont Park rang down the curtain for the year yesterday with stirring memories but with fading numbers: attendance for the 48-day fall season was down by 3.2 percent and wagering by 5 percent, continuing the decline that has afflicted thoroughbred racing in recent years.
But Jerry Lawrence, executive vice president of the New York Racing Association, suggested that "the figures reflect a general malaise in the economy." And he said they implied that "people are being much more careful with their money during this recession."


Make Room For Daddies, Little Goblins
THIS Halloween, advertisers anticipate that the ghoulies and ghosties and long-legged beasties will have very long legs, indeed.
The reason is that more of those legs are attached to people who are old enough to drive and vote.
As more grown-ups take part in a holiday once the exclusive province of children, advertisers, always eager to cash in on a consumer trend, are directing more Halloween-themed advertisements at adults.
Research by Hallmark Cards Inc. indicates that one adult in three now takes part in Halloween activities.


Vietnam Says Hong Kong Can Return 222 Refugees by Force
The British Government announced today that it had persuaded Vietnam to let the authorities in Hong Kong fly 222 boat people back to Vietnam against their will next month, and that it would keep trying to persuade Hanoi to take back tens of thousands more.
Britain had hoped last week to announce an agreement in principle with Vietnam accepting involuntary repatriation.
This would permit the authorities in Hong Kong to begin deporting most of the 64,000 Vietnamese who are being held in 12 camps after arriving by boat and asking for asylum.
Few have any prospect of being admitted to the British crown colony as refugees from political persecution.


Rangers Shuffle Roster
Rangers were coming and going again yesterday, but there was still no deal for a defenseman.


PATTERNS
A Little Messiness
Is fashion in the trash bin?
In stylish Parisian boites, where people sit whispering of love, sex or 10 percent, lately there has been talk of the death of fashion.
Somewhat defensively, the cover of this week's W magazine declared, "Fashion Is Alive." You begin to wonder.


Balance of Nature? What Balance Is That?
ECOLOGISTS are increasingly abandoning the popular concept of the balance of nature and are replacing it with the image of a natural world in which plant and animal communities perpetually fluctuate.
Disturbances like climatic change, fires, storms and disease, some scientists say, seldom give these communities the chance to settle into a state of equilibrium.
And anyway, others contend, populations of plants and animals are inherently unstable and would not achieve equilibrium even in the absence of external disturbances.
Now, taking the question a step further, ecologists at the University of Minnesota say they have demonstrated that under some conditions, populations of certain grasses, following an internal dynamic, rise and fall in the irregular, unpredictable patterns that scientists call chaos.


G.M. Is Said to Select McCann for Card Effort
The General Motors Corporation has awarded McCann-Erickson, the agency for its Buick division, the account for the introduction of a G.M. credit card, advertising executives who insisted on anonymity said yesterday.
The decision, which has been the subject of speculation in the advertising trade press for many months, follows a review that the executives said also included two other G.M. agencies: the Leo Burnett Company, which handles Oldsmobile, and D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, which handles Pontiac and Cadillac.


Rats See the Invisible
BIRDS do it, bees do it, even fish within the sea do it -- all interpret their world with the help of ultraviolet light from the sun.
And now, to their great surprise, scientists add rodents to the list of animals able to see in wavelengths invisible to human beings.
In the first clear evidence of ultraviolet vision in mammals, Dr.
Gerald H. Jacobs and his colleagues at the University of California in Santa Barbara have discovered that house mice, gerbils, gophers and rats have photoreceptors more sensitive to ultraviolet light than to any other light on the spectrum.


Accounts
*
The Business and Professional Group of the Sony Corporation of America, Montvale, N.J., to Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos Advertising, Boston, for business-to-business advertising.
The account, with estimated billings of at least $5 million, had been at Geer, DuBois, New York.


Montgomery Ward Plans Return to Catalogue Trade
Montgomery Ward &amp; Company wants to muscle its way back into the crowded catalogue business.
The big Chicago retailer, which closed its unprofitable catalogue division in 1985, said yesterday that it was teaming with the Fingerhut Companies, a mail-order concern, to start a company to produce nearly a dozen separate catalogues a year.


1,200 Layoffs At Wal-Mart
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. said yesterday that it was laying off up to 1,200 workers in what it called a normal payroll adjustment and not a response to the weak economy.
It appeared likely that Wal- Mart, which has a work force of 367,000, took the step to keep costs in line.
Wal-Mart, one of the nation's largest retailers, has built its reputation and success on lower prices, which are dependent on reduced expenses.


AFRICANS PRESSING BID FOR U.N. POST
African nations are stepping up their campaign to win the position of Secretary General of the United Nations for an African next year, warning the United States and other Security Council members that they will oppose any non-African nominated for the post on the floor of this year's General Assembly.
The Africans maintain that it is their continent's turn to fill the $183,000-a-year job, which they have never held.
They are also pressing other members of the 102-nation Non-Aligned Movement to back such a challenge, a move that would prevent a non-African from winning a simple majority of the 166-seat Assembly for confirmation.


New Chamber Series To Offer French Music
The Instrumental Ensemble of Avi gnon, a group of six musicians, will give five concerts of French chamber music, mostly from the 20th century, in a new series this season presented by the French Institute/Alliance Francaise.
The concerts, on Sundays at 3 P.M. at Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, will include works by Faure, Debussy, Roussel, Honegger, Poulenc, Milhaud, Jolivet, Francaix and Messiaen.


Californian Makes 3d Bid for Presidency
Lashing out at both major political parties and at what he called the evils of incumbency, former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California announced his third campaign for the Presidency today in front of Independence Hall.
In a speech that never mentioned President Bush and heaped scorn on Democrats as well as Republicans, Mr.
Brown, a Democrat, expressed his intention to stake out an anti-establishment theme in an appeal to voters who might otherwise stay home on Election Day.


Jets Idle the Engines After a 4-4 First Half
It may have taken the Jets numerous attempts to get the ball into the end zone from the 1-yard line against the hapless Indianapolis Colts, but Brad Baxter finally did get the touchdown.
"We might have scored ugly, but we darn well scored," said Coach Bruce Coslet, whose Jets broke a four-game losing streak against the Colts with Sunday's 17-6 victory.
"It might've taken us 16 plays to score, but last year we couldn't have done that."


Brown Announces Third Presidential Bid


Gorbachev Warns Republics on Armies
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev surveyed the shaky remains of the Soviet Union before its shrunken new Parliament today and found his warning about the dangers of forming separate republic armies falling on deaf ears.
In a tone that seemed funereal at times, the weary-looking Soviet leader inaugurated the weakened Parliament, whose session was ignored by 5 of the 12 Soviet republics, and delivered a state of the union message that went unacknowledged by applause.


Bridge
There was something highly unusual, perhaps even unique, about the diagramed deal.
The reader who can spot the uniqueness, after following the details of the bidding and play, will also be highly unusual.
The occasion was the semifinal of the Venice Trophy contest at the NEC World Team Championships in Yokohama, Japan, earlier this month.
Sitting South was Stasha Cohen, of Glen Ridge, N.J., who reached three no-trump after her partner had opened with a weak two bid.


N.F.L. Fines Butler
Chicago Bears place-kicker KEVIN BUTLER has been fined by the National Football League but escaped suspension for a drunken-driving offense.
Butler pleaded guilty to speeding and drunken driving charges after his arrest on Aug. 6, 1991, near his suburban Chicago home.


Jazz Waives Griffith
DARRELL GRIFFITH, one of the National Basketball Association's leading 3-point shooters, was put on waivers by the Utah Jazz yesterday.
Griffith has spent his entire 11-year career with the Jazz, the team that drafted him as the second overall pick out of Louisville in 1980.


Tracy Bennett Is Dead; City Ballet Dancer, 39
Tracy Bennett, a longtime dancer with the New York City Ballet, died on Friday at his home in New York City.
He was 39 years old.
He died of pneumonia, said Mark Walker of the Walker Mortuary in Morgan, Utah.


Hospitals Ravaged by Cuts, Report Says
Budget cuts have devastated New York City's municipal hospitals, according to a report released yesterday by a voluntary monitoring group.
The annual report by the City Hospital Visiting Committee, which has been touring and evaluating hospitals here for 120 years, describes hospital care as the worst "in recent memory," and attributes the deterioration to "Draconian budget cuts, demoralized staff and soaring service demands."


Some Bondholders Hesitant In Offer for Harcourt Brace
The outcome of General Cinema's $1.3 billion offer for Harcourt Brace Jovanovich was uncertain last evening, as a tense standoff continued with at least one group of Harcourt bondholders, well past the 5 P.M. deadline set by General Cinema.
The General Cinema Corporation's offer was conditioned on Harcourt's bondholders tendering 90 percent of each of five classes of bonds.
The company's goals had not been met by the deadline, but General Cinema said late yesterday that it would have no announcement until today, hoping that it would get the required 90 percent to proceed with its buyout.
The prevailing wisdom last night was that General Cinema would hold open its tender offer until 2 P.M. today.


Careers; Engineers At Company Start Fast
THE International Paper Company has a training program it calls MAP to guide young engineers it hires to success within the company's packaging business.
"MAP," says Dr.
Nelson M. Fraiman, the program director, "stands for our manufacturing associate program, which we began about three years ago."


Life Before Diamonds
It has been known for many years that diamonds of substantial size (as opposed to the microscopic ones resulting from meteorite impacts) come from very deep within the earth, where extreme pressure converts carbon into diamond, its most compact form.
It was widely thought that the carbon, several hundred miles down where diamonds originate, was of local origin.
Now, however, evidence has been found that, in one class of diamonds, the carbon came from sediment within the earth's crust.
It may therefore have been derived, long ago, from living organisms, carbon being a component of virtually all forms of life.


Meredith Net Down Sharply
The Meredith Corporation, a publisher and broadcaster, reported sharply lower earnings today for its first fiscal quarter compared with results a year ago that included a big gain on the sale of assets.
Earnings from continuing operations were also down sharply because of the effect of the nationwide slump in advertising spending.


Corrections
A chart on Thursday about overcrowded classrooms in New York City schools omitted the date on which the statistics were compiled.
It was Oct. 4.


Eye Drug Prolongs AIDS Patients' Lives
THE Federal Government announced yesterday that a newly available drug to treat a common, devastating eye infection in people with AIDS not only halted the infection but allowed patients to live 50 percent longer than they did with the standard treatment.
Patients who took the new drug, foscarnet, which was approved last month by the Food and Drug Administration, lived an average of 12 months after developing cytomegalovirus retinitis, or CMV retinitis.
Those who took the old drug, ganciclovir, lived an average of eight months.


Chase Has Profit as Turnaround Continues
Chase Manhattan, although still working its way out of staggering loan losses, reported a $136 million net profit yesterday for the third quarter.
The banking company attributed its turnabout partly to falling interest rates and to drastic cost-cutting over the last year.
The profit, equal to 79 cents for each outstanding share of common stock, contrasted to a loss in last year's third quarter of $623 million.
Chase has been profitable in each quarter this year, and net income for the first nine months totaled $385 million, or $2.31 a share, in contrast to a loss of $527 million in the comparable period on 1990.


Keeping a Soviet Enterprise Afloat
Thirty-eight-year-old Vladimir Gurov probably deserves an Olympic medal for agility for the way he has kept his soot-covered apparel factories on an even keel while the Soviet Union's economy crumbles.
In the face of challenges that would wither many a Western manager, Mr.
Gurov, director of Bolshevichka, one of the nation's biggest manufacturers of men's wear, has managed to increase profits, lift morale and improve the quality of the 500,000 suits that his factories stitch together each year.


Why Not a Third Special Election?
Hard as it is to believe, last month's Democratic primary for the New York City Council isn't over.
Slim victory margins have forced two reruns today.
And if fairness prevails, there could be yet another rerun next week.
In the 31st District, in southeast Queens, voters will choose between Malcolm Smith, a former aide to Representative Floyd Flake, and Juanita Watkins, a member of the city's Civil Service Commission whose ability to bridge racial and ethnic differences has earned our endorsement.


BRIEFS
*
Ashland Oil Inc., Ashland, Ky., said its Scurlock Corp. subsidiary would sell its Corpus Christi, Tex., marine terminal, as well as other pipelines and oil-gathering systems, to Koch Industries Inc., Wichita, Kan.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Bechtel Software Inc., a unit of Bechtel Corp., San Francisco, said it would move its headquarters from Acton, Mass., to Bechtel's worldwide headquarters in San Francisco.


Classical Music in Review
Pittsburgh Symphony  Carnegie Hall
Posterity has yet to render a firm verdict on Sibelius.
True, the swings in the composer's popularity seem less drastic than in earlier decades, but he still tends to fall periodically from the active repertory.
Just now, when few respond to musical subtlety of the sort that informs his finest creations, Sibelius is seldom performed in New York.


U.N. Says Iraq Admits Research on Atomic Bombs
The Iraqi authorities for the first time have admitted in a written declaration that they conducted research on building atomic bombs, the chief of the United Nations inspection team said here tonight.
Dimitri Perricos, the head of the seventh United Nations team to visit Iraq to supervise the disposal of Baghdad's weapons of mass destruction, said on the eve of his departure that the Iraqi authorities this week "made a declaration they had launched a research and study program on the weaponization process."


A Growing Gloom Among Americans
As the Presidential campaign is about to begin in earnest, Americans are more deeply troubled than they were earlier this year about the state of the nation in general and of the economy in particular, according to a New York Times/CBS News Poll released Monday.
Article, page A19.


After Harassment Charge, Her Fellow Firefighters Transfer
Four days after a female firefighter charged harassment by male colleagues at a tension-ridden Queens firehouse, officials yesterday granted transfers to five men and said more transfers would be coming.
The five are among 21 male firefighters and officers -- all but two of the men assigned to Engine Company 274 in Flushing -- who have asked for new assignments, Fire Department officials said.
While a department spokesman said that the woman's repeated complaints of harassment over the years "could be a contributing factor" in the desire for reassignment, others in the department and in the firefighters' union said it was the prime reason and that the men considered her too difficult to work with.


P.L.O.'s High Profile on Talks
The Palestinian delegates to the Mideast peace talks are ready to openly declare they are members of the P.L.O., one of them said.
Israeli officials dismissed the comments as posturing.
Page A14.


Bush Reverses U.S. Stance Against Black College Aid
President Bush personally intervened this month to reverse a position his Administration had taken in a major desegregation case now before the Supreme Court, ordering the Solicitor General to support increased state aid to black public colleges, Administration officials said today.
The highly unusual action came in a case that will be argued before the Court next month on the extent of Mississippi's constitutional obligation to integrate its once-segregated higher education system.


Chess
Anatoly Karpov, the previous world champion, and his Soviet countryman, Vasily Ivanchuk, tied for first place in the initial World Cup Tournament of the new cycle in Reykjavik, Iceland, from Sept. 23 to Oct. 13.
Each scored 10 1/2-4 1/2 in the elite 16-player, round-robin event.
But they each got there in quite different ways: Karpov blasted off with 6 points out of his first 7 games before losing to the Yugoslav grandmaster Ljubomir Ljubojevic in Round 8, whereas Ivanchuk started indifferently, later began to win, caught Karpov in Round 11 and stayed with him the rest of the way.


On My Mind; The Double Standard
The double standard in the Middle East has become built into American diplomacy and journalism.
It is so taken for granted that hardly anybody notices.
It is time to notice, the most important of times.
The Israeli-Arab talks supposed to start at the end of this month can be an important step in the Mideast.
The credit goes to the persistence of President Bush and Secretary of State James Baker, the willingness of the Israeli Cabinet to take plain risks for peace, and the decision of some Palestinians not to let yet another opportunity pass them by.


End Nuclear Tests? Yes. Now.
The U.S. and Soviet Union have now made dramatic promises to cut nuclear arsenals.
Just last spring, the physicists Hans Bethe and Kurt Gottfried and former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara proposed such deep reductions, to a chorus of sneers from "realists" who said that couldn't happen.
Then President Bush took the initiative, and President Mikhail Gorbachev said yes, let's do even more.
It is happening.
So commentators began talking of the nuclear "disarmament race," as though it were some kind of trap.
In a way it is, but only for the community that has grown up relying on the design and production of nuclear weapons as its mission in life.


School District in Chaos Over Asbestos Removal
A routine asbestos-removal project gone wrong has upended life here, leaving schoolchildren without a school and residents without answers as to who is to blame.
Peru's 1,100 elementary school students finally moved back into their building last week for the first time in a month.
But at least until Oct. 28 the 1,200 junior and senior high school students will be going to class from 3:30 to 8:30 P.M. at the high school in Plattsburgh, 10 miles to the north.
And to make up for lost time, there will be virtually no holidays for anybody for the rest of the school year.


Sexual Harassment: It's About Power, Not Lust
CONSIDER the case of a male supervisor who, in the midst of a conversation with a female employee about an assignment, asked her out of the blue, "Are you wearing panties?" and then blithely continued the conversation seemingly pleased that he had left her rattled.
Years later, the woman says she is still outraged by the incident, though she said nothing at the time.
One of a flood of tales that have surfaced in the wake of Anita F. Hill's accusations of sexual harassment in hearings on Clarence Thomas's Supreme Court nomination, the story underscores a picture that is emerging from extensive research on such harassment: it has less to do with sex than with power.
It is a way to keep women in their place; through harassment men devalue a woman's role in the work place by calling attention to her sexuality.


N.C.A.A. Leader Is Out
Fresno State quarterback MARK BARSOTTI, the National Collegiate Athletic Association passing efficiency leader through last week, will be lost to the team for up to six weeks with a broken left leg.


By Design; White Shirts
Men's crisp white cotton shirts are big news here.
As the spring '92 collections continue to roll out on the runways, one designer after another uses this standard component of a man's wardrobe to give a sporty touch to women's style.
Karl Lagerfeld opened his show with a parade of shirts in all lengths, some with shirttail hems to the ankle.
All were worn over black tights and belted with low-slung slashes of black leather.
Even the show's program was shaped like a folded wing-collar shirt.


A $129,000-a-Year Post, But Often Short of Cash
When Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo arrived in New York City last year to take over the largest public hospital system in the country, he was bubbling with vision, energy and enthusiasm, his friends say, but he was also perpetually short of cash to pay his personal bills.
He repeatedly borrowed money from friends and associates, including a friend who was to become his $128,000-a-year top deputy, as well as the executive director of a city hospital and the president of one of the city's major academic medical centers.


Bertram W. Subin, 61, Lawyer in Manhattan
Bertram W. Subin, a well-known personal-injury lawyer in Manhattan, died on Saturday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 61 years old.
Mr. Subin, who lived in Scarsdale, N.Y., died of lymphoma, his family said.


If Stability of Revenue Is the Main Goal, Choose the Sales Tax; Fresh Meat for Hartford
To the Editor:
In "Who Will Pay in Connecticut?" (editorial, Oct. 8) you deride the 40,000 taxpayers who oppose the income tax, calling their leaders "defeated politicians" and their inspiration "rabble-rousing talk shows." Since when has "defeated" become synonymous with "suspect"?
I can think of lots of other defeated politicians, leaders of marches and demonstrations, who are not given that epithet.
And so far as that 40,000-strong "rabble" needing "rousing," let me say that it takes very little to stir up the anger of Connecticut taxpayers.


AMERICAN HOSTAGE FREED IN LEBANON, U.N. OFFICIALS SAY
The United Nations tonight announced the release in Beirut of Jesse Turner, a 44-year-old American professor who has been held hostage in Lebanon for almost five years.
His release was apparently linked to Israel's freeing of 15 Arab detainees earlier today.
A brief statement issued here said that Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar had been informed of the release by his assistant in hostage negotiations, Giandomenico Picco, who is in the Middle East.


A Religious War Rends a Cairo Slum
Scores of black-uniformed security police officers and khaki-clad riot policemen line the dirt streets of Imbaba, where donkey carts vie with battered cars and packs of schoolchildren with satchels.
The policemen ring the Coptic Christian churches, including two gutted by fires set by Muslim extremists recently in the sprawling mass of brick dwellings and fetid heaps of garbage.
They have set up roadblocks over the black ooze that seeps from the open sewers, and at night they glide in silent patrols through the narrow alleys that twist through this place in dizzying confusion.


U.S. SUES HOUSTON TO BLOCK ELECTION
The Justice Department has gone to court to block City Council elections scheduled for Nov. 5, saying the city's electoral districts discriminate against Hispanic voters.
In a highly unusual step, the Justice Department charged that Houston, the nation's fourth-largest city, had violated the Voting Rights Act by going ahead with plans for the election even though the Attorney General objected to its redistricting plan.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL National League
NEW YORK METS -- Named Tom McCraw hitting instructor and first base coach.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
MIAMI HEAT -- Waived Richard Anderson, forward.
UTAH JAZZ -- Waived Darrell Griffith, guard. Global Basketball Association
ALBANY SHARP SHOOTERS -- Signed Joe Ward, forward.
HUNTSVILLE LASERS -- Signed Winston Crite and Jewell Crawford, forwards.
Continental Basketball Association
COLUMBUS HORIZON -- Signed Louis Banks and McKinley Singleton, guards; Leonard Harris, forward; and Rob Loeffel, center.
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Signed Jay Edwards, guard, and Marvin Alexander, forward.
FOOTBALL  NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE -- Fined Kevin Butler, Chicago Bears.
HOCKEY National Hockey League
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Recalled Peter Fiorentino, defenseman, from Binghamton of the American Hockey League.
Sent Ric Bennett, left wing, and Corey Millen, center, to Binghamton.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Assigned Ron Hoover, forward, to Peoria of the International Hockey League.
Assigned Dominic Lavoie, defenseman, to Peoria for conditioning.
TAMPA BAY LIGHTING -- Named John Chapman head scout; Angelo Bumbacco, Don Murdoch, Richard Rose, Doug Macauley, Luke Williams and Jake Goertzem scouts.


Palestinian Says His Delegation Will Assert P.L.O. Ties at Talks
Brushing aside Israel's warnings that it will not negotiate with anyone tied to the Palestine Liberation Organization, the man widely understood to be the designated chief of the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks said today that he and his colleagues were prepared to declare openly that they are P.L.O. members.
"If we need to say this at any juncture, we shall not hesitate to say it if necessary," Dr.
Haider Abdel-Shafi of the Gaza Strip told the Israeli army radio.
"Certainly, we are not going to refrain from affirming we are P.L.O. supporters."


Books of The Times; Time Runs Backward To Point Up a Moral
Time's Arrow Or, The Nature of the Offense By Martin Amis 168 pages.
Harmony Books. $18.
The idea behind Martin Amis's latest novel, "Time's Arrow," is this: the life story of a former Nazi doctor named Tod T. Friendly is told in a reverse chronology, beginning with his incognito existence in an American suburb in the present and moving back to the days when he was a doctor in the medical section of Auschwitz.
The story is narrated by Tod's "soul," a curiously naive consciousness that seems powerless to affect Tod's behavior or understand the implications of his actions.


Coslet Goes West To Take The Stand
Given the texture and the scope of the murder trial at which he will testify this week, Jets Coach Bruce Coslet is just a small piece of a very large puzzle that has spanned one change of venue, one plea bargain, one mistrial and countless hours of court testimony without a verdict.
How much insight Coslet will offer in the trial of Michael Blatt, a 45-year-old former sports agent and wealthy developer from Stockton, Calif., is a mystery.
But so is the slaying with which Blatt is charged.


Withdrawal by Fiat From French Agency
Predictions that the newly merged French agency, Euro RSCG, would be in jeopardy of losing accounts because of perceived client conflicts are beginning to come true: one client, Fiat S.p.A., has withdrawn its $65 million account, and two more have placed their accounts in review.
Fiat, the Italian car maker, has reassigned its account to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Paris, from its agency of 17 years, MAO, Paris, a unit of Euro RSCG.
D.M.B.&amp; B. already handles Fiat accounts in six other European countries.
D.M.B.&amp; B.'s announcement of the shift yesterday followed a report about Fiat's decision in this week's issue of Advertising Age.


Standard Products Fills Its Vacant Presidency
The Standard Products Company, a Cleveland maker of automobile trim and door and window seals, named Theodore K. Zampetis president and chief operating officer yesterday.
Mr.
Zampetis filled a vacancy created in June, when Robert B. Stevens was appointed senior vice president to run the military division, a unit that the company has since decided to close.
Mr.
Zampetis, 46, has engineered several turnarounds and consolidations in recent years at Standard Products divisions in Canada, Britain and the United States.
In one case, for example, he was called in to solve costly quality and training problems at the company's plants in Britain, which make trim and seals for the Ford Motor Company.
In his new role, Mr.
Zampetis said he hoped to be able to head off any problems before they arise.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15
An American hostage was set free in Beirut by his pro-Iranian kidnappers, hours after Israel and its Lebanese allies freed 15 Arab prisoners, the U.N. reported.
Jesse Turner, a 44-year-old professor, had spent nearly five years in captivity.
Page A1 The Palestinians going to peace talks were prepared to declare openly that they are Palestine Liberation Organization members, the delegation's chief said, brushing aside Israel's warning that it will not negotiate with anyone tied to the P.L.O.
A14 Iraq's child mortality rate has grown as a result of the Persian Gulf war, civil strife and international sanctions, a new study by Western experts in Iraq concludes.
Such an elevated mortality rate could mean tens of thousands of additional deaths.
A6
Christians and Muslims in Cairo are engaged in a festering dispute in one slum.
The police now guard the squalid streets of Imbaba after Coptic Christian churches were set afire, and a Muslim was shot by a Christian butcher.
A12 U.N. says Iraq admits to research on atomic bombs A7
Vietnam will let refugees be returned against their will from Hong Kong under an agreement forged by the British Government involving 222 boat people.
British officials hope to persuade Vietnam to take back tens of thousands of the refugees.
A8
News analysis: The coup in Haiti is being explained -- even by supporters of the ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide -- by pointing to the insular and menacing ruling style Father Aristide implemented in his first eight months of rule.
A10
India ferries aid to quake victims A9
Africans pressing bid for U.N. post A11
Gorbachev warns republics on armies A3
Soviet Union may get foreign debt deferral A3
Keeping Soviet enterprise afloat D1
Autonomy issue turns Slovak agains Slovak A15  National A16-20, B6
A law limiting abortion was upheld by a Federal appellate court.
The endorsement of the restrictions in Pennsylvania could set up a direct test of the Roe v.
Wade decision in the Supreme Court.
A1
American discontent has grown in recent months, a New York Times/CBS News Poll found.
Respondents said they were concerned about the state of the nation in general and the economy in particular.
A19
Republicans fret over David Duke, saying that his claiming to be a leader of their movement is deeply embarrassing.
Democrats are reaching for the moral high ground, saying that Mr.
Duke's success in Louisiana is the outgrowth of Republican efforts to build on racial divisions.
A1
Edmund G. Brown Jr. will run for President in 1992, his third campaign for the Presidency.
Mr.
Brown, a Democrat, staked out an anti-establishment theme, criticizing both major parties for what he said was the corruption of incumbency.
A18
News analysis: Talk about tax breaks is just talk A19
The destruction in Oakland by a fire was so total in some areas that no residents bothered to hike to see what was left.
It was as if they already knew the horrible answer to their question: There are no homes left, not a one, and it is nearly impossible to imagine that there ever were.
A1
Oakland fire rates as California's worst A16
Private psychiatric hospitals, part of a fast-growing industry, are being investigated by health authorities who say there are many complaints about the treatment at the facilities.
There is a fierce argument about the hospitals' care, rising costs and attempts to balance the needs of patients with the search for profits.
A1
Historically black colleges lobbied successfully for President Bush to reverse a position his Administration had taken in a major desegregation case now before the Supreme Court.
Mr.
Bush ordered the Solicitor General to support increased state aid to black public colleges.
B6
A ruling protecting judges from suits for virtually anything they say or do from the bench was handed down by the Supreme Court.
The Court ruled that a California judge who is accused of ordering a public defender to be dragged from a nearby courtroom cannot be sued for damages.
B6
A suit to block Houston's elections for City Council was filed by the Justice Department, which said the districts discriminated against Hispanic voters and that the city violated the Voting Rights Act by going ahead with the election despite objections by the Attorney General.
A16
Appeals court strikes down major parts of asbestos ban A20  Regional B1-5
Mario Cuomo's Presidential plans are becoming increasingly clear, as he indicates that he really is considering entering the 1992 race and that his primary obstacle is the political burden of serving as Governor during a campaign.
A1
New York City's hospitals chief resigned amid harsh criticism of his management of the nation's largest hospital system and investigations into his personal finances.
Dr.
J.
Emilio Carillo's resignation was announced by Mayor Dinkins.
A1
Filled with enthusiasm, but often short of cash B5
Budget cuts ravage hospital care, report says B5
A plan for commuter railroads offered by transit officials would eliminate the proposed fare increases for the Long Island Rail Road and the Metro-North Commuter Railroad.
The plan does not address New York City subway and bus fares, which may have to rise.
B1
Ferry commuters from New Jersey are a small but growing part of the city's 3 million commuters.
B1
A tension-ridden Queens firehouse is experiencing a run of transfers, four days after a female firefighter charged harassment by male colleagues.
Five men have been granted transfers and officials say more transfers will be coming.
B1
The University of Bridgeport voted to reject a takeover by a group founded and largely financed by the Unification Church and its leader, the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon.
B1
More women complain to New York rights unit B4
Nassau unions dismiss moves for pay freezes B2
School district in chaos over asbestos removal B2
Budget cuts ravage hospital care, report says B5
Killing linked to bear gallbladders B3  Business Digest D1
Science Times
Pentagon's technology wizards consider bigger civilian role C1
Biologists discover new immune "switch" C1
Sexual harassment is about power, not sex C1
Personal Computers C7  Arts/Entertainment
Men Dancers celebrate a founding father C13
The battle for Kyoto's skyline and soul C13
Music: Chamber group opens season C13
Fashion Page B7
Obituaries B8
J. Graham Parsons, career diplomat  Sports B9-15
Baseball: Can little guys rescue Braves? B9
Football: Giants special teams hit with injuries B9
Basketball: Answers soon for Knicks B15
Horse Racing: Belmont ends on declining note B15  Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed  Editorials A22
The Thomas connections
What defense defends: waste
Municipal saving by sharing
A third special election?  Letters A22
A. M. Rosenthal: The double standard A23
Russell Baker: Return with us now . . .  A23
Barry Nalebuff: The Democrats' best ticket A23
Flora Lewis: End nuclear tests? Yes. Now.  A23


Vietnam Says Hong Kong Can Return 222 Refugees by Force; Broader Accord Predicted
Officials of this British colony said today that the agreement between London and Hanoi to allow the involuntary return of 222 Vietnamese was the first step of what they expect will be a broader accord that will send tens of thousands of Vietnamese back to their homeland.
However, the flow of people still coming in -- nearly 500 a day this month -- and 20,000 so far in 1991 -- means that the swelling of Hong Kong's population will not be stemmed, let alone reversed, until such a broad accord is reached and carried out.
Compared with this year's steady flow, in all of 1990 only 5,000 Vietnamese sought new lives here.


People
*
Following a mutual agreement with management, Dan Mountain, 47 years old, creative director at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Los Angeles, is leaving the agency because of differences over strategic direction for the Infiniti account.


Picturetel In Project With I.B.M.
The Picturetel Corporation, a pioneer in the emerging video-conferencing industry, announced an agreement yesterday with I.B.M. to jointly market video-conferencing capabilities on I.B.M.'s personal computers.
Picturetel, based in Peabody, Mass., will bring full-motion, full-color, dial-up video-conferencing capabilities to the personal computer over digital switched telephone lines.
The agreement calls for Picturetel to use I.B.M.'s PS/2 personal computer and OS/2 operating system as the platform for the video-conferencing technology, which enables the user of a personal computer to see the person at the other end of the telephone line on the screen.


Biologists Discover New Immune 'Switch'
IMMUNOLOGISTS have accidentally uncovered a new and unexpected signaling system that the immune system uses to deliberately shut off certain disease-fighting cells.
The discovery fills in a major gap in understanding the immune system and may lead to advances like a treatment for hay fever.
The finding is that white blood cells need two separate signals before they will start an attack on invading viruses or bacteria.
If the cells receive only one of the signals, they will take active steps to stand on the sidelines.


Broad Advances for Dollar On Prospect of Higher Rates
The dollar advanced against other major currencies yesterday, helped by hopes that United States interest rates would move higher.
Gold prices jumped overseas -- by $4.20 in London, to $364.25 -- but rose less sharply in later New York trading.
Gold rose $1.60 on the Commodity Exchange in New York, closing at $363.80 an ounce.
The Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $363.25, up $1.50.


Fire in Oakland Ranks as Worst In State History
Firefighters succeeded today in containing the wind-driven fire that swept the parched hills above Oakland and Berkeley on Sunday, but not before it caused enough death and damage to rank as the worst fire in California history.
The Alameda County coroner confirmed 14 people lost their lives in the fast-moving blaze, including a 49-year-old Oakland fire battalion chief, who died while battling the flames.
There were fears the death toll could go still higher, and investigators today began searching the 1,800 or so burned houses, condominiums and apartment buildings for more victims.


Review/Fashion; Short and Long Coexist in Paris
Some of the big fashion houses are setting off explosions that will be heard round the world with their spring ready-to-wear collections.
The best designers here, like Christian Lacroix, mix practicality with imagination.
He has toned down the creative blast that brought him to the head of the fashion column five years ago, but his clothes haven't lost their fizz.
The colors still sizzle, and the patterns grab the eye with their mixtures of checks, stripes, heart shapes, ornate frills and flowers.
With all this surface excitement he has had the good sense to keep his styling simple.
And he has dealt sensibly with the question of changing hemlines.


Veronica Perry, Teacher, 44
Veronica Perry, a Harlem teacher and the mother of Edmund Perry, the honor student fatally shot by a police officer on Morningside Drive on June 12, 1985, died on Oct. 4 at St.
Luke's Hospital.
She was 44 years old.
She died as a result of a heart condition, the funeral home said.


If Stability of Revenue Is the Main Goal, Choose the Sales Tax
To the Editor:
In recent months -- most recently in "Who Will Pay in Connecticut?" (editorial, Oct. 8) -- you have told us that sales taxes provide "highly unstable revenue." Heavy reliance on sales taxes can be criticized on several grounds, but revenue instability is not one of them.
The truth is the opposite: the sales tax is the most stable tax base available to American state and local governments.
Over the last 30 years, personal consumption expenditure for durable and nondurable goods less food -- a reasonable proxy for the base of the sales tax in most states -- has never declined from one year to the next.
The average year-to-year increase has been about 7.5 percent, and there were only five years in which it was less than 4 percent.


Appeals Court Strikes Down Major Parts of Federal Asbestos Ban
A Federal appeals court in New Orleans today struck down major parts of a far-reaching ban by the Environmental Protection Agency on asbestos products, ruling that the agency had not adequately considered alternative regulation short of the prohibition.
The ruling upheld the provisions of the agency's 1989 phaseout of asbestos use that are already in effect but sent provisions that would have taken effect in 1993 and 1996 back to the agency for more proceedings.


Injury Sidelines Star
JEAN-PIERRE PAPIN, a forward for Olympique Marseilles and the French national team, was taken to a hospital with a concussion after he was struck on the head by a beer bottle as he stepped off the team bus at the St.
Etienne stadium on Saturday.
Papin was later released, but may not be available for Olympique's European Champions' Cup match against Czechoslovakia's Spartak Praga tomorrow.


Sports of The Times: The Father Of the Pride Reminisces
THE latest Mr.
October is really the first Mr.
OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOctober, plus another one-third of an O.
In blanking the Pittsburgh Pirates for 16 1/3 consecutive innings in two 1-0 victories during the National League Championship Series, Steve Avery did what no other pitcher in baseball history had ever done in the heat of the post-season crucible.


Liz Claiborne Profit Up 5%
Despite its own dire predictions for less than stellar growth in the second half of this year, Liz Claiborne Inc. yesterday reported record sales and earnings increases for the third quarter that ended Sept. 28.
The company, which manufactures and markets men's and women's apparel, shoes and accessories, reported a 5 percent increase in third-quarter profits, to $65.7 million, from $62.6 million in the comparable period last year.
Earnings per share were 77 cents, compared with 72 cents in last year's third quarter.


America Grows Gloomier on Economy, Poll Shows
As the Presidential campaign season begins in earnest, Americans are even more deeply troubled than they were earlier this year about the state of the nation in general and of the economy in particular, according to a New York Times/ CBS News Poll.
The number of Americans who say that "things" in the country have "pretty seriously gotten off on the wrong track" has increased from 31 percent who said so in January to 42 percent in March and to 60 percent in the latest poll.
And a plurality of 44 percent says things in the country are generally going worse than they were five years ago; that is up from 31 percent who expressed the same view in March.


Marcus Aurelius Goodrich, 93, Writer Known for Naval Stories
Marcus Aurelius Goodrich, a novelist and screenwriter, died on Sunday at the Libby Convalescent Center in Richmond.
He was 93 years old.
He died of heart failure, said his daughter, Helene Goodrich Horner of Cary, N.C.


Political Memo; Biggest Hurdle for Cuomo As He Ponders '92: His Job
Despite his inscrutable ways, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is making it increasingly clear that he really is considering the 1992 Presidential race and that his primary obstacle is the political burden of serving as Governor while running for President.
In the 10 days since Mr.
Cuomo rejuvenated the dormant speculation about his future by saying he was thinking about the race, he has held a running dialogue with reporters and supporters about the three options he faces: not to run, to run while Governor, or to resign and run.
"The fundamental problem is what do you do about being governor," said one longtime adviser to Mr.
Cuomo.
"His mind tells him he can't do both, but his heart is saying there must be a way."
Many of Mr.
Cuomo's closest advisers consider the resign-and-run option a long shot.
If Mr.
Cuomo stepped down and left his office to Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine, he would likely face harsh criticism for abandoning his obligation to the state.
He also would give up a job he relishes and his only residence, the Executive Mansion.
But after watching the incremental progress of Mr.
Cuomo's musings over the last week, many of the Governor's aides and advisers, as well as Democratic leaders from around the country, say they believe he is now engaged in a serious examination of the other two options.
Mr.
Cuomo's supporters in New York and elsewhere said today it has long seemed clear that he would relish a race against President Bush.
The clearest sign yet that he was actively considering the race came Sunday night in Chicago, where Mr.
Cuomo told reporters that he believed that he had "until sometime in November" to make a decision.
A Question of Priorities
Throughout the seven years that Mr.
Cuomo has flirted with the Presidency, he has described his decision-making process in linear terms.
First, he has said, he would have to decide that he was more capable than other contenders.
Then, he would have to decide that he could do the job.
And finally, he would have to figure out what to do about his responsibilities as Governor.
Many of the Democratic Governor's closest advisers, most of whom admit that they want Mr.
Cuomo to run, say they believe that he has vaulted the first two hurdles and is now measuring the final barrier.
"The bottom-line problem is I'm the Governor of the state of New York," he said in Chicago.
"How do you manage that and do a Presidential campaign?"
Why is the Governor holding this public dialogue?
The possibility cannot be dismissed, gubernatorial aides say, that part of the Governor's motive may be to let supporters down softly if he chooses not to run.
But most believe something more serious is going on, even if he ultimately decides not to run.
It is also difficult to know whether a Cuomo candidacy would be significantly damaged if Mr.
Cuomo, after suggesting that the state would suffer under an absentee governor, became one anyway.
Also weighing on Mr.
Cuomo is the experience of the last Democratic nominee, Michael S. Dukakis, who mixed Presidential and gubernatorial politics into a lethal combination.
Having run on the platform of the Massachusetts Miracle, Mr.
Dukakis was held directly accountable as a sitting governor when the miracle unraveled in mid-campaign.
By the time he returned to the Statehouse in Boston, Mr.
Dukakis was the object of such scorn -- in part because he had not tended to problems at home and in part because he had lost -- that his final two years in office became an endurance test in humiliation.
Mr.
Dukakis's experience may have left an indelible impression on the electorate.
A New York Times/CBS News poll conducted Oct. 10-15 shows that 53 percent of the 991 registered voters questioned said a sitting governor could not fulfill his responsibilities at home while running for President.
Problems at Home
Clearly, there are differences between Mr.
Dukakis's situation and that of Mr.
Cuomo.
Because the political timetable for 1992 has been contracted, Mr.
Cuomo would be running for President for a maximum of only one year.
The Dukakis campaign lasted almost twice that long.
But Mr.
Cuomo also faces obstacles at home that Mr.
Dukakis did not face, at least at the beginning of his campaign.
Unlike Massachusetts, where both houses of the Legislature were Democratic and could protect Mr.
Dukakis from state problems, New York has a divided Legislature with a Republican State Senate.
New York also has a looming budget problem that the Republicans could make embarrassing for Mr.
Cuomo throughout the primary season.
"Let's say I wanted to run, that I passed all the other impediments," he said at a news conference Friday.
"What would you do about being Governor? Quit? Say, 'Oops, sorry, there's a more important task,' or try to do it with one hand? That's the problem that is very, very difficult to get past."
Mr.
Cuomo has been so effective in making the case against running that many of his advisers believe he will not do so.
That, of course, raises the question of why Mr.
Cuomo has made his thought process so public.
If, as in 1987, the Governor declines to run after a long and public flirtation, he inevitably will be criticized for both a lack of backbone and for suspending the Democratic contest with his hand-wringing.
The most generous interpretation of why Mr.
Cuomo has chosen this course of public discussion comes from John A. Marino, the state Democratic chairman and a close Cuomo adviser.
"There is something here that people fail to see, which is that he is intensely honest and shares his thoughts," Mr.
Marino said.
But others in Albany think it was not coincidental that Mr.
Cuomo began his public ruminations shortly after expressing frustration that the media was paying less attention to his comments on national affairs.
"It's the Jesse syndrome," said one state official, referring to the Rev.
Jesse L. Jackson.
"The minute you say you're not running, people start ignoring you."


Researchers Report Depletion of Ozone In Temperate Zones
An international panel of scientists will report today that for the first time, instruments have detected significant decreases in the earth's protective ozone layer in spring and summer over the temperate zones of the Northern and Southern Hemispheres.
The ozone layer protects living things from the Sun's harmful ultraviolet rays and increases in the radiation will cause more cases of skin cancer and cataracts, scientists have warned.
They also fear the radiation could disrupt oceanic food chains and harm some crops.
While not unexpected, the decreases are alarming because sunlight, particularly ultraviolet radiation, is strongest in spring and summer.


Where Are Little Guys When Braves Need 'Em?
Chili Davis, who with two Octobers of experience is something of a veteran of post-season play, offered a theory.
"In the World Series and the L.C.S. games," he said today, "pitchers key so much on the big guys to get them out. Who ends up being the m.v.p.? Pitchers or the little guys."


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
Psychiatric Institutes of America is under investigation by law-enforcement officials in several states on charges that it systematically misdiagnosed, mistreated and abused patients to increase its profits from insurance claims.  [ Page A1. ]
Chase Manhattan reported a $136 million net profit.
The bank attributed its turnabout partly to falling interest rates and to drastic cost-cutting over the past year.  [ D1. ]
Montgomery Ward is teaming with Fingerhut to start a company to produce nearly a dozen separate catalogues a year.  [ D1. ]
Amoco said its earnings fell 45.3 percent.
Analysts foresee a two-week stream of sharply lower oil-company results.  [ D2. ]
G.M.'s three main non-automotive units posted an aggregate 8.6 percent drop in earnings.  [ D5. ]
In General Cinema's $1.3 billion offer for Harcourt, a tense standoff continued.  [ D7. ]
Time Warner lost $62 million in the quarter, it said, as it continued to pay off its large merger-related debt.  [ D18. ]
Picturetel announced an agreement with I.B.M. for joint marketing of video-conferencing capabilities.  [ D4. ]
Dozens of coal companies have agreed to plead guilty to conspiring to defraud the Federal coal dust sampling program.  [ A20. ]
Apple introduced a collection of new Macintosh computers at the Comdex trade show.
Personal Computers.  [ C7. ] THE ECONOMY
Whites are nearly twice as likely as blacks to get mortgages, even within the same income group, according to a comprehensive Government report on mortgage lending nationwide.  [ D1. ]
Americans are more deeply troubled about the economy than they were earlier this year, a poll shows.  [ A19. ]
Major parts of an E.P.A. ban on asbestos products were struck down in court.  [ A20. ]
Research on sexual harassment in the workplace shows that through harassment men devalue a woman's role by calling attention to her sexuality.  [ C1. ]
The program to clean up toxic waste is hampered by its inability to identify which dumps pose a real threat to human health, the National Research Council said.  [ C5. ] INTERNATIONAL
The Soviet Union may be allowed to defer some of its foreign debt repayments for up to a year, a Bush Administration official told Congress.  [ A3. ]
While the Soviet economy crumbles, Vladimir Gurov has kept his soot-covered apparel factories on an even keel.  [ D1. ]
Eastern Germany's battered economy will grow strongly next year, western German research institutes predicted.  [ D1. ] MARKETS
Stock prices pulled back from Friday's record levels, with analysts citing a weak bond market, rising inflation fears and some gloomy corporate earnings.
The Dow fell 16.77, to 3,060.38.  [ D10. ]
Treasury bond investors were rattled by talk of tax cuts to revive the economy, and prices of long-term securities fell more than a point.  [ D17. ]  The talk about new tax breaks is mostly political positioning on the eve of the 1992 campaign.
News Analysis.  [ A18. ]
Orange juice futures prices rose sharply for the fifth straight day.  [ D20. ]  The dollar advanced.  [ D20. ] TODAY'S COLUMNS
Owens-Corning's asbestos costs shocked Wall Street.
Should analysts have seen it coming?
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D1. ]
Latin America is re-emerging as a big buyer of American goods.
Louis Uchitelle: Business Scene.  [ D2. ]
As more grown-ups take part in Halloween, advertisers are taking notice.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D18. ]


Ex-Backers of Ousted Haitian Say He Alienated His Allies
When the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide won Haiti's first democratic presidential elections in December, his landslide victory sent tens of thousands of Haitians coursing through the streets waving branches stripped from trees and crowing like the rooster that was their leader's campaign symbol.
One of the new President's first acts was to declare a "marriage" with a long-troublesome Haitian Army, whose enlisted soldiers, he was fond of pointing out, shared a dirt-poor background with his core supporters.


So Far, It's the Twins, Handily


Please Take a Letter, Miss O'Hara
WRITE short, snappy sentences.
But vary them occasionally with more leisurely ones that serve to spare the reader from the constant, irritating staccato of short, snappy sentences.
That is standard advice to writers, but many find it hard to take.
Corporate Voice, a program from Scandinavian PC Systems of Rockville, Md., analyzes a written document from several points of view: in terms of readability as measured by grade level, against standard readability measures and also against a standard that may be selected by the user.
For example, a supervisor could designate some excellent sales letters, have them typed into the program, and then measure subsequent letters against them.
The aim is to enable the corporation to speak with a single voice, no matter who wrote the particular document.


Orange Juice Prices Increase For the Fifth Straight Day
Orange juice futures prices rose sharply for the fifth straight day yesterday on the New York Cotton Exchange as perceptions of a shrinking Florida orange crop underpinned a powerful rally.
Analysts warned, however, that the market had become "overbought," meaning a sudden downturn was likely, even though prices were expected to rise further as colder weather approached.


Reviews/Television; How 2 Parties Managed The S.&amp; L. Bailout
The savings-and-loan disaster is not camera friendly -- no shootouts, no car chases, no emergency rooms -- which may be why it has inspired few documentaries.
But like the gorilla in the bedroom, it is not easy to ignore.
L.
William Seidman, who until last week was in charge of the Federal agency entrusted with damage control of what he calls "the mother of all Government mistakes," says the cost to taxpayers will probably reach $600 billion to $700 billion.
He makes the estimate tonight on "The Great American Bailout," a punchy "Frontline" report at 9 on Channels 13 and 49.
Robert Krulwich, the program's correspondent, traces the trouble to the 1982 deregulation of savings and loans, which permitted them to invest their federally insured deposits in all manner of risky speculations.
He describes that bill, which was pushed by both the Republican Administration and the Democratic leadership in Congress, as an invitation to "real estate speculators and outright crooks who turned some S.&amp;L.'s into their private piggy banks." When the real estate boom went bust, particularly in the Southwest, Washington was left holding a very big bag.


Very Soon, Answers For Knicks
The Knicks embark on a three-game road trip this week, trying to answer several important questions before the regular season begins.
When will Xavier McDaniel begin playing like a 20-point scorer?
Which players will make the final two roster spots -- Brian Quinnett, Carlton McKinney, Jarvis Basnight or Patrick Eddie?
And will the Knicks' bench, which on paper looks stronger than it did last season, continue to perform consistently when the regular season opens on Nov. 1?


CHRONICLE
MARCELLO ALENCAR, Mayor of Rio de Janeiro, came to Manhattan this week to persuade New Yorkers that his city, despite its reputation for high crime rates, is a safe place to visit.
Then the tables were turned; his daughter-in-law, PATRICIA ALENCAR, was mugged in Bloomingdale's.


Q&amp;A
Lightning and Trees
Q. Why is lightning attracted to trees?
A.
"It isn't so much that lightning loves trees as that it loves things that are A, tall; B, the tallest thing in the region, and C, conduct electricity," said Dr.
Allan Friedman, director of the New York Hall of Science in Queens.


Tax-Cut Talk Sends Prices Down
Talk of tax cuts to revive the economy rattled investors in the Treasury bond market yesterday, and prices of long-term securities fell by more than a point, while yields rose above 8 percent.
"The debate about fiscal stimulus is sending a cold chill through the market," one government securities trader said.
"If we are going to focus in on what is going on in Washington, that is going to hurt."


Pay Dispute Closes Royal Opera House
The Royal Opera House in Covent Garden will close Tuesday until further notice because of a pay dispute between management and its orchestra.
The company's 118-member orchestra, which is seeking a 24 percent increase in basic pay over two years, refused to wear its customary evening dress for performances last week, playing instead in casual street clothes.
Continuing its protest this week, the orchestra announced that starting today it would observe all the intermissions called for in the original score of a particular ballet or opera.
In the Royal Opera's new production of Meyerbeer's "Huguenots," which was to open at Covent Garden Thursday, that would mean four intermissions instead of one, including one after an act just eight minutes long, and overtime pay for the orchestra.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.25
4.87
7.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.06
5.03
7.24
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.12
5.05
7.19
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.31
7.20
8.47
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.07
7.94
8.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.15
9.06
9.83
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.88
6.85
7.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about an earthquake in India misstated the death toll in the California earthquake in 1989.
It was 63, not "more than 200."


More First Union Stock Is Sought
The First Union Corporation, Charlotte, N.C., a financial holding company, said that underwriters had exercised an option to buy an additional 1.125 million shares in an offering of 7.5 million common shares to cover heavy demand.
The lead underwriter is Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Classical Music in Review
Anonymous 4 and Medieval Strings
Corpus Christi Church
The Music Before 1800 series has presented a stunning array of American and European early-music groups over the last 17 years.
Its home, Corpus Christi Church, has acoustics that are warm and reverberant, and that make it an ideal place to hear much of the music the series presents.
It was particularly well suited to this year's opening concert on Sunday afternoon, a program of sacred settings drawn from four manuscripts compiled in Spain and France between the 12th and 14th centuries.


An Unexplained Departure By the President of Fedders
Even for the secretive Fedders Corporation, the brief announcement late Friday night was extraordinarily unrevealing.
R.
D.
Tyler Jr., the air- conditioning company's president and chief operating officer, had resigned both posts and his directorship, and announced no plans for his future.
Taking up his responsibilities would be Salvatore Giordano Jr., Fedders's vice chairman and chief executive, whose family has controlled the company for decades.
Mr.
Tyler, who is 47 and goes by the name of Toby, joined the Peapack, N.J., company in 1981 after five years as president of Kubar Bearings in Cambridge, Mass.
He became senior vice president and chief operating officer of Fedders's entire air-conditioning operations in 1983 and was promoted in 1987 to the posts he held until Friday.


Star of New TV Series Taps Harsh Memories Of School Integration
Back in the 1970's, the actress Regina Taylor was among the first group of blacks to integrate an all-white junior high school in Oklahoma.
"I felt like I was a child of Martin Luther King," Ms.
Taylor said.
"I was very idealistic. The reality was very different. The first day we were seated in the classroom in alphabetical order. I sat next to a little white girl. She told the teacher, 'I do not want to sit next to this nigger.' "
Ms.
Taylor, a sharecropper's granddaughter, is telling this story in Atlanta, on the set of a new NBC television series, "I'll Fly Away," a drama about the first stirrings of the civil rights movement in a small Southern town at the end of the 1950's.


Eudora Welty Wins A $10,000 Book Prize
Eudora Welty will receive the $10,000 National Book Foundation Medal for Distinguished Contribution to American Letters, the foundation announced yesterday.
The medal will be presented to the 82-year-old author on Nov. 20 for works that the foundation described as "a unique and evocative body of work in which regionalism becomes universal."


Accountants' Group Names Board Member
In a small victory for those who favor making accounting rules less burdensome for companies, the Financial Accounting Foundation said yesterday that it had selected a seventh member for the industry's rule-making board: Robert H. Northcutt Jr., an accountant who has served as the controller of the Lockheed Corporation since 1978.
The foundation, a Norwalk, Conn., group that administers the board, also announced that it would reappoint Dennis R. Beresford to another five years as the board's chairman when his current term ends on June 30.
"Denny stepped into a tough spot and probably has done at least as well as anyone could have expected," said Arthur R. Wyatt, a former board member who is a partner at the accounting firm Arthur Andersen.
"So that's a good move."


Review/Music; Chamber Society Navigates Transition
Like many other musical institutions, the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, which opened its season on Sunday afternoon with a concert in Alice Tully Hall, is in transition.
In the last few years, attendance has been dropping and the number of concerts has decreased.
And the cellist Fred Sherry will be leaving the post of artistic director at the end of this season.
Moreover, despite changes in personnel and in repertory during the last decade, Sunday's concert was not all that different in effect and style from those I remember from the early 1980's.
The repertory was miscellaneous to a fault, lacking a theme or a design, while the playing was polished, energetic, expert -- and astonishingly dull.


GUILTY PLEAS SET IN U.S. COAL CASE
Dozens of coal companies and individuals have agreed to plead guilty to conspiring to defraud the Federal coal dust sampling program, a Federal prosecutor said today.
The agreements were the latest development in a lengthy investigation into fraud in the program, which is intended to protect miners from excessive levels of coal dust, which can cause black lung disease.


Once-Lush Hills Turned to Ash By Fire's Rage
In the steep canyons high above the landmark Claremont Hotel, nothing remains but a few chimneys, the hulks of melted cars, the charred skeletons of trees and a couple of twisted I-beams that until Sunday supported some of the grandest homes in the region.
Today, no former residents bothered to argue their way past police barricades in the hills at the northern edge of Oakland, the epicenter of the fire-storm, or to hike these meandering streets to see what was left behind.
It was as if they already knew the horrible answer to their questions: There are no homes left here.


Be Certain Mars Has No Dinosaurs
To the Editor:
The project to make Mars habitable by terraforming should not be ridiculed, as some scientists are doing ("Can Mars Be Made Hospitable to Humans?", Science Times, Oct. 1).
Its proponents would warm up the red planet by creating a greenhouse effect.
This is in fact the way Earth was made habitable.
An econometric model prepared on Venus in approximately 200,000,000 B.C. has recently been discovered in a cave in Colorado and is now being analyzed in our university's computers.


INSIDE
Shift on Black College Aid
Reversing the Administration's position on a major desegregation case, the President ordered the Solicitor General to support increased aid to black public colleges.
Page B6.
Houston Election Challenged
The Justice Department has gone to court to block Houston City Council elections on Nov. 5, saying the districts are discriminatory.
Page A16.  222 Boat People to Go Home
Britain said it had persuaded Vietnam to let the authorities in Hong Kong fly 222 boat people back to Vietnam against their will.
Page A8.


3-Year Degree Idea Ignores College Realities
To the Editor:
S.
Frederick Starr ("Tuition Relief for the Middle Class," Op-Ed, Oct. 6) has not been entirely frank in proposing a three-year program for undergraduates.
For one thing, he does not tell us at what expense this will be accomplished: either units required will be reduced or summers will be filled with school work.
In the former case, the proposal flies in the face of many disciplines that have been raising the unit requirements for majors; in the latter, he will eliminate the one period when students can help pay for their education, this while claiming he is fighting the high costs parents pay for college.
And where will faculty labor costs come from if they are given summer teaching assignments?


Our Towns
Hazel Hobbs was late for a hairdresser's appointment when an elderly gentleman walked into the principal's office at the Hamilton Avenue Elementary School here on May 24.
The man asked to look around.
The children were long gone on that Friday afternoon and the principal had a ton of work.
But Mrs.
Hobbs is friendly and proud of her school.
So she canceled her hair appointment.
That was a decision that changed her life and that of the entire neighborhood.


U.N. Guards Stop Armed Visitor


U. of Bridgeport Refuses Aid From Moon's Group
The trustees of the financially ailing University of Bridgeport voted unanimously last night to reject a possible takeover by a group founded and largely financed by the Unification Church and its leader, the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon.
Colin Gunn, chairman of the trustees, said that the members rejected a $50 million offer to affiliate with the group, the Professors World Peace Academy, because of the potential effect on the reputation of the university and because there were other options for income, including possible aid from the State of Connecticut.


What Defense Defends: Waste
This year's budget cycle is too far along for Congress to do much more than pare egregiously superfluous weapons from the Pentagon's shopping list.
These include the B-2 bomber and the latest variant of Star Wars, "Brilliant Pebbles." But the erosion of support for military excess sends a clear warning to Defense Secretary Dick Cheney: $300-billion-a-year Pentagon budgets are unsustainable.
He needs to use the coming months to cut much deeper.
The place to start is the non-nuclear part of the budget.
That's where the money is.
With the evaporating Soviet threat, what should the Pentagon be prepared to defend against?
The worst menace anyone can conjure is another Iraq.
But even Iraq is much reduced and no other Iraqs are visible.
Iraq nevertheless suggests two places where the defense budget can be safely cut: the overall size of air and naval forces and the pace of modernization.
Both now assume a continued Soviet threat.
Neither is needed to counter another Iraq, or even two such episodes at once.


Both Ends of the Apple Spectrum
Apple Computer Inc., making it clear that it will no longer be an outsider in the personal computer industry, introduced an impressive collection of new Macintosh computers today at the Comdex Fall computer trade show here.
Comdex Fall is the biggest annual event in the computer industry, but until this year Apple had been a minor participant in a show dominated by I.B.M.
PC and compatible computers.
Buoyed by its recent alliance with the International Business Machines Corporation, Apple not only came to Comdex, but also made one of the biggest opening-day splashes.


Study Says Iraq's Child Mortality Rate Has Tripled
A new public health study by American and other Western experts in Iraq says the country's child mortality rate has nearly tripled and perhaps even quadrupled as a result of the Persian Gulf war, civil strife and international sanctions.
Such an elevated mortality rate could mean tens of thousands of additional deaths in Iraq's population of more than three million children under five years old, officials who took part in the survey said, although they declined in their study to make specific projections of overall deaths.


Glassboro's Fake to the Left Turns Out Right
With the fourth quarter a minute old and Glassboro State trailing Ramapo, 14-10, the Profs had the ball with a third-and-11 on the Roadrunners' 30-yard line.
Burl Battle, the Glassboro quarterback, approached the referee, Jim Wickersham, and said one word, "Now," while John Rechner, a linebacker, came into the game to play left guard.


Uncovered Short Sales Decline 4% on Big Board
The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that the number of shares sold short and not yet covered fell by 4 percent, to 719.1 million, for the monthly period ended Oct. 15.
The number was 749.1 million on Sept. 13, the previous reporting date.
The decline was the first since July.
The entire change, however, was accounted for by a drop of 31.5 million shares in the short position in the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, where the number of shares held short -- that is borrowed and sold but not yet repurchased -- fell to 7.8 million.
Effect of Merger With NCR
Most of that decline in the A.T.&amp; T. short position was related to the completion of the company's merger with the NCR Corporation.
Arbitragers had purchased NCR and sold A.T.&amp; T. short, betting that the merger would succeed.


Black Hypertension May Reflect Other Ills
RESEARCHERS studying why American blacks have such alarming rates of high blood pressure are finding new evidence that hypertension may be a symptom of different underlying conditions and not one disease.
Over all, blacks in the United States have twice the rate of high blood pressure of whites, and five to seven times the rate of severe hypertension.
But they also have much higher rates of elevated blood pressure than blacks in Africa.
This leads most scientists to believe that environmental factors like diet, stress and smoking play a large role in triggering the condition in blacks who may have a genetic vulnerability to it.


Net Losses Cut at Time Warner
Time Warner Inc. reported yesterday that it had a third-quarter net loss of $62 million, compared with a loss of $91 million in the comparable period last year, as it continued to pay off the large debt incurred when Time Inc. acquired Warner Communications in 1990.
On an operating basis, income for the quarter fell by 7.5 percent, to $505 million, compared with $546 million a year earlier.


Dinkins Announces Resignation of Chief At Hospital Agency
Mayor David N. Dinkins announced the resignation of Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo as president of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation yesterday amid harsh criticism of Dr.
Carrillo's management of the nation's largest hospital system and investigations into his personal finances.
Dr.
Carrillo's resignation, in a letter dated Saturday, capped a stormy 18-month tenure that mixed ethnic politics, deep budget cuts and infighting with City Hall.
It followed a series of questionable deaths in city hospitals, the appointment of a mayoral commission to examine the state of care in the hospitals and weeks of rumors about his impending departure.


Turkish Premier Quits After Party's Defeat
Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz handed his resignation to President Turgut Ozal today after their center-right Motherland Party was beaten in general elections on Sunday.
Mr.
Yilmaz told reporters that Mr.
Ozal had asked him to continue as head of a caretaker Government until a new Cabinet could be formed by Suleyman Demirel, whose center-right True Path Party won a narrow electoral victory.


U.S. Said to Lack Data on Threat Posed by Hazardous Waste Sites
The National Research Council said today that the nation's mammoth program to clean up toxic waste was hampered by its inability to tell the difference between dumps posing a real threat to human health and those that do not.
In a report, the research council, an arm of the National Academy of Sciences, said that because not enough money was spent on developing a sound scientific system for setting priorities, the nation faced the prospect of wasting billions of dollars on dumps that posed little or no risk and ignoring dumps that were a true threat to the environment and public health.


Marcia Weisman, Collector, 73; Supporter of Major Art Museums
Marcia Simon Weisman, a collector admired for her discerning taste in postwar American art and as a benefactor who helped found the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art, died on Saturday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
She was 73 years old.
She died of a stroke, a spokesman for the hospital said.


Pentagon Wizards of Technology Eye Wider Civilian Role
A HIGH-STAKES ideological skirmish is heating up over a little-known Federal agency that some see as the savior of America's high-technology industry and others see as another example of misguided Government meddling in the economy.
The tiny agency, credited as the unseen hand in shaping many major technical innovations, from computers to materials science, is a high technology arm of the Pentagon known as the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, or Darpa.
The White House, Congress and some of the nation's top economists and scientists are battling over whether Darpa should explicitly try to invigorate civilian industry so the United States can better compete with international rivals, especially Japan.


Chain of Mental Hospitals Faces Inquiry in 4 States
Law enforcement officials in several states have begun investigations of one of the nation's largest private psychiatric-hospital chains on charges that it systematically misdiagnosed, mistreated and abused patients to increase its profits from insurance claims.
Over the last decade, the company at the center of the investigations, Psychiatric Institutes of America, the operator of 73 hospitals and treatment centers across the nation, has been regarded as one of the most modern, profitable and prestigious enterprises in the fast-growing industry of private psychiatric hospitals.


Talk About Tax Breaks Is . . . Just Talk
All the talk in the last few days about new tax breaks is mostly political positioning on the eve of the 1992 election campaign.
The basic theme of Republicans and Democrats on tax policy is the same as it was generations ago: Republicans want to give tax breaks to the wealthy, saying that to do so would improve the economy and thus benefit all Americans.
Democrats want to redistribute income away from the rich and toward the poor and middle class, maintaining that fairness makes the economy run more smoothly.


EXECUTIVES
*
Carolina First Bank, Greenville, S.C., a subsidiary of Carolina First Corp., named James W. Terry Jr. president. *
Chrysler Taiwan Co.
Ltd., Taipei, a subsidiary of Chrysler Corp., named Alan L. Spencer president.


J. Graham Parsons Is Dead at 83; Former Envoy to Laos and Sweden
J.
Graham Parsons, a retired career diplomat who was Ambassador to Laos and Sweden and Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, died on Sunday in Lyme, Conn.
He was 83 years old and lived in Stockbridge, Mass.
He died in his sleep while a guest in the house of friends, his daughter Margaret M. Hallett said.
She said the cause of death was not immediately known.


Review/Television; The Age of AIDS vs. the Age of Immortality
CBS's "Schoolbreak Special" series, the more or less monthly dramas aimed at young audiences, opens a new season this afternoon at 4 with "Dedicated to the One I Love."The subject is AIDS, an understanding of which is now being widely recognized as crucial for teen-agers.
One problem is getting the message across to a population segment that tends to feel immortal and pretty much immune to life-threatening issues.
This latest effort tries, quite successfully, to be neither manipulative nor hysterical.
In fact, AIDS complications don't surface until halfway through the 50-minute story.
It begins with the death in a car accident of a high-school student named Ron (Joey Sciacca).
Amy (Lisa Dean Ryan) is devastated.
Ron had been her boyfriend, although they had broken up about a year ago.
She and several others would like to dedicate the yearbook to Ron's memory.
But some students object, pointing out that he had become a heavy drug user.


Ben Johnson Pleads Guilty in Assault Case
BEN JOHNSON pleaded guilty in Toronto yesterday to assaulting a former teammate, CHERYL THIBEDEAU, last year.


Nassau Unions Protest Demand For Pay Freezes
About 2,000 Nassau County employees demonstrated today against an ultimatum from County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta that their union agree to a pay freeze and other concessions or face hundreds of layoff notices.
The marchers, chanting "chop from the top" and "down with Gulotta," began circling the building where the Nassau County Board of Supervisors was meeting shortly after Mr.
Gulotta asked the board to declare a fiscal emergency in the county because of an anticipated deficit of up to $150 million in a budget of $1.7 billion.


Judge Will Stay on Murder Trial
The judge in the murder trial of a Westchester teacher accused of killing her former lover's wife said today that he would not remove himself from her re-trial, rejecting a charge by the District Attorney's office that he showed favoritism toward the defense.
Judge John Carey of Westchester County Court characterized his handling of the first trial of the defendant, Carolyn Warmus, as impartial "in fact and appearance." That trial ended in a hung jury last April, and Ms.
Warmus, charged with second-degree murder and criminal weapons possession, is now free on bail pending a new trial.


Yugoslavia's Conflict Is Not Ethnic
To the Editor:
"Ethnic Conflict in Yugoslavia Tearing Apart Its Army, Too" (front page, Oct. 1) is somewhat misleading.
For example, it says, ". . . since July the army has backed Serbian irregulars in Croatia who have seized Serbian-populated areas in opposition to the republic's June 25 independence declaration."
"If all went the way of  [ Serbian President Slobodan ]  Milosevic's dictum, the outcome would be a greater Serbia comprising . . . pieces of Croatia inhabited largely by Serbs."


Soviet Union May Get Foreign Debt Deferral
The Soviet Union may be allowed to defer some of its foreign debt repayments for up to a year, a Bush Administration official told Congress today.
The official, David C. Mulford, the Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs, said representatives of the Group of Seven nations reached a "general consensus" in Bangkok last week that some response would be necessary if the Soviet Union temporarily found itself without enough foreign currency to meet its debt payments.


2 Dictionaries Go to War Over Words
It is perhaps the ultimate war of words for a courthouse well accustomed to them.
A Federal jury in Manhattan is being asked to decide whether the publisher of one dictionary stole the trademark of another by using a similar title and packaging.
On one side is Merriam-Webster, which publishes Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, packaged since 1973 in a red cover with the word "Webster's" in white along the book's spine.


Brooklyn Stabbing Death Linked To the Exporting of Animal Parts
Detectives at the 68th Precinct in Brooklyn who thought they had seen everything say it is a New York City first: a killing apparently committed for bear gallbladders, which have sold for as much as $45,000 in Asia.
The 39-year-old victim, identified by the police as Haeng Gu Lee of 170 72d Street in the Bay Ridge section, was a Korean-American trader who apparently exported animal parts to the Far East, where black bear gallbladders are prized as powerful medicine.


The Thomas Connections
There are obvious connections between last week's Senate vote to confirm Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court and the civil rights bill that comes up in the Senate today -- obvious, that is, to everyone except President Bush.
One connection concerns race, another concerns Republican consistency and a third concerns decency to women in the workplace.
At the Thomas hearings, Republicans helped the nominee denounce what he called a "high-tech lynching," a startling image of racial oppression.
Then last Friday, President Bush called in his Senate minority leader, Bob Dole, and Senators John Danforth and Arlen Specter to discuss the 1991 civil rights bill.
Those Republican Senators, who had led the fight for Justice Thomas, were too polite to raise the possibility that the President might follow their example and support the nominee
and
the bill.


CHRONICLE
What does Gov.
MARIO M. CUOMO do for relaxation while he decides whether to run for the Democratic Presidential nomination?
Last weekend he played basketball, and he announced yesterday on his weekly radio show, "The Capitol Connection," on WAMC in Albany that he had received a "boo-boo."


The Newest Fashion in Urban Transportation: Ferryboats
Long before dawn, commuters arrive at the dock in Weehawken, N.J., first one by one, then in briskly moving masses.
Briefcases in hand, they board a blue and white ferry marked "Midtown." And for the next five minutes, until the Port Imperial ferry docks at West 38th Street in Manhattan, serenity seems to settle over the crowd.
"Before the overwhelming assault on my senses, I just like to have a few Buddha-like moments," said one woman who sat on the upper deck, her eyes closed and her face lifted into a breeze rolling off the Hudson River.


In War-Torn Croatia, a Widow Mourns


3-Year Degree Idea Ignores College Realities; Fosters Tunnel Vision
To the Editor:
As a recent graduate of Dartmouth College, I applaud S. Frederick Starr's efforts to curb the spiraling costs of higher education in "Tuition Relief for the Middle Class" (Op-Ed, Oct. 6).
However, I believe his solution -- instituting three-year baccalaureate programs for undergraduates -- could be damaging not only to a student's intellectual growth but to the university's vitality as well.
Traditionally at liberal arts institutions the student has one and a half years to sample a broad range of courses to determine a major by the end of the second year.
Mr.
Starr's proposed accelerated program would undoubtedly place the onus on the incoming freshman to choose a program of concentration after only one semester.
With such limited time to sample a university's diverse curriculum, the student would likely gravitate toward those familiar and pre-professional disciplines.


Review/Dance; 2 Routes to Jocasta, Both Validly Graham
Christine Dakin's performance as Jocasta on Sunday afternoon, before the Martha Graham Dance Company brought its richly varied season to a close in the evening at the City Center, was mind-stretching: a tragic portrait of a heroine who falls from high estate.
In the current Graham company, Miss Dakin and Terese Capucilli have stepped into their mentor's parts from opposite temperamental poles.
If Miss Capucilli has been the vibrant sun and Miss Dakin the luminous moon, each now seems to have borrowed something of the other's qualities as the heroine of "Night Journey," Graham's view of Jocasta and Oedipus.


Ex-Klan Leader's Vote Sends Message to a Pained G.O.P.
Suddenly, the high theater of Louisiana politics has become deadly serious to both parties.
For national Republican leaders, the second-place finish by State Representative David Duke in Saturday's primary for governor, which puts him in the runoff election on Nov. 16, is a source of deep embarrassment.
Even as the White House and the Republican National Committee sought to distance themselves from the former Ku Klux Klan leader today, he was making the rounds of the morning talk shows -- as a Republican, he insisted.


Supreme Court Roundup; Court Reaffirms View That a Judge Can't Be Sued for Acts on the Bench
Reaffirming its view that judges are immune from suit for virtually anything they say or do from the bench, the Supreme Court ruled today that a California judge who is accused of ordering a public defender to be dragged from a nearby courtroom and brought before him cannot be sued for damages.
By a vote of 5 to 3 in an unsigned opinion, the Court held that the judge is entitled to absolute immunity and that a Federal appeals panel in Los Angeles was wrong to let the public defender's damage lawsuit go forward.


The No-Braking Ball: CBS Versus Physics
CBS's latest high-tech toy at the World Series is Super Vision, a computer gizmo that shows in animated form the path and speed of a pitch.
This high-tech toy had better explain itself to Sir Isaac Newton.
In Game 1, Super Vision (redubbed Inside Pitch for CBS) tracked a Jack Morris fastball that burned rubber from Morris's hand to Brian Harper's leather at 94 miles per hour.
No slow-up.
No rest stops.
A real mitt-burner.


U.S. Investors Sue Lloyd's
Sixty-four American investors in Lloyd's of London filed a racketeering lawsuit yesterday that accuses the British insurer of securities fraud.
The plaintiffs say they face up to $9 million in losses because Lloyd's hid the true risk of investing in its underwriting syndicates.


Amoco Off 45.3% on Woe In Oil Patch
The Amoco Corporation said yesterday that its earnings fell 45.3 percent in the third quarter.
It was the first report in what analysts said would be a two-week stream of sharply lower earnings results from the nation's major oil companies.
Prices for crude oil fell by an average of about $5 a barrel during the quarter ended Sept. 30 from the level of a year ago, when they had surged following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2.


Bills Will Beat Redskins for Title
With the season half over, this is crystal clear: There is no team that will prevent the Redskins and the Bills from reaching the Super Bowl.
Both teams will own the best record in their conferences and thereby earn home-field advantage throughout the playoffs.
Both teams will sweep through the playoffs and they will meet in Super Bowl XXVI.
Buffalo will win the game in a high-scoring affair, the only way the Bills can.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
GE Capital Corp., a unit of General Electric Co., filed a shelf registration for up to $3 billion of variable-denomination floating-rate notes.
COMMON STOCK


Quotations of the Day
"The stage is now set for the restructured Supreme Court to overturn Roe v. Wade and deny the right to choose to American women." -- Kate Michelman of the National Abortion Rights Action League.  [ A16:6. ]
"I'm obviously delighted. The court upheld everything except spousal notification. The bottom line is that Roe v. Wade is doomed." -- Denise Neary of the Pennsylvania Pro-Life Federation.  [ A16:6. ]


Behind The Plate, A Dream Come True
Junior Ortiz isn't particular.
You can call him Joe.
You can call him Gehrig.
You can call him Clemens.
Cy Young, too.
Ortiz, the animated catcher who has been known to borrow a name or two, does not care a whit these days what his monicker is, as long as someone calls for him during this, the biggest moment of his life.
Ortiz is a catcher for the Minnesota Twins. Not
the
catcher, but Brian Harper's backup and the designated batterymate for Minnesota's only 20-game winner, Scott Erickson.
The bit role relegated Ortiz to the bench in the Twins' first two World Series games against the Atlanta Braves.
But that is scheduled to end here Tuesday night as Ortiz and his favorite pitcher take the field at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium in Game 3.


Business Scene; The Latin Market Comes Back
FOR decades, Latin America was a hugely important marketplace for the United States -- one that largely shut down in the 1980's when the Latin nations fell far behind in their debt payments.
These countries are still deeply in arrears.
But nearly a decade after the onset of the foreign-debt crisis, Latin America is re-emerging as a big buyer of American goods and a big borrower.
The comeback is quite bullish.
This month alone, the Latin nations have borrowed nearly $900 million abroad.
And United States exports to Latin countries are approaching the levels of the golden 1960's and 1970's, when they accounted for more than 15 percent of all American goods sold overseas.
The beneficiaries of these new exports, of course, are American manufacturers, which, in a recession year, have enjoyed a windfall of $3 billion in extra sales from an unexpected quarter.


Corrections
A front-page article on Sunday about sexual harassment in the workplace misstated the Federal law regarding harassment.
Although the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission strongly urges all companies to have policies against sexual harassment, there is no Federal law requiring them.


Britain Reduces Trade Deficit
Britain reported today that its trade deficit narrowed slightly in September, but economists said a sharp fall in exports dented hopes of an export-led recovery from recession.
The deficit in the balance of payments, covering trade as well as international transactions in invisible goods or services, fell to $:529 million, or $904.7 million, in September from a revised $:596 million ($1.02 billion) in August.


Group Chief Sets Goals At Johnson &amp; Johnson
Peter T. Tattle, the 49-year-old Canadian recently promoted to group chairman in charge of about half of Johnson &amp; Johnson's stable of pharmaceutical companies, says his main job "is building on progress we have already made." For that, Mr.
Tattle says his exposure to Johnson &amp; Johnson's overseas pharmaceutical business operations over the last seven years will come in handy.
"You not only need to come up with unique products these days, but they have to demonstrate a good cost/ benefit profile," he said, referring to the growing pressures to reduce drug prices in the United States.
In most overseas markets, drug companies have already adapted to lower markups.
In those markets, the only way to sell drugs is to strike deals with the budget-conscious governmental authorites that run the national health services, he added.


Mr. Cuomo's Medicaid Bargain
Gov.
Mario Cuomo's prescription for revising New York's Medicaid system moves in the right direction because it accepts the principle of state responsibility for Medicaid, the program of medical insurance for the poor that is draining local budgets from Buffalo to New York City.
But does the plan go far enough?
It is not, despite the Governor's claim, a state "takeover" of the local share of Medicaid.
Localities now struggling to pay 25 percent of their ever-escalating Medicaid bills would instead give the state part of their tax revenues.


Ayer Confirms Hopes For California Merger
Ayer Inc., New York, is hoping to merge its Los Angeles unit, Ayer Tuttle, with the independent Los Angeles shop of Gumpertz/Bentley/Fried, an Ayer spokeswoman said, confirming a report in this week's issue of the trade publication Advertising Age.
The move follows account losses at Ayer Tuttle that caused billings to drop to $15 million from $40 million last year.
Gumpertz/Bentley's billings are estimated at $25 million.


Japan Bank's Chief Resigns Over Scandal
The chairman of the Industrial Bank of Japan said today that he was resigning to take responsibility for the bank's involvement in a multibillion-dollar loan fraud.
Kaneo Nakamura, a cosmopolitan business leader who attended the Harvard Business School, said in a telephone interview today that he was "doing the samurai-like thing" by resigning to begin the process of restoring the badly tainted image of what had been the most prestigious financial institution in Japan.


Stanford Unveils Fiscal Rescue Plan
To bridge a budget gap caused in part by its problems in overbilling the Federal Government for research costs, Stanford University plans to cut $43 million over the next two years by reducing academic and administrative expenses, delaying building projects and scaling back some student financial aid.
The financial rescue plan, announced yesterday by university officials, sets broad goals for reducing the university's $362 million budget.
Administrative expenses would be cut by an average of 13 percent and academic expenses in six of Stanford's schools by an average of 7.6 percent.
A Difficult Centennial Year
To meet these goals, each of the schools must make specific cuts, including possible layoffs of teachers and the elimination or merger of small departments.
The final package will be submitted to the university's board in April and, if approved, will take effect next in September 1992.
The budget cuts are the latest in a series of difficulties that Stanford has confronted in this, its centennial year.
In July the university's president, Donald Kennedy, announced his resignation after 11 years in office.
Mr.
Kennedy was at the center of a controversy over accusations by Federal auditors that Stanford had overcharged the Government millions in research-related expenses.
As a result of the audits and subsequent investigations, Stanford returned more than $1 million to the Government for ineligible research expenses.
The Government has also substantially reduced the rate at which Stanford is paid for those research costs, a move that will cost the university more than $20 million and that has added to its deficit.
Because the department-level cuts have not yet been made, Stanford officials could not estimate how many of the university's 9,000 employees might be laid off.
The chairman of the Faculty Senate, James J. Sheehan, said professors had expressed concern about the effect the announced cuts would have on academic standards.
"They've told us Stanford's commitment to excellence will not be compromised," said Mr.
Sheehan, a professor of history.
"The question of whether they honor that will be answered as we move from principled statements to specific application." 8.8% Cut in Education
The School of Education stands to lose the most among the six schools facing cuts -- 8.8. percent of its operating budget.
The Graduate School of Business would get the smallest budget cut, 7.1 percent.
Besides the academic and administrative cuts, Stanford is delaying a number of construction projects and scaling back repairs to buildings damaged in the 1989 earthquake.
The university also plans to cut financial aid for students who can afford to pay more.
It will do this by including the income of both parents in a divorced family when it calculates the family's ability to pay.
The university's offer of financial aid to the student would then be reduced accordingly.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.18
5.25
7.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.05
5.06
7.22
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.11
5.12
7.18
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.35
7.31
8.51
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.09
8.07
8.79
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.18
9.15
9.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.89
6.88
7.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sneaking Past the Immune System to Deliver Toxic Drugs to Tumors
Scientists are banking on a new technology called stealth to improve the human body's acceptance of potent but highly toxic drugs for the treatment of cancer and infection.
Researchers at Liposome Technology Inc. and their partners in academia have had success with the stealth technique in laboratory experiments with mice.
If they can duplicate the results in human clinical trials, their work could breathe new life into liposomes as a medium for administering drugs.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Thursday about efforts to preserve tract houses in Levittown, L.I., rendered the name of the author of "The Levittowners" incorrectly.
He is Herbert J. Gans.


300 ARE EVACUATED
Belgian troops evacuated hundreds of foreigners from copper-producing areas of southeastern Zaire amid further looting today, and the opposition challenged President Mobutu Sese Seko by reconfirming as Prime Minister, his political adversary, Etienne Tshisekedi.
Western diplomatic officials said disgruntled Zairian soldiers in the city of Lubumbashi went on a rampage late Monday, ransacking homes and offices.
Civilians joined in when they saw that no action was being taken against the troops.


Critic's Notebook; Examining the Dark Flower That Was Weimar Culture
The culture of the Weimar Republic, that brief flowering of artistic expression between two totalitarian German regimes, was analyzed and celebrated this weekend at the Actors Theater of Louisville.
As the culmination of a two-month, citywide Classics in Context festival, several hundred academics and theater professionals delved into the origins of Weimar, the depth of the creativity and the aftereffects that are still being felt today in many countries, including a reunified Germany that is still troubled by divisiveness.
Though the festival covered a spectrum from "The Blue Angel" to the Bauhaus and included a Schoenberg concert and an exhibition of drawings by Josef Albers, the focus this weekend was on theater.
In particular, the subject was Bertolt Brecht and Odon von Horvath, the two major playwrights of the era.


Theater in Review
Servy-n-Bernice 4Ever  Provincetown Playhouse 133 Macdougal Street By Seth Zvi Rosenfeld; directed by Terry Kinney; scenery by Edward T. Gianfrancesco; costumes by Judy Dearing; lighting by Kenneth Posner; sound by Jeffrey Taylor; associate producer, Eugene Musso; production stage manager, M. A. Howard.
Presented by Al Corley, Bart Rosenblatt and Marcy Drogin.
WITH: Ron Eldard, Lisa Gay Hamilton, Erik King and Cynthia Nixon.
Two disparate shows share the stage at the Provincetown Playhouse, Seth Zvi Rosenfeld's quite ordinary new play, "Servy-n-Bernice 4Ever," and Terry Kinney's high-powered, hyperkinetic production.


Our Forests Are Not Being Overcut
To the Editor:
You are correct in calling for action by Congress and the President to resolve the national forest timber crisis ("National Forests: Going, Going . . .", editorial, Oct. 5).
For far too long, each branch has ignored the problem or attempted Band-Aid solutions.
But your reasoning is uninformed and counterproductive.
Action by Washington is not needed because the forests are being overcut, but because demand for wood and paper products is growing at the same time national forests are being set aside for recreational or other noncommodity uses.
Claims that our forests are being overcut are simply not true.
Not one forest in the entire national forest system has come close to meeting the timber harvest levels called for in its forest plan.
Those plans, by the way, were drawn up with substantial local preservationist input, and preclude timber harvesting on nearly 60 percent of all forest lands.
Moreover, the national forests contain almost 50 percent of the softwood timber inventory in our country.
Softwood is necessary for housing construction and renovation.
Preservationist calls to stop harvesting trees from our national forests, and your implied support of that position, are irresponsible unless you and they are willing to address how the public can reduce its demand for softwood products, or identify which country should fulfill our demand for such products.
Halting the harvesting of trees from our national forests represents the ultimate act of Nimbyism, given that the United States' demand for wood products is expected to increase by 50 percent over the next 50 years.
MARK REY  Executive Director American Forest Resource Alliance Washington, Oct. 7, 1991


Treasury Prices Decline Slightly
Prices of Treasury securities fell slightly yesterday in active trading, but dealers said the recent rise in long-term interest rates had sparked some demand for bonds.
"At around 8.10 percent, there seems to be some sponsorship for these securities," one government-bond trader said.


Review/Film; Hip-Hop, Hooray, the Pajama Party Wakes Up as the 'Jammie Jam Jam'
"House Party 2" seems less like a sequel to the free-floating first film than a part of it, arbitrarily chopped off and saved for a rainy day.
Though Reginald Hudlin wrote and directed the original, and though Doug McHenry and George Jackson produced and directed "House Party 2," the line separating the films is invisible.
"House Party 2" is an equally entertaining mix of comedy and music (rap and hip-hop) about the adventures of Kid (Christopher Reid), the young man with the Eraserhead hair, and his less serious pal Play (Christopher Martin), when Kid goes off to college and Play loses Kid's tuition check.
That's all there is to the story but not to the movie, which somehow makes manifest such abstractions as good humor and high spirits.


Arbitrator Is Sought
State Supreme Court Justice HERMAN CAHN said yesterday that he would appoint an arbitrator to hear a pay dispute involving former Giant running back JOE MORRIS and former Jet tight end MICKEY SHULER because N.F.L.
Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE is too biased to render final and binding arbitration, as specified in the players' contracts.
Morris and Shuler were cut from their teams just before the 1990 season.
They say they were cheated out of large sums of money because the Giants and Jets ignored their contracts.


Educators Ask if All-Girl Schools Would Make a Difference in Inner Cities
As a storm rages over the idea of separate schools for black boys, the champions of inner-city girls are debating whether these girls' often-ignored problems require all-girls' schools.
Boys may end up dead or in jail, but many girls lead dead-end lives.
Teenage pregnancy, dropping out of school, sexual abuse, depression, drug abuse and gang violence are the problems that shadow these girls, but the more striking problems of boys attract the most attention.
Dispute Over Concept
"Boys gone astray are considered dangerous and girls gone astray are considered blameworthy," said Heather Johnston Nicholson, director of the National Resource Center for Girls, a private organization that runs social and educational programs nationwide for 250,000 girls, many from inner cities.
"If girls aren't acting out and making other people's lives miserable, they're liable to be inconspicuous, but that doesn't mean things are going well."


About New York
A security guard unlocks a padlock and I step outside.
I am alone on the 86th-floor observation deck of the Empire State Building.
It is 6 A.M.
An odd feeling.
The only discrete sound is the squeak of my soles on stone; otherwise, there is only the dull unfocused drone of a still-sleeping city.
From 1,050 feet up, the tens of thousands of buildings look like jagged stalagmites in a vast cave.
Few lights are yet on in the apartment houses; the tiny cars are still just a trickle on the avenues.


U.S. Blocks Solution to Vietnam Refugee Crisis; Flawed Procedures
To the Editor:
"Vietnamese Refugees, Reconsidered" (editorial, Oct. 8) draws a distinction between Vietnamese refugees who have a "well-founded fear of persecution" and those boat people who are simply "seeking to escape poverty," advocating asylum for the former and return to Vietnam, even forced, for the latter under the terms of United Nations arrangements made in Asia in 1989.
Yet the flawed determination procedures of many of the countries in the region render them incapable of making this important distinction, which derives from international refugee law.


Bridge
If the values are "thin," lacking intermediate cards, two flat hands in combination are unlikely to do well.
The normal complement of 26 high-card points is often insufficient to bring home three no-trump, and on the diagramed deal North-South had to struggle with 28 points.
It was played Monday night at the St.
Moritz Hotel at 50 Central Park South in a Pro-Am charity game that raised $20,000 for the Israel Cancer Research Fund.
Sitting South was Jim Krekorian, of Manhattan, who won the event with Sarah Wiener, of Wantagh, L.I.
Runners-up were Henry Bethe and Warren Spector, both of Manhattan.


THEATER IN REVIEW
The Novelist  Theater Row Theater 424 West 42d Street By Howard Fast; directed by Sam Schacht; set design, Jane Clark; costume design, Kitty Leech; light design, Victor En Yu Tan; music arrangement, Joseph Bloch; graphic design, Denny Tillman; production stage manager, Sara Gormley Plass.
Presented by J. B. Matthews, in association with the Ensemble Studio Theater, produced by Kate Baggott.
WITH: Gretchen Walther and Will Lyman.
What if Jane Austen had found true love in the last three months of her life?
It is a proposition that intrigued the veteran novelist, screenwriter and playwright Howard Fast enough to write a two-character play that imagines the wooing and winning of the 41-year-old author (Gretchen Walther) by a dashing 45-year-old Mr.
Right.


BAKER TO APPOINT MIDDLE EAST ENVOY
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d plans to appoint a special Middle East envoy to help coordinate and promote the various one-on-one Arab-Israeli negotiations planned for the second phase of the peace conference scheduled to begin in Madrid on Oct. 30, the State Department said today.
The role of the special Middle East coordinator, officials said, would be to monitor the three different negotiations that are supposed to be spawned by the peace conference: between Israel and Syria, Israel and Lebanon and Israel and a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation.


Schoolchildren Deserve Better Than Sporadic Health Care
To the Editor:
Judge Judith B. Sheindlin wrote that "thousands of New York City children are deprived of basic health care" because their parents are unable to provide it (letter, Sept. 30).
She proposed that volunteer physicians be sent into the schools.
New York City schoolchildren deserve better than sporadic care by volunteer physicians.
They deserve a school health program that provides supervised medical attention under a central administration that will insure proper followup is done.


A Record Profit At McDonald's
Continued weak sales in the United States and in some foreign markets caused the McDonald's Corporation's revenues to drop 2 percent in the third quarter, although the company yesterday reported a record profit for the quarter.
Profits increased nearly 7 percent, to a record $258.7 million, compared with $242.2 million in the quarter a year earlier.
Earnings per share increased 6 percent, to 71 cents, from 67 cents a year earlier.


Arthur Klar Dies at 96; Publisher for Theaters
Arthur Klar, a theater concessionaire and publisher of souvenir books for the New York City Ballet and many dance and opera productions, died on Oct. 15 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 96 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said Leah Klar Barr, his sister.


Salvadorans Sharply at Odds as Parley Recesses
Leftist rebels and the Government of El Salvador recessed their negotiations here early today still hoping for a peace treaty by the year's end but sharply at odds over the future of the army and the creation of a new police force.
The 10 days of talks held at a Mexico City hotel appeared to have carried considerable momentum from the breakthrough in meetings at the United Nations last month.
Those sessions yielded a broad pact to end the 12-year-old civil war, but left many difficult issues for later.


Oakland Fire A Costly One For Insurers
The two-day firestorm that ravaged the Oakland and Berkeley hills already makes 1991 the second-worst year ever for insurers, industry officials said today.
While many companies have yet to complete preliminary estimates, those that have said their insured losses would greatly exceed those from the Santa Barbara blaze in June 1990, which destroyed more than 300 homes and cost insurers $265 million.


Space Agency's Challenge on Telescope: How Much to Repair?
A repair mission in early 1994 to the troubled Hubble Space Telescope is being planned with a new sense of urgency as more technical problems beset the $1.5 billion instrument in orbit around the Earth.
Astronauts will be asked to spend more time replacing more malfunctioning parts, and some scientists worry that the mission could come too late.


Tandy Profit Increases 2.2%
The Tandy Corporation, the electronics manufacturer whose retail chains include Radio Shack, today reported a 2.2 percent increase in its first- quarter profit on revenue that was slightly lower.
Tandy earned $41.8 million, or 52 cents a share, during the three months ended Sept. 30.
In the corresponding period last year, the company earned $40.9 million, or 50 cents a share.


Yellow Pages Are Getting A Nudge
INTENSIFYING efforts to sell the Yellow Pages as an advertising medium, telephone directory publishers are committing themselves to an ambitious agenda that includes seeking more revenue from national advertisers and exploring electronic data delivery.
"Business development will be the keynote theme of everything this association does," J. Raymond Avedian, president and chief executive of the Yellow Pages Publishers Association, said in an interview during a recent visit to New York.


Britain Urged to Investigate Spy Allegations
Two Members of Parliament called today for investigations into accusations made in a new book that the foreign editor of one of Britain's leading tabloid newspapers has been a spy for Israel.
In his new book, "The Samson Option," the reporter Seymour M. Hersh asserts that Nicholas Davies, the 52-year-old foreign editor of the Daily Mirror, worked as an Israeli agent.


Trade Bar Provision
Two influential Senators introduced legislation today that would revive the controversial Super 301 provision of the 1988 Trade Act.


Big Losses For Top 2 In Detroit
The General Motors Corporation posted a $1.1 billion third-quarter loss today and the Ford Motor Company recorded a $574 million loss as the recession-ravaged United States auto industry skidded toward its worst year in history.
The Chrysler Corporation is not scheduled to announce third-quarter results until next week, but auto analysts say it, too, will post a sizable loss, which would push total industry losses for the first nine months of the year to about $5 billion.
In 1980, its worst year ever, the American auto industry lost $4 billion.


Alan Harper Dies; Was Art Editor, 61, At 'Sunday Morning'
Alan A. Harper, a television producer who was the arts editor of "CBS News Sunday Morning," the weekly 90-minute newsmagazine program, since its inception in 1979, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital, a spokeswoman for the program said.
He was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of lung cancer, said the spokeswoman, Jill Bernstein.


Melville Net Off 13.5%
The Melville Corporation, which operates specialty-store chains like Marshalls, CVS and Thom McAn, yesterday reported a 13.5 percent decline in third-quarter earnings.
Profits of $55.6 million, or 50 cents a share, in the quarter that ended Sept. 28 compared with profits of $64.3 million, or 59 cents a share, in the quarter last year.
Melville's sales in the third quarter, however, rose 14.5 percent, to $2.3 billion from $2 billion, because of sales at the Circus World toy stores and Peoples drugstores that the company acquired last year.
Excluding the sales of those businesses, sales for the third quarter would have increased 4.9 percent over those in the corresponding period a year earlier.


A St. Anthony Star Decides on Kentucky
The February snowstorm had dissipated, but the roads remained icy and the wind cruel.
Fans going to the basketball game between St.
Anthony and Good Counsel traveled at their own risk.
If the people living nearby had to ponder whether it was worth it to brave the conditions for a few blocks, what kind of risk was Kentucky Coach Rick Pitino taking?
He flew in from Lexington for the game, gambling against the harsh elements to see Rodrick Rhodes, who had gained national notice by doing amazing things with a basketball.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Cossor Electronics Ltd., Harlow, England, a division of Raytheon Co., bought the navigation systems business of STC, a unit of Northern Telecom Europe.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Charles Schwab Corp., San Francisco, announced a 3-for-2 stock split, payable on Dec. 2 to holders of record as of Nov. 4.
It raised its quarterly dividend to 6 cents a share, from 5 cents.


Book Notes
Michener's 'Mexico'
T.
E.
Lawrence should have had the luck of James Michener.
Lawrence left his only copy of "The Seven Pillars of Wisdom" in the back seat of a London taxi and had to rewrite it from memory.
But three decades after Mr.
Michener began it and set it aside, and years after he thought it lost forever, he has found and finished "Mexico," a book in the style of his other grand place novels, which Random House plans to publish next year.


Nigerian Wins British Fiction Award
The Nigerian writer Ben Okri has won the 1991 Booker Prize, Britain's most prestigious fiction award, for "The Famished Road" (Jonathan Cape), his novel about a spirit child's experiences in a world where vision and reality are indistinct.
The award includes a prize of $34,350.
Mr.
Okri was born in Lagos in 1959 and now lives in London.
His previous works include two novels, "Flowers and Shadows" and "The Landscape Within," and the short-story collections "Incidents at the Shrine" and "Stars of the New Curfew."
These were the other final nominees: William Trevor, "Reading Turgenev" from "Two Lives" (Viking)
Martin Amis, "Time's Arrow" (Jonathan Cape)
Roddy Doyle, "The Van" (Secker &amp; Warburg)
Rohinton Mistry, "Such a Long Journey" (Faber &amp; Faber)
Timothy Mo, "The Redundancy of Courage" (Chatto &amp; Windus)


Net Falls at Washington Post and Tribune
The Washington Post Company said yesterday that its earnings fell 30.4 percent in the latest quarter, and the Tribune Company said its third-quarter profit fell 9.7 percent.
Like most media concerns reporting on the latest quarter, both companies cited the impact of the advertising slump on their results.


Transit Unit Nears Accord On Drug Tests
The New York City Transit Authority and its unions are nearing agreement on a random drug-testing plan that could go into effect as early as next month and would cover about 30,000 of the 35,000 workers responsible for operating buses and subway trains, officials said yesterday.
Under the plan, which would affect people in jobs deemed "safety-sensitive," the agency is expected to test 3,000 people within the first 90 days, said Eugene Freidus, a lawyer for the Transit Authority.


2 Koreas Resume Talks; Clash on Atom Plants
The Prime Ministers of North and South Korea opened a new round of talks today, but the two leaders' first meeting in 10 months, in the North Korean capital of Pyongyang, began with a clash over the North's continued refusal to allow international inspections of its nuclear installations.
Prime Minister Chung Won Shik of South Korea, who crossed into North Korea at Panmunjom, told reporters that he would demand North Korea acknowledge that it is developing a nuclear bomb and allow international inspections immediately.


U.S. Blocks Solution to Vietnam Refugee Crisis
To the Editor:
In "Vietnamese Refugees, Reconsidered" (editorial, Oct. 8), you go to great pains to point out the obvious fact that no country can let in everyone who wants in, and that governments are constantly forced to make decisions on returning illegal immigrants to their homeland.
The difficulty in this case lies in the fact the "homeland" happens to be Vietnam.
On this very distressing issue the United States wields a triple-edged sword: the United States will not accept "economic migrants," strongly condemns and opposes any move to return "economic migrants" to Vietnam, and at the same time obstructs Vietnam's attempts at improving its economy, which is the root cause of "economic migrants."


Power Outage Cuts Stock Trading
Trading on the New York Stock Exchange was halted briefly by a power failure yesterday, prompting other financial markets to curtail dealings until the Big Board was back in business.
New York Stock Exchange trading stopped at 10:21 A.M. but resumed by 10:45 A.M., said Richard Grasso, executive vice chairman and president of the nation's biggest stock market.


Seles in Trouble Again
MONICA SELES is in trouble with tennis officials again.
Seles, fined for skipping Wimbledon and banned from the Barcelona Olympics next year for missing the Federation Cup, will be fined $20,000 for playing in an exhibition this week in Spain rather than the Women's Tennis Association tournament in Brighton, England.
Eleven others in the exhibition will be fined up to $10,000, GEORGINA CLARK, director of European operations for the W.T.A., said yesterday.


Washington Governor Skips Re-election Bid
Gov.
Booth Gardner, a 55-year-old Democrat who is one of the most popular politicians in the Pacific Northwest, announced today that he would not run next year for a third term.
Mr.
Gardner's announcement, which he made at a news conference at the State Capitol in Olympia, came only two weeks before the voters of Washington State decide on a term-limitation initiative that, if passed as expected, would forbid the Governor to seek a third four-year term anyway.


Building a Lost-Cause Portfolio
Samuel Zell, the brash Chicago investor who has made a fortune by turning around down-on-their-luck companies and properties, is dredging the bottom again.
Earlier this month, Zell-Chilmark Partners, a $1 billion venture led by Mr.
Zell, won creditor approval to buy the debt of Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., the Los Angeles-based department store chain.
That means the Zell partnership will probably end up controlling the company, which owns the Emporium, Broadway and Weinstock's stores and which Mr.
Zell says he wants to run.


Bankers Trust Earnings Rise 8.8%
The Bankers Trust New York Corporation yesterday announced a greater-than-expected profit of $185 million in the third quarter, up 8.8 percent from a year ago, largely on the strength of increased revenues from its various trading activities.
The profit gain at Bankers Trust is a reminder that banks with specialties in trading are faring well, while those that rely more on lending have been troubled by a combination of weak loan demand and growing losses on delinquent and defaulted loans.


Frequent Use of Veto Had Its Early Critics
To the Editor:
Those who defend the President's frequent use of the veto to stymie the majority will of Congress may be interested in the views of two early commentators on the Constitution.
Peter Du Ponceau, provost of the Law Academy of Philadelphia, argued in 1834 that the President's "negative power . . . is not intended to be frequently used. It is but seldom that a president can have just cause to differ in opinion from the representatives of the people and those of the states."


Lemke Ends Long Night as Braves Win in 12th
The World Series came to Atlanta for the first time tonight, and the Braves won their first game of this World Series.
It wasn't easy, but David Justice made sure he touched third base en route to scoring the winning run.
The Braves avoided being pushed to the brink of post-season disaster by edging the Minnesota Twins, 5-4, in 12 innings in Game 3.
Atlanta needed the victory because the Twins had won the first two games at their friendly Metrodome home.
Mark Lemke, whose error in the top half of the inning presented the Twins with an opportunity they couldn't capitalize on, drove in the winning run with a looping two-out single to left field.


B.C.C.I. Official Says Link To U.S. Bank Was Obvious
A former senior official of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International told Congress today that he found it "impossible to believe" that Robert A. Altman did not know that First American Bankshares was secretly owned by B.C.C.I. while he president of the American bank.
In testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee's Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics and International Relations, the former B.C.C.I. executive, Abdur Sakhia, said he based his conclusion mainly on his frequent meetings with Mr.
Altman during the 1980's.
Mr.
Sakhia said Mr.
Altman would often discuss with him marketing strategies for First American, ways to bring in more business and other matters related to running the Washington-based bank.


Court Upholds Closing Shoreham Nuclear Plant
New York State's highest court yesterday narrowly upheld the 1989 agreement to close the Shoreham nuclear power station, removing one of the few remaining obstacles to the final dismantling of the plant.
The 4-to-3 vote by the State Court of Appeals means that the Long Island Lighting Company, which owns Shoreham, can continue the process -- by now nearly irreversible -- of taking down the plant's systems and preparing it to be transferred to the state for decommissioning.
Had the settlement been overturned, state officials said, a result would have meant increased delay and higher costs rather than the ultimate opening of Shoreham as a nuclear plant.


Using Laser, Researchers Test New Way to Correct Myopia
HOPING to throw away their glasses and contact lenses, more than a thousand nearsighted Americans have had their eyeballs reshaped in an unusual procedure in which a laser beam trims away part of the cornea, the clear layer that covers the lens of the eye.
It is still too soon to recommend the procedure for wide use, ophthalmologists say, but results are promising.


Morgan Stanley Posts Sharply Higher Net
The Morgan Stanley Group, Wall Street's fifth-largest firm, reported a sharp rise in third-quarter earnings yesterday, largely because of increased sales and trading revenues.
The company said it earned $121.8 million, or $1.52 a share, on revenues of $1.74 billion, compared with earnings of $71.9 million, or 91 cents a share, on revenues of $1.5 billion in the 1990 period.


Havel Appeals for U.S. Investment And Markets in Talks With Bush
President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia signed political and trade agreements in ceremonies here today, opening a six-day tour of the United States that is aimed as much at luring business investment as cementing diplomatic ties.
Mr.
Havel told President Bush in an hourlong meeting at the White House that the economic crisis in the Soviet Union had also ravaged the Czechoslovak economy, and that his nation needed more American investment and access to American markets to become economically stable.


2 Baby Boomers Unearth A Generation of Recipes
SOME of us would rather forget the recipes of the 1950's and 60's that we embraced with such enthusiasm.
We blush at what we thought passed for "gourmet," like roast duck with gala soda-pop glaze, a recipe that called for a bottle of 7-Up , and noodle doodle and cheese made with canned macaroni and cheese, frozen broccoli and a can of french fried onions.
Not Jane and Michael Stern, who treat meatloaf Wellington and Grand Marnier souffle as equals.


Editorial Notebook; Moscow's Brave Entrepreneurs
In one part of town, Boris Yeltsin, Mikhail Gorbachev and other famous figures of Soviet reform were celebrating the signing of an economic pact among eight newly independent republics.
In a less posh part of Moscow, I was meeting with uncelebrated figures who will make economic reform work.
Moscow's new entrepreneurs -- young, bright and ambitious -- are popping up by the hundreds.
The Soviet economy is collapsing.
Output has fallen 13 percent; inflation is rising an astounding 20 percent a month.
Muscovites wait years for decent housing, hours for bread and clothes.
But these savage statistics don't count the private sector mushrooming at the margins of society, at the margins of the law.


A New Publication From Ad Organization
The Association of National Advertisers is introducing a quarterly magazine called the Advertiser, to be sent to 25,000 advertising and marketing executives nationwide.
The first issue, dated fall, is timed to coincide with the association's 82d annual meeting and business conference, being held Sunday through Tuesday in Phoenix.
The issue carries 47 ad pages from marketers like Kraft General Foods and media like NBC.


Money Woes Force Orion to Shelve Several Films
Several newly completed films starring some of Hollywood's most prestigious artists have been placed in virtual cold storage because Orion Pictures, which made them, is facing severe financial difficulties.
Film executives close to Orion, a small studio with a record of critically acclaimed movies, said that the decision to keep the movies on the shelf was especially painful because several of them, and their stars, are believed to have Academy Award potential.
If the movies are not released in the next two months, they will be ineligible for Oscar nominations.


Skypix in Accord For New Capital
The Skypix Corporation, a privately held company developing a new satellite television programming network, said it had signed an agreement with four partners to receive enough money to allow it to operate on a long-term basis.
Skypix did not disclose how much money it expected to receive, but unsuccessful negotiations with the Home Shopping Network involved $30 million in capital.
The four companies involved are the Sky King Investment Corporation, OI Inc., the Calafia Group and the Richard Owens Investment Corporation.


House Approves Anti-Crime Bill With Something for Both Camps
The House overwhelmingly today approved a $1.1 billion anti-crime bill that would extend the death penalty to several drug-related crimes, reduce the rights of the accused in Federal cases and expand Federal aid to local law-enforcement agencies.
The House measure, which was approved by a vote of 305 to 118, is a patchwork that was stitched together by conservatives who worked to stiffen penalties and by liberals who tried to protect civil liberties.
Tonight the White House gave the measure its qualified support.


Nets Keep Anderson on Line
Although there has been no major progress in contract talks between the New Jersey Nets and their first-round draft pick, Kenny Anderson, lines of communication remain open, according to insiders on both sides.
Willis Reed, the Nets' vice president, recently relayed a modified offer to Anderson's attorney, Richard Howell of Atlanta, although the terms in years and how they would be distributed were not specific.


Corrections
A picture caption in Science Times yesterday about Murray L. Weidenbaum, an economist who discussed the success of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, misstated his university affiliation.
He is at Washington University, not the University of Washington.


In St. Louis, Lining Up to Sell Guns to Police
One by one, they show up at the front desk of police stations here: men, women, young fathers and great-grandmothers.
Some are sharpshooters or gun dealers; some are ordinary citizens who can barely bring themselves to touch a gun.
Since Oct. 14, the St.
Louis Police Department has been offering citizens money for their old rifles and revolvers, no questions asked.
The response has surpassed the expectations of all.
So far, the department has bought 5,111 guns in a selling frenzy that has at times created lines across police station parking lots and into the street.
At one police station, officers had to direct traffic because of the crowds.
Similar programs in a handful of other cities have been successful, but not like this.


Pyla Journal; In a Small Town on Torn Cyprus, the Twain Meet
Heading for lunch and the promise of lamb stew, the town clerk locked the door of the town hall.
Or rather, one of the town halls, for Pyla has two local governments and two Mayors.
Indeed, many things in this little town come in pairs.
On the sun-splashed square, two cafes face each other, one for Turkish and the other for Greek coffee drinkers.
There are two schools, each teaching in a different language.
And beyond the narrow, winding streets, there is one cemetery for Muslims and another for Orthodox Christians.


Devils Return to Early-Season Form and Defeat Kings
After four straight losses that had them talking to themselves, the Devils returned tonight to the kind of team defense that had made them the talk of the National Hockey League after they won their first four games.
From Chris Terreri in goal to the last man on the fourth line, the Devils played inspired hockey in all areas and the result was a 5-2 triumph over the Los Angeles Kings at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Quotation of the Day
"I bought it to kill my husband, but God took him before I could. I don't need it now. I'll take Jesus to protect me." -- Lena Hicks, turning her evolver over to the St.
Louis police.  [ A18:4. ]


Wine Talk
REMEMBER when it was not gauche to say "Gimme a beer" to a waiter?
"A vodka martini, stirred, not shaken," had its day.
Then there was "Oh, just a glass of white wine for me." Now you are likely to hear, in the most exiguous of joints, "A glass of chardonnay, please," or, in your better class of boite, "What kind of chardonnay do you have?"
Chardonnay is ubiquitous.
People who will not in their lifetime drink from a glass with a stem have heard about chardonnay.
Enologically speaking, it is America's sweetheart.


Ex-Beirut Hostage Is in Care of U.S.
Jesse Turner, pale and slightly unsteady on his feet after nearly five years in captivity in Lebanon, was turned over to American officials in Damascus today.
"I am happy to be out, finally," he said in a soft voice.
"I am looking forward to seeing my family and friends."


In Health Name Change
The magazine In Health announced yesterday that it would change its name to Health, effective with the February-March issue.
Two months ago, In Health, which is published by Time Publishing Ventures, a unit of Time Warner Inc., bought the assets of Health from Family Media Publications, which ceased doing business.


U.S. Warns of Phone Industry Lag
The Commerce Department warned today that American telephone companies were investing less to modernize their networks than their leading competitors in the industrial world.
But its main recommendation was for the Government to stay out of the business.
The report comes after a season of breakdowns that have raised new concerns about the reliability of today's telephone networks and is likely to heat up a growing national debate about lifting restrictions on the seven regional Bell telephone companies.


Out of Ashes, Move to Ban Wood Roofs
Harold Smith was an uninvited guest today when about a dozen state and local officials toured several fire-devastated sites here, and he found most of their political pronouncements of little comfort to the thousands of people like himself whose homes have burned to a cinder.
But Mr.
Smith, a 68-year-old builder, found one area of agreement with Gov.
Pete Wilson, Mayor Elihu Harris and their unwieldy entourage: wood shingle, or shake, roofs should be banned in the rugged wooded canyons and ridges where more and more Californians choose to live.


C.D.'s and Bank Funds Fall
The decline in yields on certificates of deposit and bank money market accounts continued unabated for another week, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, the publication in North Palm Beach, Fla., that covers interest rates.
"While financial markets have long-term concerns about the prospect of inflation next year, savings yields, nevertheless, continue to show short-term declines," said Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor.
"The numbers should fall even lower in the next few weeks."





Grain Prices Surge on Hope Of Further Aid for Soviets
Grain and soybean futures prices rose strongly yesterday after President Bush raised hopes for new food aid to the Soviet Union by declaring "nobody is going to starve" there this winter.
Wheat for December delivery rose 5 3/4 cents on the Chicago Board of Trade to settle at $3.60 3/4 a bushel, a 17-month high.
December corn ended 3 3/4 cents higher at $2.54 1/4 a bushel; December oats rose 3/4 cent, to $1.34 1/4 a bushel, and November soybeans climbed 8 cents, to $5.55 1/2 a bushel.


Our Forests Are Not Being Overcut; A National Tree Policy
To the Editor:
"National Forests: Going, Going . . ." (editorial, Oct. 5) was timely and relevant.
Once sanity is introduced to the management of our national forests, as you say, the next step must be to dignify the planting of trees with a national tree policy.
Cut one tree down anywhere and what has your chain-saw done?
It depends on the age of the tree: as any schoolboy knows, you count the rings to determine age.


Islanders and Jets Tie, but There Are Few Witnesses
A new satellite dish was installed today outside the Nassau Coliseum.
A year or so ago, a spiffy, modern, four-sided, full-color video board was erected over center ice.
If the Islanders wish to draw more than the handful of fans who attended tonight's 1-1 tie with the Winnipeg Jets, they might have to consider putting their high-tech toys to new use.
During their games, they could use the video board to show the World Series, or any other major sports event.
They could play hockey during the breaks between innings or while managers change pitchers.


For Twins, Powers That Be Aren't
Tonight, the Minnesota Twins rediscovered some of the primary boosters of the offense that got them to the top of the American League this season.
Unfortunately, these hitters' contributions, though dramatic in spots, were too sporatic to prevent the Atlanta Braves from gaining their first victory of the 1991 World Series, by 5-4 in 12 innings.


Some Lanes of Damaged Bayonne Bridge Will Reopen by Thursday


It's the Young-Boy Network For Baseball Management
At one time it would have been considered a gathering of eagles by baseball standards.
Syd Thrift, Jack McKeon, Dallas Green, all major architects of championship or winning teams, were sitting together, doing what baseball people do at events like the World Series.
Thing is, Thrift, Green and McKeon are no longer eagles in this game because, like so many managers and general managers and club presidents from their era, they've been replaced by clubs that at one time had considered them irreplaceable.


House Panel Passes New Benefits Bill
The House Ways and Means Committee today approved a bill to extend unemployment benefits and raise additional taxes to pay for them.
The bill was designed to move away from the deficit financing of the measure that President Bush has cited in blocking two previous attempts to aid the long-term jobless.


Novell-Kodak Pact For New Software
Novell Inc., based in Provo, Utah, said it had entered a partnership agreement with the Eastman Kodak Company to incorporate document-imaging services into Novell's Netware network operating system software.
A primary component of the so-called paperless office, document imaging allows users to work with documents of text, data or graphics in an electronic form, as on a network of personal computers.


Washington Memo; Amid Housing Crisis, a Bitter Feud Over Policy
In a world of capital baronies, this is the story of two subcommittee heads and a Cabinet Secretary who do not get along.
It would not matter, except that about $25 billion a year in Federal spending on housing is at stake.
At the heart of the dispute is a fundamental disagreement about the future of public housing: an Administration eager to sell the housing to tenants and a Congress more eager to preserve, expand and improve it.


Hospital Chief's Rise and Fall Is a Trial Under Political Fire
When David N. Dinkins was sworn in as Mayor on the steps of New York's City Hall last year, Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo was a thoughtful, if sometimes disorganized, clinic doctor toiling in Cambridge, Mass., with some notions of how to improve health care for the poor.
Armed with little more than his ideas and enthusiasm, Dr.
Carrillo was soon called by the Dinkins administration to head the largest public hospital system in the country, a vast and money-strapped bureaucracy of 16 public hospitals, scores of clinics, a $2.8 billion annual budget and 50,000 employees.


The Bench Is Cleared Without A Brawl
Tom Kelly said after the long, long, long third game of the World Series that he was playing to win it in regulation time and wasn't about to concern himself with extra innings.
So the game went 12 innings, and he used a World Series-record 23 players, as his Twins' team lost to the Braves, 5-4, tonight.
Kelly used, among others, Rick Aguilera at game's end, his closer.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13
The Ukraine will create its own army.
But the Parliament there has not yet decided whether the proposed 400,000-member army will be created from parts of the Soviet Army contingents already stationed in the country's second-most-powerful republic.
Page A1


INSIDE
G.M. and Ford in Big Losses
General Motors posted a $1.1 billion third-quarter loss and Ford a $574- million loss, as Detroit headed for its worst year in history.
Page D1.
Another Unemployment Bill
A House panel passed a bill to extend unemployment benefits and, in a gesture to President Bush, finance itself by raising taxes.
Page A16.
Braves Trim Twins' Lead
After blowing a 4-1 lead, Atlanta scored on a single by Mark Lemke in the 12th inning to defeat Minnesota, 5-4, and reduce the Twins' World Series lead to 2 games to 1.
Page B7.


World-Class Runner, Global Trouble
Two months ago, Abdi Bile of Somalia wanted to be in Tokyo, defending the 1,500-meter title he had won at the world track and field championships four years ago in Rome.
Instead, he was at home in the Washington suburbs, still coping with the bewildering incidents that have defined his life for the last two years, virtually removing him from international competition and his rightful place among the world's best milers.


Showalter Is Leading Candidate for Yankee Post
When Gene Michael fired Stump Merrill as the Yankees' manager two weeks ago, he also dismissed third-base coach Buck Showalter.
That move was buried in the agate pages in some instances, but it was a shocking one.
The 35-year old Showalter had been regarded as a managerial candidate and was part of the organization for 16 seasons.
The general manager did not offer much of an explanation for the curious move.


Seeing Stamford as a City, Not a Suburb
On the surface, the corporate office boom of the 1980's appears to have ended here with a crash.
New office buildings stand empty, their hollow interiors pierced by the afternoon sun.
Hand-lettered forwarding addresses are taped to the windows of closed stores.
Traffic lights that break down on weekends stay broken; the city has decided not to call in technicians on overtime.


Food Notes
Vegetarian Dim Sum
In Hong Kong, there are a number of restaurants that specialize in Buddhist vegetarian cooking and serve dim sum.
Because the dumplings, spring rolls and other dishes are so well seasoned and textured, the absence of meat is hardly noticable.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press in some editions yesterday about the release of one of two Americans held by pro-Iranian Afghan guerrillas incorrectly characterized the aid group that the two men were working for.
The British-based group, Global Partners, says it is non religious and nonsectarian.


Market Place; Coke vs. Pepsi As an Investment
COKE and Pepsi are often compared on taste and on the potency of their advertising, as people did recently when Pepsi introduced a new logo.
But how do the companies compare as investments?
"They are two different animals," said Emanuel Goldman, an analyst with Paine Webber Inc. in San Francisco.
Other experts also view the two companies as a study in contrasts.


Ex-Father Of the Year Is Indicted In Child Sex
A Manhattan grand jury has indicted Kodzo Dobosu, the adoptive father of dozens of hard-to-place children, on charges of sexual abuse involving three children and endangerment involving eight more of the 18 children who lived with him in a Harlem brownstone.
One of his older sons was also indicted on a sexual abuse charge and one of his older daughters on a child endangerment charge.
All Mr.
Dobosu's children are adopted.


Holyfield Now Looking At November Title Bout
Despite Mike Tyson's absence, Evander Holyfield will defend his undisputed heavyweight title next month.
Holyfield will fight what is being termed an interim match, probably on Nov. 23 against a top 10 opponent in either Atlanta or at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev.
Francesco Damiani, a clever boxer from Italy, is mentioned as a likely opponent , but no deal has been made, and other names -- Carl Williams, Alex Garcia, Larry Holmes and Pierre Coetzer -- have surfaced as potential opponents for Holyfield.


Leftist Party in Canada Wins Power in 2 Provincial Governments
The left-leaning New Democratic Party has swept into power in two more Canadian provinces -- British Columbia and Saskatchewan -- creating a new source of economic tension for the Conservative-led national Government in Ottawa and altering the dynamics of efforts to keep the country united.
Saskatchewan's 1 million voters on Monday joined British Columbia's 3 million last Thursday in electing New Democratic Party premiers.
Ontario, Canada's richest and most populous province with 9.6 million people, have been led by the New Democrats for the past 13 months.
In addition, one of Canada's two territories, the Yukon, has had a New Democratic Party government since 1985.


Bird Makes Plans To Play Through 1994
He faced an uncertain future when he had back surgery last June.
Now LARRY BIRD can look forward to three more seasons with the Boston Celtics as both parties work out details of a contract extension.
Bird has stood up to the rigors of training camp practices and exhibition games so well that he wants a new deal that would run through the 1993-94 National Basketball Association season.


After Dust Settles, Braves Can Celebrate
Greg Olson, exhausted beyond measure, rounded second and stared in at the plate.
Mark Lemke, his exhilaration approaching delirium, turned after striding across first and stared at the plate.
The storm of dirt cleared, and the umpire stood straight up and gave the signal that David Justice was safe.
So, Olson, the catcher who had saved the game in the eighth, and Lemke, the second baseman who had come perilously close to blowing the game in the top of the 12th, were staring at a triumph.


SUMMERTIME HARM TO OZONE DETECTED OVER BROADER AREA
For the first time, scientists have found the earth's protective ozone shield to be weakened over the United States and other temperate-zone countries in summer, when the sun's harmful ultraviolet rays are the strongest and pose the greatest danger to people and crops.
Since this summertime depletion of the ozone shield was not known until now, predicted increases in skin cancers and crop damage are too low, an international panel of scientists convened by the United Nations said here today.


On TV, a New York City Flavor May Be Poison
For television shows set in New York, the axiom does not always hold up.
In fact, if they can make it there, they will not necessarily make it anywhere.
Consider the case of the new CBS series "Brooklyn Bridge," easily the most praised new show of the television season.


Cuomo to Discuss '92 Role With Democratic Chairman
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo wants to meet with the Democratic National Committee chairman, Ronald H. Brown, in the next two or three weeks to discuss how he might "best serve" the party in the 1992 Presidential campaign, Cuomo advisers said today.
But officials of the committee said that Mr.
Brown, a former law student of the Governor's, would not be pulled into any effort to mount a draft for Mr.
Cuomo.
Instead, they said, the party chairman will use any meeting with the Governor to reinforce the message that the best thing Mr.
Cuomo can do for the Democrats is to make a decision quickly.


THEATER IN REVIEW
Geneva  Jean Cocteau Repertory Bouwerie Lane Theater 330 Bowery In repertory through Dec. 6 By George Bernard Shaw; directed by Casey Kizziah; set design by Robert Joel Schwartz; costume design by Jonathan Bixby; lighting design by Brian Aldous; music and sound design by Ellen Mandel; production manager, Patrick Heydenburg.
Presented by the Jean Cocteau Repertory, Robert Hupp, artistic director; David Fishelson, executive director.
WITH: Harris Berlinsky, Jeanne Demers, Robert Ierardi, Joseph Menino, William Charles Mitchell, Grant Neale, Craig Smith, Dan Snow, James Sterling, Elise Stone, Angela Vitale and Mark Waterman.
There are still a few laughs in George Bernard Shaw's "Geneva," but only a few.
Even in the energetic performance given by members of the Jean Cocteau Repertory Theater under Casey Kizziah's direction, this 1938 political tract, which lampoons dictatorship and other political follies, creaks and falters through its long progress.


Schoolchildren Deserve Better Than Sporadic Health Care; Good Will Isn't Enough
To the Editor:
The proposal to link volunteer physicians of good will with medically needy children through an "adopt-a-school" program is painfully naive (letter, Sept. 30).
Such a medical team would require expensive malpractice insurance, a mechanism for quality assurance and a large administrative staff to coordinate the efforts.
In addition, both medical staff and patients would require legally valid bidirectional protection in the case of, albeit unlikely, transmission of the AIDS virus.
"Physicians of good will" do still exist.
It is tragic that we have been crippled by an accusatory, malpractice-ridden medical environment.
The thought of joyfully offering care to those most in need was a motivating factor in my own decision to become a doctor.
Sadly, I have been well educated in the need to protect myself, my career and even my family in conjunction with caring for my patients.
It would be foolhardy bravely to abandon the established medical structure just because I "want to help." AMY L. FRIEDMAN, M.D.
Philadelphia, Oct. 3, 1991


David Budd Memorial
A memorial service for the American painter David Budd is to be held tomorrow at 6 P.M. at the United Nations Chapel, 777 United Nations Plaza, at First Avenue and 44th Street.
The speakers are to include the artists Michael Solomon and John Chamberlain; in addition to his own remarks, Mr.
Chamberlain will read a eulogy by the writer William Burroughs.
Mr.
Budd died on Oct. 8 at the age of 64.


Daniels Gets Contract
LLOYD DANIELS, the former New York City high school star, will continue his recovery from substance abuse -- as well as his basketball career -- with the Greensboro City Gaters of the Global Basketball Association.
Daniels has signed the league's standard one-year contract, according to JOE MOORE, a spokesman for the team, which is situated in Greensboro, N.C. (AP)


Appointee to Hospitals Panel Resigns on His First Full Day on Job
Less than a day after Mayor David N. Dinkins appointed a "management team" to run the Health and Hospitals Corporation temporarily, one member of that group has resigned amid suggestions that his presence within the public hospital system created a conflict of interest.
Dr.
Martin S. Begun, the associate dean of the New York University School of Medicine, had been named to the team on Monday but delivered a letter yesterday morning saying he could not be on the panel.


Police Looking For Sex Photos Find an Arsenal
Police officers found more than 150 guns, tens of thousands of rounds of ammunition and a hand grenade when they entered a Brooklyn apartment yesterday to arrest a 52-year-old handicapped man on charges of using children to pose for pornography, the police said.
The officers also found hundreds of sexually explicit photographs of dozens of girls, 10 to 16 years of age, and dozens of cameras, they said.
Investigators from the Brooklyn South Public Morals Squad found the arsenal in the top-floor apartment of George William Palmer at 475 Fourth Avenue in the Park Slope section.
Crammed in two bedrooms, the living room and the kitchen were firearms, ranging from antique ball and powder pistols and muskets to semi-automatic handguns and assault rifles.
Weapons Were Everywhere
A police spokesman, Lieut.
Raymond O'Donnell, said the weapons were "everywhere, hanging on the walls, near the bed, in the closets."


Metropolitan Diary
LET'S get down to brass tacks:
Nehama Zibitt was explaining the omnipresence of God to her kindergarten class at the Hebrew school of Congregation Ohav Shalom in Merrick, L.I.
"Is God in your bedrooms?" she asked.
"Yes."


President Is Named By McCaw Cellular
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. said yesterday that James L. Barksdale, a top officer at the Federal Express Corporation, would be McCaw Cellular's new president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Barksdale, whose resignation from Federal Express is effective Oct. 31, said he was approached by an executive recruiter several months ago.


60-Minute Gourmet
IN my day, one of the first tests for young cooks seeking employment was to make an omelet.
Making the perfect omelet -- smooth and lightly browned outside, moist and well seasoned within -- is a technique about which I have written often over the years.
Italians have their own version of the omelet, the frittata, and the strategy for making a superior one is similar.
The fundamental difference between the two is that an omelet is made with eggs and seasonings, then filled with sundry ingredients, whereas the frittata mixture incorporates the ingredients and the result is thicker and slightly drier.
Moreover, the omelet is cooked in an open pan, while the frittata, at least the way I make it, is covered.


Court in Trenton Reviews Access To Phone Bills
Since the public pays for the telephone bills run up by their elected and appointed officials, are they entitled to learn specific details about their calls??
The New Jersey Supreme Court took up that question today with attorneys for the Passaic County Board of Freeholders and a newspaper chain that wants to examine the telephone records of the seven members of the board.


Coslet Testifies About Note in '89 To Defendant in Murder Trial
Jet Coach Bruce Coslet, testifying in the murder-for-hire trial of the former sports agent Michael Blatt, was questioned today about a note he sent to Blatt in February 1989, two weeks before the murder that his friend and former college roommate is charged with arranging.
Blatt is charged with ordering the killing of Laurence Carnegie, a former business associate, on Feb. 28, 1989, near Stockton, Calif, where both worked.
Two men have pleaded guilty to killing Carnegie with an arrow shot from a crossbow, but said they were hired by Blatt.


The Pop Life
Taylor on Aging
There has long been an idea that pop culture is disposable, that once the thrill has been sucked out of a product, it's best to leave it behind.
The idea is predicated on the notion (being proved incorrect daily) that the age range of the pop market is roughly 12 to 25.
As rock and soul performers age, their audiences, who are also growing older, keep going to the shows and buying the records.


Israelis Deplore Advisory Panel Of Palestinians
Israeli officials said today that they were "most unhappy" with a Palestinian team that will attend the Middle East peace conference next week, and they called on the United States to insist that the group's members have nothing to do with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
The Israelis stopped well short of threatening to withdraw from the peace process unless their demand was met.
Nonetheless, one senior official charged that the Palestinians "are trying to provoke us," and he cautioned that "at some point it could become too much."


Pasqua Is Charged
The doorbell rang twice at DAN PASQUA'S house in Dumont, N.J., yesterday.
First it was the man from United Parcel delivering a package from Chicago.
Then it was the police armed with a search warrant to find the package, which they said contained a quantity of marijuana.
According to the police, the package did contain just under an ounce and a half of marijuana, along with a marijuana pipe, and Pasqua, a former Yankee who plays outfield for the Chicago White Sox, was charged with two counts of a disorderly persons offense, which carries a maximum penalty of six months in jail and a $1,000 fine.


Giants Hope Turnover or Two Will Spur Big-Play Bonanza
There is a single moment, among the thousands of moments in a life of football, that always makes Everson Walls beam: his one, his only, touchdown.
Perhaps, if it hadn't happened on an interception return against the Redskins last year, and sealed the Giants' sixth straight victory over their formidable opponents, it might not mean so much.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Kemper Corp., the insurance and investment company, priced $110.75 million of seven-year notes at 99.906 to yield 8.818 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
Noncallable, the notes are rated A-2 by Moody's and A by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Girl, 2, Killed in Hit-and-Run
A 2-year-old Newark girl was killed and four members of her family were injured yesterday afternoon when they were struck by a car stolen by two youths, the police said.
The hit-and-run accident at the corner of 15th Avenue and South Seventh Street killed Dominique Lopez and left her parents, a brother and a cousin hospitalized in fair condition.
The two youths fled.
The car, stolen from Newark International Airport, was found a few blocks from the accident scene, the police said.


Dr. Kalaher Is Wed on L.I.
Dr.
Kathleen Marie Kalaher and Dr.
Phillip Rand Brown were married yesterday at the American Hotel in Sag Harbor, L.I.
Mayor Robert Freidah of Sag Harbor officiated.
Dr.
Kalaher, who is keeping her name, graduated from Vassar College and received a Doctor of Veterinary Medicine degree from Cornell University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur W. Kalaher of Seven Springs, Fla.


On Watch: Maytag And Credit Suisse
The Moody's Investors Service yesterday put Credit Suisse, the Swiss financial company, on its watch list for a possible debt downgrading, while the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation added the Maytag Corporation, the Newton, Iowa, maker of washers and other appliances, to its watch list for possible downgrade.
The move on Credit Suisse, Switzerland's third-largest bank, sparked a selloff of its shares on the Zurich stock exchange.
Shares of CS Holding, Credit Suisse's parent, fell 80 Swiss francs, or $53.92, to close at 1,960 Swiss francs, or $1,321 a share.


Economic Scene; End of the Game For Motor City?
TO the armies of auto company lawyers, victory in the trade war over mini-vans turns on definitions: Have Toyota and Mazda "dumped" the car-truck hybrids by selling them to Americans below the price charged Japanese consumers, as the plaintiffs allege?
If the Japanese did sin by offering better deals in Toledo than Tokyo, did they "injure" Chrysler, Ford and General Motors in the process?
But to many analysts, Detroit's decision to seek protection in the anti-dumping laws says more about the companies' survival strategies than Japanese prices.
A decade after the Big Three vowed to beat the Japanese on cost and quality, they are still losing market share.
Apparently the goal now is to convince the Japanese to ease off.


Deal for Harcourt Is Said to Be Near
A deal between the General Cinema Corporation and Harcourt Brace Jovanovich's bondholders appeared to be imminent late last night.
Two executives involved in the transaction said General Cinema had received oral commitments that at least 90 percent of the bonds in each of Harcourt's five classes, the required amount, would be tendered.
The executives, who spoke on condition of anonymity, warned that the commitments had to be honored for the deal to go through, but the transaction appeared likely to happen.


France Seeks Teheran Aide's Arrest in Killing of Ex-Iranian Premier
A French judge issued an arrest warrant today for an official in the Iranian Government on charges that he was an accomplice in the killing of a former Iranian Prime Minister, Shahpur Bakhtiar, here in August.
Although three arrests have already been made in the case, this is the first time that French investigators have directly implicated any member of the Teheran Government in the plot to kill Mr.
Bakhtiar, who was stabbed to death in his home on Aug. 8.


Foreign Affairs; Throw the Bums Out
Hey, senators and representatives, you want to know what Americans think of you?
Not very much, if you read the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
What that poll suggests is that the people, their incalculable lack of information and passivity notwithstanding, are going to throw a lot of you -- Republicans and Democrats alike -- back into the free-market economy where you will find slightly unfamiliar standards for kiting checks, paying restaurant bills and sexual harassment.
You, too, President Bush, may find the survey unsettling.
It could be that the voters might like to anoint you as Secretary of State and choose someone else to be President.


Computing Chance of Survival
DOCTORS in intensive care units are testing a new computerized system that uses data about patients' conditions to predict their chances of survival.
The system, being tested in three Michigan hospitals, allows doctors to compare a patient with more than 17,000 others who were treated in 40 hospitals throughout the country.
The system uses this information to judge the patient's chances for survival.


Schoolchildren Deserve Better Than Sporadic Health Care; Medical Vans
To the Editor:
Judge Judith B. Sheindlin is correct that the public school system should play a role in providing primary medical care to neglected children ("How Schools Might Use Volunteer Physicians," letter, Sept. 30).
However, rather than relying on volunteers, this can be accomplished through use of medical vans staffed by appropriate personnel that would bring the requisite care to the children.
When I headed the Office of the Homeless, we implemented such a project to provide primary medical care to children living in the infamous (now closed) Martinique Hotel.
Medicaid payments covered the medical costs.
I suggest that the plan be expanded to targeted schools.
STELLA SCHINDLER  Judge, New York State Family Court Jamaica, Queens, Oct. 9, 1991


Personal Health
WHEN Jo-Ann Friedman awoke one January morning, her knees felt wobbly, as if she might be getting the flu.
Not one to give in to illness, the 37-year-old corporate executive went to work.
But by 10 A.M. she was walking like a drunk and squinting because the lights seemed too bright.
By 11 her fingers and tongue were tingling, and by 5 she was so off balance she needed to be helped downstairs and into a taxi.
The neurologist she consulted that afternoon sent her directly to the hospital.
The diagnosis: Guillain-Barre syndrome.
This terrifying neurological disorder attacks perhaps 4,000 Americans each year.
It is the most common sudden cause of serious and potentially fatal nerve damage in the United States.
Even with prompt diagnosis and care, symptoms nearly always go from bad to worse.
But despite the lack of a definitive treatment, more than four out of five victims eventually recover fully or nearly so.


Gerald L. Belcher, Professor, 50
Dr.
Gerald L. Belcher, professor of history and chairman of the history department of Beaver College in Glenside, Pa., died on Sunday at his home in Wyncote, Pa.
He was 50 years old.
The college gave the cause of death as brain cancer.


THEATER IN REVIEW
Futz  La Mama 74 East Fourth Street Through Nov. 3  By Rochelle Owens; direction, music and set design, Tom O'Horgan; lighting design, Howard Thies; costume design, Ellen Stewart; set construction, Jun Maeda and David Adams; stage manager, Marybeth Ward.
Presented by La Mama E. T. C.  WITH: Penny Arcade, John Bakos, Paul Beauvais, Peter Craig, Sheila Dabney, Kimberly Flynn, Tom Keith, John Moran, Doug von Nessen, Jonathan Slaff and Marilyn Roberts.
As much as any experimental play of the 1960's, Rochelle Owens's "Futz" symbolizes that era's gleeful embrace of rude Dionysian revelry to tweak establishment sensibilities.


Democrats Look to the Senate Race In Pennsylvania for Lessons and Hope
A few weeks ago, Dick Thornburgh did not even know how to pronounce the name of his opponent in the Nov. 5 special election for United States senator.
He learned, perhaps coincidentally, just after a poll showing that the Democratic candidate, Harris Wofford (pronounced WOFF-erd), had made substantial gains among voters.
Mr.
Wofford's stunning emergence from anonymity is being watched by Democrats around the country seeking lessons to use against powerful Republicans next year.
Mr.
Wofford has gone on an angry populist offensive, saying that he has had it with Washington's corruption and failure to revive the economy, stem the flow of jobs overseas and enact a national health care policy.


EXECUTIVES
*
Anheuser-Busch Inc., St.
Louis, promoted Henry H. Brown to senior vice president of marketing development and affairs from vice president of that same department. *
Beneficial National Bank, Wilmington, Del., a subsidiary of Beneficial Corp., appointed Robert W. Pierce president and chief executive.


As Fire Toll Rises in Oakland Hills, So Do Questions
As the toll of death and damage from the devastating East Bay fire mounted today, so did questions about whether the Oakland Fire Department moved too slowly and why water pressure failed.
The Alameda County Office of Emergency Services raised the death toll by 5, bringing to 19 the number of bodies found in the rubble of what were once fashionable neighborhoods in the hills above Oakland and Berkeley.
Many people are still missing, however, and the count is almost certain to rise.


Compromise on Banking Law Near
A bitter dispute over a measure that would overhaul the nation's banking system appeared close to resolution today, raising the prospect that Congress will act soon on broad banking-reform legislation.
Significant progress by the staffs of the House Banking and the House Energy and Commerce committees, which have been at loggerheads on the issue, was reported by committee aides.
At the same time, the House Democratic leadership signaled that the full House would consider the legislation as early as next week.


Review/Fashion; Flirty Looks For Spring By Ungaro
Emanuel Ungaro twirled into the inner circle of top couturiers some years back with draped dresses that wrapped around the body in explosive prints.
He was able to translate that seductive line into his ready-to-wear, where his fortunes continued to rise.
Now he is trying to move out of that restrictive mode, and he is succeeding.
Stretch fabrics help.
When the shiny fabrics cling to the body, there is no need for fancy wrappings.
But what Ungaro did best in his spring ready-to-wear show here today was create a frolicsome country-fair atmosphere in which everybody looked joyous and flirty.


Europeans in Accord to Create Vastly Expanded Trading Bloc
Europeans took a decisive step today toward building a unified Europe, agreeing to create the world's largest trading bloc.
It will embrace 380 million Western European consumers from the Arctic Circle to the shores of the Mediterranean.
The 12-nation European Community, now the world's largest trading bloc, and the 7-member European Free Trade Association concluded two years of tough negotiations at a make-or-break overnight session in Luxembourg early today.
After compromising on nettlesome details like fishing and trucking rights, they agreed to form a new common market, to be known as the European Economic Area.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 18
Oct. 11
Oct. 19
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
6.8
6.9
Distillate production, daily
2.9
3.1
2.9
Gasoline stocks
211.8
213.1
222.6
Distillate stocks
135.4
137.3
136.9
Crude imports, daily
5.7
5.8
4.8
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.7
1.6
Crude stocks
338.3
339.9
340.4
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
83.3
85.6
83.3
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Bush Expected to Propose Limits On Senate Confirmation Process
Piqued by the tortuous Clarence Thomas hearings, President Bush is expected to propose revisions in the Senate confirmation process this week, including tighter access to F.B.I. files and limits on the documents that the nominees must produce, officials said today.
As the President worked on his proposals, which the White House said would be announced in a speech on Thursday or Friday, the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine, asked a panel of Senate committee chairmen to make recommendations on improving the confirmation process by the end of the year.


Corrections
A picture caption in some copies yesterday about Jesse Turner's wife, who learned of her husband's release from captivity in Lebanon, misidentifed Estelle Ronneburg.
She is Mr.
Turner's mother, not Mrs.
Turner's.


Books of The Times; America's Story in Alphabetical Order
The Reader's Companion to American History  Edited by Eric Foner and John A. Garraty Illustrated. 1,226 pages.
Houghton Mifflin. $35.
"The Reader's Companion to American History" arrives at a moment when historical literacy about the United States is sadly neglected, and there is continuing debate about the enshrinement of a European-centered version of the past, while excluding other cultures.


Italian Workers Protest Austerity Budget


Japan Ending Sanctions Against South Africa
Japan said today that it was lifting most of its trade sanctions against South Africa, paving the way for the country to resume its role as one of Pretoria's largest trading partners.
The move, which came after strong pressure from Japanese businesses that were reluctant to obey the trade embargo for the last five years, means that Japan's nuclear power industry can once again buy South African uranium and that Japanese companies can now build factories there.


Fantasy For the Price Of a Burger
LAST night, hundreds of invited guests descended on West 57th Street to salute the opening of Planet Hollywood, a sprawling restaurant and bar that is dedicated to the deep-down desire to be one with the silver screen, or at least to be somebody -- somebody famous, somebody else.
Forget the free-range chicken.
Let the free-range fantasy roll.
The walls of Planet Hollywood curve around the 350 seats, placing diners at the epicenter of an alternate reality.
A 40-foot mural dominates one wall.
Movie memorabilia -- the dress that Dorothy wore in "The Wizard of Oz," James Dean's motorcycle -- are displayed in museum cases.
Oh, and the menu.
There are Buffalo wings, pizza bread, blackened fish and burgers.
Dinner runs about $15.


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
Europeans took a decisive step toward building a unified Europe, agreeing to create the world's largest trading bloc, embracing 380 million Western European consumers from the Arctic Circle to the shores of the Mediterranean.  [ Page A1. ]
The Industrial Bank of Japan's chairman resigned to take responsibility for the bank's involvement in a loan fraud.  [ D1. ]


Dollar Rises in New York; Gold Prices Little Changed
The dollar was higher in New York and mixed overseas yesterday in trading that largely lacked direction.
Gold prices were little changed, with bullion rising 10 cents an ounce to close at $363.90 on the New York Commodity Exchange.
The Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $363.25, unchanged from late Monday.


Sports of The Times; For Love Of Those Braves
THINGS might be easier for the socially committed if the Atlanta Braves had retained one of their historical names, like the Red Caps, or the Beaneaters, or the Doves or even the Bees, or the names by which this team had also been known while plying its trade in Boston.
Recently, the Atlanta fandom has picked up some little craze related to the nickname.
This piece of business is called the tomahawk chop and an uncommon number of the team's supporters are regularly seen chopping -- chopping what, nobody is quite sure, but most Americans have seen tomahawks only in movie westerns they were used to chop up people and reap scalps.


Cowdin Kicks Off Aqueduct
New York switches its racing scene from Belmont Park today when Aqueduct opens for the winter, and it opens with a final audition: Any 2-year-old colt still looking for a ticket to the Breeders' Cup championships next week can probably find it at the finish line of the seven-furlong Cowdin Stakes.
The race is the opening-day feature at Aqueduct, and it offers juvenile colts a chance for fortune far beyond the purse of $116,200.
At least three of the starters can win a shot at the Breeders' Cup on Nov. 2 if they win the Cowdin or come close.


North Says Bush Knew Shape Of His Efforts to Aid Contras
Oliver L. North said today that he believed that George Bush, as Vice President, was aware of the broad outline of Mr.
North's activities in Central America during the Iran-contra affair.
But Mr.
North said he could provide few new details about Mr.
Bush's knowledge.
In an interview with news organizations, Mr.
North also said he was unable to clarify unanswered questions about other Reagan Administration officials concerning the scandal.


Freed Hostage 'Happy to Be Out, Finally'


800 Marchers Protest Times's Haiti Coverage
About 800 demonstrators protesting the ouster of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti and The New York Times's coverage of the coup gathered in front of the Times building on West 43d Street in Manhattan last night.
The demonstrators, many of them blowing whistles, waving Haitian flags and holding placards that castigated The Times or warned "No Aristide, no peace," filled much of 43d Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenue for a little more than half an hour until 8:30 P.M., disrupting traffic in the Times Square area.


The Keating None?
Nearly nine months ago the Senate Ethics Committee, toothless watchdog of legislative standards, slapped the wrists of four of the Keating Five.
Those are the Senators who did outrageous favors for Charles Keating, the generous political giver and savings and loan impresario.
Yet the Ethics Committee managed to find only one of them worthy of censure by the full Senate.
That was Alan Cranston of California, who stood out even in this unusually greedy group.
For most of those long months, the committee has been unwilling or unable to take the obvious next step -- move the case to the Senate floor for censure or reprimand.
That has made the committee a laughingstock even in Washington, awash in scandals over private piggy banks and other Congressional perks.
Finally, the committee is holding a series of special meetings to try to break the impasse.


Ross Roy Is Opening A Promotion Agency
Continuing a drive to diversify into marketing communications apart from advertising, the Ross Roy Group, Bloomfield Hills, Mich., is opening a promotion agency in New York called Ross Roy Communications.
Heading the new unit is Ron Wall, who was previously president of Paragon Marketing in New York.
Mr.
Wall will report to Ric Calvillo, president of Calet, Hirsch &amp; Spector, a Ross Roy ad agency in whose office Ross Roy Communications will be based.


Soprano's Recital Canceled
The soprano Gabriela Benackova will not appear as scheduled at Carnegie Hall on Nov. 21 because of a lack of sponsorship for the concert.
The Czechoslovak singer was to make her New York recital debut with the Opera Orchestra of New York, conducted by Eve Queler.
The price of tickets purchased through Carnegie Charge will be automatically refunded.
Tickets bought at the box office or by mail may be returned either in person or by mail.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Credit Offer To Salomon
Two big banks have offered to extend a large credit line to Salomon Brothers Inc., which has suffered impaired financing abilities because of a bond-bidding scandal, an official of the Wall Street firm said yesterday.
The credit offer, which has not yet been accepted by Salomon, was made by Citicorp and J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, said the Salomon official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.


LEGISLATORS BACK EFFORT TO CREATE A UKRAINIAN ARMY
The Parliament of the Ukraine, considered the second-most-powerful Soviet republic after Russia, took its drive for independence a step further today and authorized creation of a 400,000-member republic army.
The authorization, which had been expected with the strong anti-Moscow separatist mood sweeping the republic, did not immediately touch on the more controversial proposals from some officials to create the independent military arm from parts of the Soviet Army contingents now stationed in the republic.


At 33, Redskins' Monk Is a Top Old Smoothie
Brian Mitchell, the Redskins' kick returner, remembers arriving here as a 21-year-old rookie last season from Southwest Louisiana and being awed by the speed and strength of his new teammates.
And then he saw Art Monk.
"I thought, 'Is that old man still here,' " Mitchell said, laughing.


Stocks Retreat Again; Dow Drops by 20.58
Stock prices pulled back yesterday for the second straight day, with a weak bond market seen as the main culprit.
New York Stock Exchange volume was heavy, even with a power failure giving traders an unexpected morning coffee break.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 20.58 points, to 3,039.80, on Big Board volume of 194.4 million shares, up from 154.2 million on Monday.
Declining stocks outpaced gainers by 914 to 685.


2 Banks Eliminate Some Preferred
Manufacturers Hanover and the Mellon Bank both announced plans yesterday to eliminate some preferred stock.
The Manufacturers Hanover Corporation, based in New York City, said its $85 million of series 9 7/8 percent convertible preferred stock would be converted into 3,074,141 common shares on Friday.
Most holders chose to take cash rather than shares, and Goldman, Sachs bought 2,965,642 shares, at a price of $27.65 each, with the proceeds to go to the preferred shareholders.
The remaining 108,499 shares will go to preferred holders.
The conversion ratio was established through competitive bidding, the company said.


Dallas Police Discount AIDS Revenge Tale
For more than a month, Dallas faced a threat known only as C. J., a woman who claimed to be spreading the AIDS virus in revenge on the man who had infected her.
The Dallas police now say C. J. is a fake.
"Our attitude is that there is no C. J. as purported to be," Deputy Chief Ray Hawkins said Monday at a news conference.
"However, there are lots of C. J.'s out there, either knowingly or unintentionally spreading HIV. That's why we haven't called it a hoax."


TRANSACTIONS
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
INDIANA PACERS -- Waived Clifford Martin, forward. Continental Basketball Association
COLUMBUS HORIZON -- Signed Elbert Gordon, forward. Global Basketball Association
GREENSBORO CITY GATERS -- Signed Lloyd Daniels, forward.
Traded Drexel Deveaux, guard, to the Mid-Michigan Great Lakers for 1992 first- and third-round draft picks.
FOOTBALL National Football League
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Placed Harry Hamilton, safety, on injured reserve.
HOCKEY National Hockey League
NHL -- Suspended Greg Smyth, Quebec defenseman, for four games for striking Kevin Miller of Detroit in a game on Oct. 19.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Sent Byron Dafoe, goaltender, Jari Yykoukal, defenseman and Victor Gervais, center, to Hampton Roads of the East Coast Hockey League.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Sent Scott Arniel, left wing, to the New Haven Nighthawks of the American Hockey League.
East Coast Hockey League
HAMPTON ROADS ADMIRALS -- Acquired Mike Chighisola, left wing, from the Cincinnati Cyclones to complete an earlier trade for Don Gagne, right wing.
SOCCER National Professional Soccer League
ILLINOIS THUNDER -- Purchased Tim Tyma, defender, from the Milwaukee Wave.


How Many Angels Danced at the Benefit?
YOU could barely hear yourself think over the heavy-metal music, but thinking was not a primary concern at the Hell's Angels benefit last Friday night at the Marquee in Manhattan.
Instead, the renowned biker club provided ample quantities of blissfully mindless activities like loud rock-and-roll, a strip show and beer drinking.
The large warehouse space on West 21st Street was filled with power chords, high-kicking gartered legs, long hair and leather.
Decorum could be checked at the door.
The reasons for the benefit go back to an incident six years ago at the Angels' clubhouse on East Third Street.
"In 1985, the Federal Government seized our building under the forfeiture act," said Bob, the president of the New York City Hell's Angels charter as Steppenwolf's "Magic Carpet Ride" blared in the background. (Bob, like the other Angels, would give only his first name.)


Finally, 2 Win Council Races In 2 Primaries
Former State Senator Israel Ruiz Jr.  won a special Democratic primary in the Bronx yesterday, taking another step in a political comeback after being ousted from the Senate two years ago because of a fraud conviction.
In Queens, Juanita A. Watkins, a longtime party chairwoman, virtually assured that she would win her first public office after more than a quarter century in party politics.


Public &amp; Private; Reading Hepburn
Growing up, I had trouble seeing the women around me as role models.
I loved my mother, but I saw her mostly as a woman with a diaper thrown over one shoulder, white mottled with pale yellow, her working clothes.
Some girls saw that diaper as the shape of their own inevitable future; I found it an inevitable divide.
We ambitious, discontented girls of 30 years ago had a hard time imagining how to imagine ourselves.
There was the occasional inspirational teacher, the Miss Jean Brodie of Glen Oaks Elementary, and the fictional and historical women, the Molly Pitchers and Jo Marches.
I was enamored of the two Dorothys, Thompson and Parker, the columnist and the wit, although neither had a happy life.
But happy was not what I was seeking in the wilderness of male writers, doctors, world leaders and explorers.
It was something harder to name, restless and self-involved.


Earnings Off At Three Oil Companies
Several big oil companies reported lower earnings yesterday, as reduced prices for crude oil and natural gas and slack demand for chemical products pared profits.
Companies with operations mainly in the United States, where natural gas prices and gasoline demand declined more than in other nations, fared worse than companies with global operations.


Schooling In Health Criticized
Many doctors, nurses and other health-care practitioners believe that while they were in medical school they were not properly trained in balancing medical costs against adequate health care or in dealing with the increasing cultural diversity of their patients, according to a study released last week.
The health-care workers also rated as fair or poor their medical school training in dealing with public scrutiny of the health-care system, evaluating the appropriateness of costly new technology and insuring that all people have access to good health care.


Eating Well
ANYONE who takes on a symbol should be prepared for the backlash.
In the world of the "nutritionally correct," trashing tofu is about as safe as cursing Mother Teresa.
Nevertheless, in an article I wrote for the Oct. 6 issue of the Good Health Magazine of The New York Times, foods were categorized according to how often they should be eaten: anytime, sometimes and seldom.
Judging by the mail and the phone messages, no one could believe that tofu belonged under "sometimes." .
It wasn't the only food placement question, but it beat all the others -- fruit juice, dried fruit, nuts, tortillas, fried fish -- by 100 to 1.





CHRONICLE
WALTER CRONKITE and Burton Benjamin were close friends and colleagues for years, so it is only fitting that Mr.
Cronkite receive the first Burton Benjamin Memorial Award, named for the executive producer of "The CBS Evening News." It is to be presented at a dinner of the Committee to Protect Journalists this evening at the Hotel Pierre.
"Bud was one of the real leaders of the profession, a superb journalist and a man of enormous integrity," Mr.
Cronkite said yesterday.
"He had just accepted the executive directorship of this committee and had just attended his first meeting when he was stricken. It is meaningful but undeserved that I receive an award that carries his name."
Mr. Benjamin died of a brain tumor in 1988.
TOM BROKAW, PETER JENNINGS, DAN RATHER and BERNARD SHAW will present awards to seven journalists who have been imprisoned or threatened by governments seeking to silence them.
Among them will be WANG JUNTAO and CHEN ZIMING, the editor and publisher, respectively, of Economics Weekly in China.
They are serving 13-year prison sentences for their roles in the 1989 student movement in China.
Both are said to be in solitary confinement and on hunger strikes to protest their treatment.
"I don't think the public has the slightest concept of the dangers that journalists face," Mr.
Cronkite said.
"And I don't know why they should. We are the poorest of all professions at tooting our own horn and don't make much of the fact that journalists, especially in foreign situations, are in a life-threatening profession."


CHRONICLE
"Must I pay $100 rent to land on Pennsylvania Avenue?" Dr.
RUTH WESTHEIMER asked just as LEWIS RUDIN was handing PRESTON ROBERT TISCH 28 Monopoly dollars for landing on his property.
It was 8 A.M. yesterday, and a flock of recognizable names, including GLORIA STEINEM, ED BRADLEY, JERRY DELLA FEMINA, ROBIN LEACH and TREVOR MATICHof the New York Jets were playing an abbreviated version of Monopoly for a cause: Citymeals-on-Wheels.
For $75, the audience, made up mainly of real estate executives and lawyers, got to watch while eating raspberries, croissants, bagels and the like at the Regency Hotel, where the powerful often gather for breakfast.
The Monopoly Power Breakfast was the brainstorm of JONATHAN TISCH "three years ago during a sleepless night," he said.
"I had the idea because I was born in Atlantic City."
In addition to watching the game, guests were also asked to participate in a campaign called Buy a Block.
For set amounts, purchasers can feed all the homebound elderly on a particular block on weekends and holidays for a year.
It makes for some interesting real estate price comparisons: in this campaign, Central Park West goes for $12,600, the same as Ocean Avenue in Brooklyn.
As the Monoply game proceeded, Mr.
Rudin was among the first to go bankrupt.
"Thank God, it's happening here, not elsewhere," he said, "and now let's take the subway to the office."


Appeals Panel Orders New Primary in Bitterly Fought Harlem Council Race
Reversing a lower court ruling, an appeals panel yesterday ordered a new Democratic primary between the top two candidates in the bitterly contested race for the City Council seat in eastern Harlem.
The ruling capped weeks of legal wrangling and political mudslinging between William Del Toro and Adam Clayton Powell 4th.
It set the stage for a one-on-one showdown in District Eight between Mr.
Del Toro, the older brother of Angelo Del Toro, a powerful State Assemblyman, and Mr.
Powell, the son of the Harlem Congressman by the same name.
The court dropped seven other candidates out of the race.


U.S. Open to Talks on Ties to Vietnam
Eighteen years after American troops withdrew from Vietnam in humiliation, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today that the United States was prepared to begin talks with Hanoi next month to normalize relations.
Mr.
Baker said progress in the talks would depend on Vietnam's willingness to furnish information that Washington has long sought about 2,300 Americans who were prisoners of war or are listed as missing in action.


Rutgers Is No. 1, With a Bullet
Rob Johnson stopped in the hallway outside the soccer office of Rutgers University this afternoon to look at the bulletin board that was cluttered with newspaper articles proclaiming the school's No. 1 ranking in the nation this week.
"There are a lot of people responsible for this, but he is a big reason for our top ranking," Coach Bob Reasso said about Johnson as the sensational freshman entered Reasso's office.


Mary Painter Garin, 71, Innovator In Economic and Statistical Work
Mary S. Painter Garin, an American economist who was an important innovator in the use of statistical techniques during and immediately after World War II, died Monday in Toulon, France, near her home in Sollies-Toucas.
She was 71 years old.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, said a niece, Sarah Wells.


Bondholders Accept Offer For Harcourt
General Cinema has won the approval of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich's bondholders for a $1.3 billion takeover of the publishing and insurance company.
Late yesterday, General Cinema said that 90 percent of each of Harcourt Brace's five classes of bonds had been tendered.
That percentage was the threshold General Cinema had set for completing the deal.
The announcement came after days of speculation on whether the bondholders who were holding out would come around.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-17
A peace treaty for Cambodia, brokered by the U.S., China and the Soviet Union, was signed.
A cease-fire in the civil war that began in 1978 went into immediate effect, and several other steps are to be taken by mid-1993.
Page A1


THOMAS SWORN IN AS 106TH JUSTICE
Clarence Thomas became the nation's 106th Supreme Court Justice today at a hastily arranged private swearing-in ceremony at the Court.
There was no public announcement of the event until after it had taken place.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist administered the judicial oath shortly after noon in the Justices' conference room, with only three witnesses in attendance: Virginia L. Thomas, the new Justice's wife, who held the Bible; Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri, Justice Thomas's friend, and Robb M. Jones, the Chief Justice's administrative assistant.
Senator Danforth took pictures with a camera borrowed from Justice Thomas.


Bridge
For half a century, the presidents of the American Contract Bridge League, who serve for one year, were busy politicians with little claim to expertise at the card tables.
Waldemar Von Zedtwitz and Peter Leventritt were notable exceptions to the rule.
But recent presidents have included such stars as Tom Sanders and Bob Wolff, and the 1991 incumbent, David McGee, of Mason City, Iowa, continues this trend.
He showed his skill as South on the diagramed deal, played Saturday in a Regional Open Pairs in South Fallsburg, N.Y.


Corrections
An article last Thursday about Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts misstated the frequency of payments being denied to some welfare recipients under a law signed by the Governor.
They are monthly, not weekly.


Partners Deserve Only Truth About HIV
To the Editor:
As an HIV-positive hemophilic heterosexual male infected through contaminated blood-clotting products, I have been faced many times over the last few years with the question of how and when to inform a woman of my status.
"The Search for Romance in the Shadow of AIDS" (front page, Oct. 10) says some HIV-positive people tell a potential partner straightaway.
But others say that as long as they keep the risk of transmission to a minimum, they think they pose little threat and feel they can withhold the information.
I have always taken what I believe to be the only morally defensible position: the woman must be informed before any physical contact can take place.
I can assure your readership that this position has led me to many dateless Saturday nights, but at least I sleep well.
It appears from reading the article that several of the people interviewed were attempting to rationalize their individual positions on this issue, like the fiancee of "George K.," who questioned why she should have disclosed her HIV-positive status to potential sexual partners "while there are people who do not know they are infected and are not practicing safe sex."
I can only answer this by stating that each and every person who is infected with the virus that causes AIDS and who is cognizant of it has a great responsibility never to infect another person through negligence or duplicity.
The front line of responsibility for halting the spread of this hideous epidemic is drawn up by those of us who are aware of our HIV-positive status.
While it is true that all sex should be safe sex unless people are absolutely certain of their partners' status, only those of us who are infected with this virus seem to think of it each and every day.
Therefore, one cannot assume that all of us are equally conscious about acquired immune deficiency syndrome, and people who are aware of their HIV-positive status must assume the responsibility for both partners if they decide to undertake a relationship.
MICHAEL J. DRUCK  New York, Oct. 10, 1991


RJR Nabisco Reports Neet Of $123 Million in 3d Quarter
Once beleagured by a crushing load of debt, the RJR Nabisco Holding Corporation is now on the upswing.
The food and cigarette company's third-quarter net income rose to $123 million, compared with a loss of $86 million for the corresponding period last year.
The gain was attributed in large part to the company's continuing efforts to reduce its huge debt, said Jason Wright, a spokesman for RJR Nabisco.
In its most recent debt-reduction move at the beginning of this month, the company disclosed a plan for large offerings of common and preferred stock that would help the company retire some of the debt.


Shamir Will Head Delegation at Talks, Signaling Hard Line
In a move likely to guarantee a hard-line Israeli delegation to the Middle East peace talks, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir bumped aside his relatively dovish Foreign Minister today and announced that he would personally head the negotiating team going to Madrid next week.
After Mr.
Shamir's rebuff, the Foreign Minister, David Levy, announced that he would not attend the conference at all.
According to several officials, Mr.
Shamir also told Mr.
Levy that he intended to name an Israeli settler from the occupied territories to the delegation.


Twins Fit to Be Tied as Braves Win in 9th
Mark Lemke made his lineup presence felt the night before when he singled home the winning run in Atlanta's 12-inning victory.
The unheralded Lemke did it again tonight, but this time he had help from a player who was on the Braves' roster only through a quirk in the postseason roster rules.
The Braves edged the Minnesota Twins, 3-2, and evened the World Series at two games each because Lemke lashed a triple to left-center field with one out in the ninth inning and pinch-hitter Jerry Willard hit a sacrifice fly, sending Lemke home in the last of a series of close plays at the plate involving the Twins' catcher, Brian Harper.


Shade Creeps In and a Garden Evolves
A COUPLE of years ago, a friend visiting my place for the first time took one look as she got out of her car and said, "Allen, what you've got here is a mature garden."
Her comment pleased me, for it meant that the garden gave instant testimony to 20 years of work my family and I had put into its making.
The house is old, going back to at least 1812, but there was no garden when I moved in, only an ancient maple tree, two large junipers, some nondescript hedges of mildew-ridden lilacs and multiflora roses, and a lot of lawn to mow.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Eddie Bo Tommy Ridgley  Tramps
Eddie Bo brought himself and a small turban to the stage at Tramps on Saturday night and Tommy Ridgley brought a voice the size of a house and together they turned the club into a decent enough party.
Mr.
Bo and Mr.
Ridgley, two of New Orleans's better rhythm-and-blues performers make rare appearances in New York (Mr. Bo hadn't been here for 30 years) and they made the best of it.
Backed by a good New Orleans rhythm section, the two trafficked in the sort of New Orleans absurdity that had people laughing and dancing.


Car Sales Languish as Uncertainty Deters Buyers
With worries about the economy and job security apparently weighing heavily on car buyers, vehicle sales were sharply lower in recent days from last year's level.
Several dealers said showroom traffic had fallen 20 to 30 percent.
But while analysts said the poor sales suggested that the recovery was having trouble maintaining momentum, they said the latest figures did not signal that the economy was about to dip back into recession.


Dollar Gains Worldwide While Gold Prices Decline
The dollar settled higher on world currency markets yesterday in trading driven largely by technical factors.
Gold prices declined.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $362.30 an ounce, down $1.60 from Tuesday.
The Republic National Bank quoted a late bid of $362, off $1.25.


Quotation of the Day
"A dark page of history has been turned." -- President Francois Mitterrand of France, at the signing of the Cambodian peace treaty.  [ A1:6. ]


Corrections
An entry in the Company Briefs lising of Business Day on Tuesday referred incorrectly to a transaction by the United Jersey Bank of Hackensack, N.J.
The bank's purchase of two branches of the Howard Savings Bank was made directly from Howard, not through the Resolution Trust Corporation.


Review/Dance; Paul Taylor on Love, War and Their Subtext
"Company B," the jumping, jiving premiere that opened the Paul Taylor Dance Company's season on Tuesday night, is hardly a nostalgia trip.
But those who remember radio in the 1940's -- from the Andrews Sisters to Hap Harrigan -- will feel wonderfully at home despite Mr.
Taylor's radically revisionist look at the American mood during World War II.
At the end of the evening, Mr.
Taylor and a genuine Andrews Sister -- Maxene, to be precise -- danced a genteel little jitterbug onstage at the City Center (131 West 55th Street).
During this unexpected encore, when the entire company improvised onstage, the mood in the entire house was up, and understandably so.


ARABS SEEK UNITY BEFORE THEY TALK
Arab diplomats headed for the Middle East peace conference in Madrid met in Damascus today to unify their positions before sitting down with Israeli representatives next week.
The Arab representatives, including officials from Syria, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and the Palestine Liberation Organization, have agreed not to conclude separate peace arrangements with Israel, a key concern of Syrian officials and the P.L.O.
But they have failed to reach a consensus on several other issues.


ALBANY FISCAL GAP IS NOW ESTIMATED AT A HALF-BILLION
Despite adopting some of the sharpest spending cuts in state history when it put together a budget last spring, New York State is now facing a financial deficit of between $500 million and $800 million, Cuomo administration officials said today.
The state budget division's estimate of the gap in the $29 billion budget will not be completed until next week.
But the officials said the extraordinary bleakness of the state's fiscal picture was a result of higher spending on welfare and Medicaid and of a continued falloff in projected tax revenues -- trends that are themselves stark reflections of the state's weak economy.


Connecticut State Police Lay Off 79 of 974 Officers
The state police force, which supervises everything from highway traffic enforcement to small-town patrol duty, saw its ranks thinned by layoffs today as 79 officers traded their guns and badges for unemployment vouchers.
The layoffs of more than 8 percent of the statewide patrol force, which were all based on seniority, leave the agency's ability to do its basic jobs intact but severely strained, a spokesman, Adam F. Berluti, said.


Hospitals' Leadership in Doubt Again
Who is running the New York City hospital system?
The decision by Mayor David N. Dinkins to accept the resignation the president of the largest public hospital system in the country, effective on March 1, raises questions even among senior administrators about who is in charge of the Health and Hospitals Corporation.


8 Repertory Theaters Granted $6.3 Million
The Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund has awarded a total of $6.3 million in grants to eight resident theaters, including the Manhattan Theater Club, to enable them to diversify their audiences and expand their repertories.


C.I.A.'s Track Record Stands Up to Scrutiny
To the Editor:
"The Once and Future C.I.A." (editorial, Oct. 18) asserts the Central Intelligence Agency "has, at least to public perception, flunked." To support this assertion, you suggest the agency failed to anticipate the fall of the Berlin Wall, Saddam Hussein's aggression and the implosion of the Soviet Union.
This portrayal of the agency's performance is inaccurate, and does a disservice by furthering a perception that is flat-out wrong.
With respect to the Berlin Wall, the C.I.A. did draw policy makers' attention in advance of its collapse to the possibility the embattled East German regime might have to dismantle it.
But the wall was merely the most conspicuous symbol of a broader phenomenon -- the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe -- on which our analytic record is very good.
Even before Mikhail S. Gorbachev came to power in 1985, we had pointed to the likelihood of political crisis in one or more East European states before the decade was out.


Zhivkov Trial Resumes
The trial of the former Bulgarian Communist leader Todor Zhivkov resumed today after a five-month break due to his ill health.
Mr.
Zhivkov, ousted from power in November 1989, went on trial in February on charges of misappropriating state funds to buy luxury apartments and Western cars for family and friends.


KHMER ROUGE SHARES RULE
With mutual distrust still lingering between longtime enemies, Cambodia's warring factions signed a peace treaty today aimed at ending a nightmare of war, mass murder, foreign occupation, starvation and exile that has devastated the Southeast Asian country over the last 21 years.
Under the agreement -- brokered by the United States, the Soviet Union and China -- a cease-fire in the round of civil war that began in 1978 went into immediate effect.
It is to be followed by the demobilization of rival armies, repatriation of 350,000 refugees and elections by mid-1993.


Deficit in Bank Insurance Fund Is Triple the Previous Projection
Federal regulators released new estimates today that more than triple the deficit projected for next year in the fund that protects bank deposits.
The new estimates of a $9.6 billion deficit compare with the $3 billion previously predicted and reflect the view of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation that an increasing number of large banks are likely to fail in 1992 because of the weak economy.


Interpublic Group Posts 22.8% Rise in Earnings
The Interpublic Group of Companies, New York, reported yesterday that net income for the third quarter rose 22.8 percent, to $9.9 million, or 27 cents a share, from $8.1 million, or 24 cents a share, in the comparable period of 1990.
Revenues rose 26.9 percent, to $401 million from $316 million.
The earnings were in line with most analysts' expectations.
"The biggest surprise was a positive one," said Laurie Goldberger, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
"Its underlying U.S. revenue seems to be strong, even though its overseas revenue continued to slow down." Revenue from domestic operations increased 48 percent in the third quarter, versus 18 percent for overseas revenue.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
"MEASURE twice, cut once" is a maxim among carpenters, and with good reason.
If you do not measure carefully, no matter how high your level of skill or how good your tools, materials may be wasted and the result may be flawed.
A steel tape rule belongs in every tool kit.
The most useful lengths are 12 and 25 feet.
Buy a tape that is at least three-quarters of an inch wide.
These can be extended a reasonable distance without buckling.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt
*
Bell Canada's $150 million (Canadian) five-year 9.375 percent bonds ($133 million U.S.) were priced through UBS Phillips &amp; Drew at 101.70, to yield 8.939 percent.
The company, a unit of BCE Inc., is based in Montreal.


Chevron Earnings Dropped 22.3% in the Third Quarter
The Chevron Corporation, the nation's fourth-largest oil company, said yesterday that its net income declined 22.3 percent in the third quarter, extending the pattern of lower profits in the period for big oil companies.
Net income was $313 million, or 90 cents a share, compared with $403 million, or $1.14, in the comparable period last year.
Revenues for the San Francisco-based company declined 5.1 percent, to $10.01billion, from $10.55 billion.


Most Airlines Follow United's Fare Increase
Just when the airline industry's vital signs are showing a slight improvement, the big carriers plan to raise fares for business travelers by lowering the discount of a seven-day advance purchase ticket to 15 percent of a full-fare coach ticket from 20 percent.
United initiated the increase, which is effective next Tuesday.
American, Continental, Delta Air Lines and Northwest immediately decided to match United.


Taking In the Tokyo Auto Show
In the late 1980's, Japan's auto makers took on Detroit and the Europeans with a remarkable array of new luxury cars, far bigger and far more gadget-laden than anything that had ever before emerged from Japanese auto factories.
Now the Japanese are sending a new message: small is back.
At the opening today of the biennial Tokyo Motor Show, the premier showcase for the Japanese auto industry's new technologies and designs, there was a flood of two-seater sports cars influenced by Mazda's hit Miata convertible.
And there were a dozen or so egg-shaped commuter cars, as well as a category that was inevitable: "personal cars" that fit the driver comfortably but might be a squeeze for two.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Claimed Russel Meacham, pitcher, off waivers from the Detroit Tigers.
National League
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Exercised its option on Bob Ojeda, pitcher, for the 1992 season.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Sent Jerry Goff, catcher, and Chris Johnson, pitcher, outright to Indianapolis of the American Association.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Waived Clifford Scales, guard.
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Signed Kenny Smith, guard, to a 5-year contract.
MIAMI HEAT -- Waived Byron Irvin, guard.
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Waived Ricky Calloway, guard, and Jervis Cole, forward.
Continental Basketball Association
SIOUX FALLS SKYFORCE -- Signed Brett Szabo and Amando Martinez, centers; Darrin Chancellor and Darryl McDonald, guards; and Gary Mattison, Eric Strothers and Earl Walker, forwards.
Global Basketball Association
HUNTSVILLE LASERS -- Signed Richard Hollis, forward. Football  National Football League
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Signed Matt Vanderbeek, linebacker.
Waived Matt Jaworski, linebacker.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Signed Scott Ross, linebacker.
Signed Aaron Emmanuel, running back, to the practice squad.
Waived Gerald Alphin, wide receiver.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Activated Calvin Williams, wide receiver, from injured reserve.
Placed Cecil Gray, tackle, and Jessie Campbell, safety, on the practice squad.
Waived Bobby Slaughter, wide receiver.


Midtown Journal; Of Friars and Buddhists And Bowls of Cornflakes
The Tibetans woke up first, at exactly 5 A.M., to recite their morning devotions.
Then the Capuchins rose to say the 6:45 Mass for themselves and the faithful in their church at 31st Street off Seventh Avenue.
Then Tibetans and Capuchins sat down for cornflakes and coffee.


Is It a Sign? High Stick, Win Suit?
So far, there have been no takers, but the possibilities remain intriguing for the National Hockey League's latest revenue-enhancement innovation.
In a recent decision, the money makers of the hockey business agreed to sell advertising space on the playing surface.
That's right: ads on the ice.


Gretzkyless Kings Mauled by Rangers
It was a good night to wind up, put stick on puck and hope for the best.
Why not?
Strange things were happening to these shots, any shots, that kept finding open air between the goaltenders' pads.
The Rangers shot last, shot often, shot best, coming back from an early two-goal deficit to defeat the exhausted Los Angeles Kings, 7-2, at Madison Square Garden last night.


Transport Bill Passes in House, Setting Up Fight
The House today passed a six-year, $151 billion transportation bill, setting the stage for two likely fights -- one with the Senate and another with the Administration -- over how to dole out money to the states for highways and mass transit.
Although the lopsided vote of 343 to 83 put members of both political parties squarely behind the bill, the outcome of the legislation remains clouded.


Carl Allensworth; Playwright, 83
Carl Allensworth, a playwright whose work was presented on Broadway and on television, died on Tuesday in the United Hospital Medical Center in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 83 years old and lived in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
He died after a heart attack, said a spokesman for the Cox &amp; Graziano Funeral Home in Mamaroneck.


Metal Mesh as a Framework For Almost Everything
HOUSEHOLD objects that glitter are not necessarily gold.
They may be made of copper, bronze or stainless steel mesh.
In art schools, metal mesh is used as a structural base for sculpture.
Industrially, it is transformed into filters for engines or coffee machines.


Suspected Members of Violent Drug Gang Rounded Up


U.S. to Discuss Ties With Vietnam Soon
Eighteen years after American troops withdrew from Vietnam in humiliation, Secretary of State Baker said the United States was prepared to begin talks with Hanoi next month to normalize relations.


Bush Sets Rules to Curb U.S. Lawyers' Litigation
President Bush today ordered the Government's lawyers to abide by a score of new rules crafted to curb their instinct to litigate, saying the American legal system had "spun out of control" and that he wanted the vast swarm of Federal lawyers to start reining it in.
The new rules, which Mr.
Bush issued as a Presidential order at a White House ceremony, include some eye-catching and potentially controversial measures.
Chief among them is a proposal that the Government pay part of the opposition's legal costs in civil cases that it files and loses.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the fire in Oakland, Calif., misidentified the station affiliation of a television reporter, Betty Ann Bruno.
She works for KTVU-TV.


United Picks Indianapolis
United Airlines has chosen Indianapolis International Airport for a $1 billion maintenance base, which is expected to employ 7,000 people.
The decision was a victory for the city and for Indiana, which competed against Denver, Oklahoma City and Louisville, Ky.
Gov.
Evan Bayh of Indiana and Mayor William H. Hudnut 3d of Indianapolis yesterday did not disclose the amount of incentives offered to United, but they were thought to be worth several hundred million dollars.
Other states offered large incentive packages to attract United, including one of up to $341 million.
Stephen M. Wolf, United's chairman and president, said the "competition was extremely close."
The base, which is scheduled to open in late 1994, will be used to maintain United's fleet of Boeing 737 aircraft, which will eventually total about 400, or half United's fleet.


Computer Concern Assailed on Anti-Semitic Notes
The Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith has asserted that the Prodigy Services Company, the nation's largest computer information service, has allowed its electronic bulletin boards to be used as a high-tech pathway for the spread of anti-Semitism.
The accusation was issued last week.
But it was not until this week that it created a upswell of criticism, after The Wall Street Journal published in Tuesday's issue excerpts from electronic messages that had been posted on Prodigy's bulletin boards and cited by the league.


Corrections
A report on Monday about the wedding of Jill Breakstone and Jeffrey Goldberg omitted the identity of Mr.
Goldberg's stepfather and misstated the location of the company for which the bridegroom's mother works.
Mr.
Goldberg is a stepson of Alvin Gittler of Bayside, Queens, controller of Parkside Memorial Chapels in Forest Hills, Queens.
Mrs.
Gittler is director of marketing for the Plaza Nurses Agency in Lynbrook, L.I.


Taking Note of the Weather, Traders Sell Oil Contracts
Crude oil prices fell sharply yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange, extending a decline that some analysts said was overdue after the market reached a nine-month high last week.
Crude oil for December delivery settled at $23.26 a barrel, down 39 cents, and other energy markets also fell.


Salt Lake Takes Cowdin Easily
Aqueduct opened its gates for the winter yesterday with only 8,893 customers watching the horses but with plenty of irony surrounding them: The Cowdin Stakes, which was supposed to launch two smart juveniles into the Breeders' Cup championships, was won by more than six lengths by Salt Lake, who isn't even entered in the season-ending championship.
Salt Lake is the star 2-year-old owned by William T. Young and trained by D. Wayne Lukas, and he can run like the blazes.
He has gone to the races seven times and won four times, as he did when he blitzed the Hopeful Stakes by nine lengths at Saratoga in August.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Archie Shepp  Condon's
It's not much of a surprise that the saxophonist Archie Shepp has spent much of his career gravitating toward older styles of jazz, especially swing.
Mr.
Shepp is dramatic and flamboyant, and as an early member of the jazz avant-garde of the 1960's, he made noise both politically and esthetically.
The sound of the swing tenor saxophone, as derived from Ben Webster and Coleman Hawkins, is extravagant, and Mr.
Shepp fearlessly took advantage of it.


Chambliss Is Looking For Major Challenge
The standing ovation wasn't as loud as the one everyone remembers from the 1976 American League pennant playoff, when he hit the home run that won it, but this ovation said even more about Chris Chambliss.
This was in London, Ontario, last year, and Chambliss, manager of the Class AA Eastern League team, went out to the field to argue the umpire's ruling that a pitch had hit the bat and not the batter's hand.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Martha Lorin  Eighty Eights 228 West 10th Street Manhattan Through Nov. 12
Although Martha Lorin, who is singing on Tuesdays at Eighty Eights, builds her programs around familiar pop songs from the 1930's and 40's, she also includes a few of her own songs.
But unlike most singers who indulge themselves in this fashion, her songs, with music by Frank Collette, stand up well in the company of such established gems as Billy Strayhorn's "Day Dreams" and "Easy Living," the Ralph Rainger-Leo Robin collaboration that was one of Billie Holiday's earliest recordings.
They also overshadow the pleasant but simple bounciness of such songs as "Day by Day" and "I Thought About You," which make up the bulk of her repertory.


COMPANY NEWS;
The Compaq Computer Corporation, besieged by price-cutting rivals and under pressure from lagging sales, said yesterday that it would slash its work force by 1,400, or 12 percent, and reported its first quarterly loss ever, $70.3 million for the third quarter.
Separately, the Control Data Corporation said it lost $7.5 million in the quarter,
Following are the details of the companies' results:  Compaq
Compaq's loss contrasted to a profit of $123.6 million, or $1.38 a share, in the corresponding period last year.
Revenues in the third quarter fell 17.8 percent, to $709.4 million from $863 million.


In a Florida Haven for Guatemalans, Seven Deaths Bring New Mourning
Along the main street of this farm town just east of Lake Okeechobee, it is not unusual to see small, brown-skinned women dressed in huipiles, colorful woven blouses that are a trademark of Mayan culture, chatting easily among themselves in Kanjobal, Quiche, Acatec and other Indian languages.
Just a few weeks ago, marimba bands and dancers convened to celebrate the feast of San Miguel, patron saint of a village in the Guatemalan mountains that was once home to several hundred families who have settled here.


Crash! Smith Hits Ball and Harper
The bat met the baseball, and Lonnie Smith, who had already been involved in one thunderous crash at the plate, had crafted his greatest collision of the night.
Smith, the left-fielder for the Braves, tonight smashed a bases-empty home run with two out in the seventh inning to deadlock the score at 2-2 and make possible Atlanta's 3-2 comeback triumph over the Twins in Game 4 of the World Series.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Brooke Group Ltd., Durham, N.C., a cigarette company, said a new subsidiary, Brooke Irkutsk, had formed a joint venture, Brooke Taiga Timber, with Agroprom Stroi, a construction and timber concern of the Russian government, to develop timber resources in the Russian Federated Republic. *
Chrysler Corp., Highland Park, Mich., increased to $500, from $300, its cash incentives on 1992 Dodge and Plymouth Colt and Eagle Summit models.
The higher incentive will run through Dec., 31.


White House Memo; Economic Ills Cast Shadow Over Bush Re-election Plans
Concerned for months about President Bush's image on domestic policy, the White House is sharpening its focus on the economic issues that have suddenly complicated a re-election effort that seemed like a sure thing just a few months ago.
As early as August, at Mr.
Bush's first major 1992 campaign strategy session, Richard G. Darman, the budget director, warned that interest rates had to come down by year's end to improve the economy by election time, officials said today.


INSIDE
It's Now a 2-of-3 Series
The Braves evened the World Series at 2-2 with a 3-2 victory over the Twins in Atlanta on a close play at the plate in the ninth.
Page B11.
Fight on Transportation Bill
The House passed a $151 billion transportation bill, setting the stage for battles with the Senate and White House over the measure.
Page B9.
Orthodox Patriarch Chosen
Metropolitan Bartholomew of Chalcedon is the new Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, spiritual leader of Orthodox Christians.
Page A10.


Review/Art; Art and Power, or, the Fist That Grips the Brush
One of the most hotly debated issues in the boom-market art world of the 1980's and now in the politically contentious art world of the 90's has been power: who has it, how did they get it, and what are they doing with it.
Every week, it seems, there are panels on power and whatever -- you can almost fill in the blank: power and the artist, the collector, the museum, the critic.
Power, in fact, has become prominent not just as an issue swirling around art, but as one of its central subjects.
Now comes a provocative, tightly organized exhibition at the Indianapolis Museum of Art titled "Power: Its Myths and Mores in American Art, 1961-1991." The title itself exudes considerable authority, especially when you see it spelled out in metallic red on the institutional gray of the catalogue's cover.


Florio Urges Democrats To Fight Back
With even his top advisers warning that the Republicans could seize control of both houses of the New Jersey Legislature for the first time in 20 years, Gov.
Jim Florio says Democrats should "get off their knees" and come out fighting for the elections on Nov. 5.
In his first major political address of the legislative campaign, Mr.
Florio told Democrats at a fund-raising dinner on Tuesday night in Mercer County, "Democrats are javelin throwers, not javelin catchers," and urged them to take the offensive.


Hospitals and Hispanic Support: Dinkins's Ailing Coalition
The forced resignation of Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo as head of New York City's hospital system has left Mayor David N. Dinkins confronting not only a managerial mess but also another rupture with Hispanic voters, one of the shakiest components of his electoral coalition.
Just as Dr.
Carrillo was picked to head the Health and Hopsitals Corporation in part to ease complaints that Mr.
Dinkins had not named enough Hispanic appointees to high-ranking posts, so his unhappy departure aggravates stresses between City Hall and Hispanic groups that viewed their support as crucial to Mr.
Dinkins's mayoral victory, but have been disappointed since.


A Night's Sleep in a Wall
Murphy Bed Company
65 Mall Drive, Commack, N.Y. 11725; (516) 543-0234.
"It's not the usual pullout couch," said Clark Murphy, president of the Murphy Bed Company.
Mr.
Murphy, of course, was discussing the Murphy bed, the steel-frame pull-down wall-mounted bed invented in 1900 by his grandfather, William L. Murphy, and still manufactured, in an updated version, by the family company.


Legislator Urges R.T.C. to End Big Property Sale
The chairman of a Congressional subcommittee investigating the Bush Administration's showcase program to bundle and sell billions of dollars in properties from failed savings and loan associations asked the Government today to consider stopping the first of the program's deals.
The deal should be terminated, Representative Frank Annunzio, Democrat of Illinois, contended, because of questionable financial incentives being offered to the acquirers, Patriot American Investors L.P., a group of Canadian and American investors.
He also cited an inquiry by the Federal Bureau of Investigation into part of the transaction.
Widespread Criticism
Mr.
Annunzio's subcommittee oversees the Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency that manages the sales, but the Patriot deal has been criticized by Democratic and Republican members of the panel.
In addition, the subcommittee's inquiry into Patriot is being conducted by Republican and Democratic staff members.


Calendar: Architecture, Gardens and Art
Line and Form
Urban Center Galleries of the Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 935-3960.
A show of 60 works from an international competition by the American Society of Architectural Perspectivists, starts tomorrow and runs through Dec. 4.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday through Saturday (closed Thursday).
Free.


In Joust in the South, Harper Takes the Fall
It is supposed to be a game of inches, not winces.
It is supposed to be a game dominated by plays far from the plate, as opposed to plays dissected within inches of it.
Yet, Game 4 of the World Series was made memorable for the plays that flapped up dust in and around home plate through the night.
Brian Harper, both hero and tragic loser, figured in three of them.
That he won all but one was no solace to the Minnesota catcher or his team, however.


Woman Is Found Slain 1 Day After Husband's Body Found
An 18-year-old woman was found strangled in her ransacked apartment on Tuesday, a day after her husband's charred body was found in a Yonkers park, the police said yesterday.
The police said they were trying to determine whether the killings were linked.
The woman's two-month-old baby was found unharmed in the Upper Manhattan home.


Sports of The Times; The Cause Of a Classic:
FOR all the theatrics of Mark Lemke's ninth-inning triple and game-winning dash to the plate that gave the Braves a 3-2 victory last night over the Twins and squared the World Series at two games each, Tuesday night's third game deserves to be remembered as the best managerial marionette show in World Series history.
When the Braves finally won, 5-4, on Lemke's single off Rick Aguilera in the 12th inning at 12:42 A.M. after 4 hours 4 minutes, Tom Kelly of the Twins had pulled the strings on a record 23 players, including eight pinch-hitters and seven pitchers.
With the Braves' puppeteer, Bobby Cox, using 19 players, the box score had a record total of 42 names.


From the Rails, the Road and the Sea
INTEREST in table-top versions of ships, boats and trains seems to be revving up.
Gregg Dietrich, whose North Star Galleries opened last month in Manhattan, is expanding the genre.
Mr.
Dietrich, a former yacht broker, has model trains, airplanes, automobiles, even stagecoaches, in his spacious gallery.


U.N. Backs Plan to Destroy Iraqi Arms Plants
The United Nations Security Council today endorsed a plan for destroying all plants and equipment in Iraq associated with the Baghdad Government's nuclear, chemical and biological weapons programs.
The plan, presented by Rolf Ekeus, head of the special United Nations commission charged with removing Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, provides for destroying all weapons and associated material prohibited under the cease-fire agreement earlier this year, as well as the plants and equipment used in their manufacture or preparation.


Americans Hail Europe's Trade Bloc Plans
American executives, in a series of interviews today, applauded the agreement between the 12-nation European Community countries and the 7-nation European Free Trade Association to create a barrier-free market of 380 million people in Western Europe, saying it would reduce the cost of doing business in Europe and spur the Continent's economic growth.
For Becton Dickinson, the medical supplies company, the accord means that new products it introduces in Europe would have to satisfy one harmonized set of standards, rather than many sets.


Pirates Put Leyland Under Cone of Silence
The Pittsburgh Pirates' chairman, DOUGLAS DANFORTH, won't give another team permission to interview Manager JIM LEYLAND and may soon offer him another contract extension.
The Chicago White Sox are seeking a replacement for Manager JEFF TORBORG and General Manager RON SCHUELER acknowledged he would be interested in talking to Leyland.
Pirates General Manager LARRY DOUGHTY said last weekend he would give the White Sox permission to talk to Leyland.


Music Notes; A New Composer in Residence And More Secure Series at the Y
There has been much speculation lately about the performing arts division at the 92d Street Y, which underwent an administrative shakeup during the summer and is to become the Tisch Center for the Arts in December.
Now, in a move that should reassure the music world that the Y's various concert series are not about to be jettisoned, the Upper East Side institution has appointed David Diamond to a three-year term as composer in residence, beginning this season.
Among the requirements of Mr.
Diamond's new post is that he write a new work for the Y's resident orchestra, the New York Chamber Symphony, to perform during the 1993-94 season.
So, despite reports earlier this season that the orchestra's future was in doubt, it now seems firmly in place for the next three years.


Baghdad Journal; Who's Acting Tough Now? Why, Saddam Hussein.
After pinning several pounds of medals and hanging multiple sashes and honorary swords from the "mother of battles" on his top lieutenants and political cronies on Monday night, President Saddam Hussein told a nationwide television audience that Iraq was like the woman who chose to be killed rather than submit to rape.
Iraq's honor, Mr.
Hussein said, is more important than surrendering to the dictates of the allied coalition, which has forced Iraq to submit to one ultimatum after another since Iraqi forces were driven from Kuwait last winter.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
IT WAS the phone bill that tipped off his parents.
The charge for one morning's calls amounted to $622, all made to a telephone sex line by their 14-year-old son and three of his friends.
"I'd never had anybody talk to me like some of these girls would," said the boy, who lives in a suburb of Minneapolis and insisted that his name not be used.
"It's probably something I won't ever hear again."


Tax-Free Yields Off; Taxable Funds Flat
Yields on tax-exempt money market funds moved down again in the week that ended yesterday, but yields on taxable funds were essentially unchanged, according to IBC/Donoghue's, which monitors the funds and issues The Money Fund Report.
Walter S. Frank, chief economist for IBC/Donoghue's, reported that total assets of the tax-exempt funds declined by $108 million, to $89.6 billion, in the week.
The average days to maturity of holdings in the tax-exempt portfolios rose by one day, to 61 days.


Cutting Costs Helps Goodyear Post $59.1 Million Net Gain
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company said yesterday that because of lower raw-material costs and a sweeping restructuring, it earned $59.1 million, or $1.01 a share, in the third quarter.
The company, which for several quarters has reeled from low demand and sagging prices, reported a net loss of $61.4 million in the comparable period last year.
The quarterly results, the strongest since the third quarter of 1989, came in the face of continued low demand from the automobile industry and a 2.1 percent decline in sales.
It also reflected the restructuring Goodyear has undergone in the last two years.
The company has slashed production capacity, furloughed thousands of employees and sold assets unrelated to tire production.


This Time, a Real Boss for City Hospitals
The resignation of J. Emilio Carrillo as head of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation presents Mayor David Dinkins with two challenges.
The first is to arrange for effective temporary stewardship.
The second, and more important, is to find a credible full-time manager for a major agency painfully squeezed in the city's budget bind and tarnished by alarming instances of inept care at municipal hospitals.
The Hospitals Corporation is by far the largest public hospital system in the country, encompassing 45,000 employees and a $2.9 billion budget.
It is responsible for 11 acute-care hospitals, 5 nursing homes and 6 neighborhood family care centers.


Essay; Pepys Of the Future
A young English bureaucrat named Samuel Pepys, pronounced "peeps," kept a detailed, chatty diary for the decade of the 1660's; historians came to treat it as the most invaluable window on that world of plagues and fires.
By employing the old and rewarding device of keeping a journal, and by mixing it with the new world of CD-ROM, people today have the chance to become the Pepyses of the future.
Not only that, the amazing combo of human brain and technical brainchild makes it possible to build a personal life story to enrich and enliven an extended old age.


Iraqi Superguns Recall Era of Big Bertha
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 9 news article on a planned U.N. resolution to impose new arms curbs on Iraq refers to the destruction of Iraq's two "superguns" and notes the smaller one had a range of 125 to 160 miles, "more than twice the 75-mile range of Big Bertha, the huge cannon Germany used to shell Paris in World War I."
The 1969 Encyclopaedia Britannica contains a short article explaining that "the original Big Berthas were 42-cm. howitzers produced at the Skoda works in Austria-Hungary and used by the Germans in battering the forts at Liege and Namur, Belgium, in 1914. It was assumed this artillery originated from the Krupp works in Germany -- hence the nickname, after Frau Bertha von Bohlen, head of the Krupp family.


North Korea Adds Barriers to A-Plant Inspections
North Korea, which has stirred widespread fears that it is close to being able to make nuclear bombs, presented a series of tough new conditions today for allowing international inspection of its nuclear installations.
The new demands were announced five days after Bush Administration officials made public the United States' intention to withdraw all nuclear weapons based in South Korea, satisfying the principal North Korean condition for permitting outside nuclear inspections.
But the new conditions announced today, including a demand that South Korea renounce the protection of any kind of American nuclear weapons, appeared to dampen the chances of progress in easing nuclear tensions on the Korean Peninsula.


Brooklyn Gang: A Mythology of Violence
Under the cloak of darkness, when the swish of traffic abates and the metal store gates clank down, they appear.
It is their practice to roam in packs of 10 to 20, though their ranks are larger.
Their beverage of preference is a king-size bottle of beer.
If they're armed, the weapons are apt to be canes and golf clubs.
On the streets they frequent, their reputation is huge.
Some of the rowdier members will tell frightening tales of their prodigious capacity for menace.


Henry M. Schachte, 78, Is Dead; Ex-Head of J. Walter Thompson
Henry M. Schachte, a former president and chairman of the executive committee of J. Walter Thompson, the advertising agency, died on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Medical Center in Bridgeport, Conn.
He was 78 years old and lived in Sherman, Conn.
He died after a series of strokes, his daughter Susan Swift said.


Home Video
Another 'Wind'
With "Scarlett," Alexandra Ripley's sequel to "Gone With the Wind," on top of fiction best-seller lists and pulling the original novel along with it, one wonders what happened to the video of "Gone With the Wind," most recently heard from in 1989, the 50th anniversary of the film's release.
Though that particular edition, which came with a booklet describing how the movie was made, has been withdrawn from the market, the same remastered tape is available for $89.98.
"It always does well," said George Feltenstein, a vice president of MGM/UA, the distributor.
"This year it has exploded."


Lawyer Seeks to Screen Gay Jurors in '90 Murder
A defense lawyer in a Queens murder case said yesterday that he would seek to question prospective jurors about their sexual orientation, after the judge in the case said the prosecution would be allowed to introduce evidence that the victim was gay.
Prosecutors, who say the victim, Julio Rivera, a gay man, was killed during a "gay-bashing" spree by the two defendants and a third man, indicated they would seek to block such questions.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Curtis Stigers  The Bottom Line
Curtis Stigers, a New York-based singer, songwriter and saxophonist, writes brawling, middle-of-the-road ballads that describe messy emotions with a blunt, gawky directness.
His song "Sleeping With the Lights On" compares unhappy memories of a soured romance to Bela Lugosi and Boris Karloff characters who wake him up in the middle of the night with "sharp teeth and bad breath whispering your name." His lyric for "The Man You're Gonna Fall in Love With" presents a self-flagellating fantasy of a romantic rival so intimidating that the singer confesses, "I know I'll never measure up to half the man he'll be for you."


A Country Cupboard, Flat on the Wall
IT'S the stuff of the archetypal country kitchen: a Toby jug, a cheese dish, a spatter-ware pitcher, an oversize tea cup and saucer.
Yet these are not the fruits of an afternoon in the flea market, but designs from a wallpaper border that mimicks a shelf in an English cottage.
The Country Crockery pattern, above, comes in three hues, the Staffordshire pattern in five.
The borders were designed by Amanda DePew and are available at Brunschwig &amp; Fils, a to-the-trade fabric and wallpaper company in Manhattan.


Navy Brings Drug Charges Against Dozens in Capital
The Navy has brought drug charges against three dozen enlisted men, including members of a ceremonial unit that sees duty at the White House, the Navy officials said tonight.
Lieut.
Comdr.
William W. Clyde, a spokesman for the National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md., said 11 hospital corpsmen had been court-martialed in recent months.
About a dozen other enlisted men have received nonjudicial punishments, he said, confirming a report in Thursday's issue of The Washington Post.


A Haircut or Massage In a Salonlike Salon
THE era of the hair salon as a working space is giving way to the era of the salon as salon, an extension of the living room.
The Stephen Knoll Salon, which opened last month at 625 Madison Avenue (59th Street), was designed to look, according to its designer, Peter Leonard, like an Upper East Side residence.
Or "sort of as if Stephen's prestigious clients were visiting him in his own home," said Mr.
Leonard, a London furniture and interior designer.


Paul Taylor Opens With a Look at Love and War in the 1940's


Violent Drug Gang Smashed, Police Say
A violent drug gang that terrorized a Washington Heights block with gun battles and threatened anyone who tried to end its reign has been smashed, law-enforcement officials announced yesterday.
The gang had killed a 66-year-old man who tried to stop them from dealing drugs from the building where he lived, the authorities said.
It also shot rival drug dealers and sent death threats to a police officer who was investigating them, they said.
The group is known as the Jheri-Kurl Gang, the police said -- named after its trademark hair-style characterized by tight curls. 7-Month Investigation
Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, said yesterday that 23 gang members had been indicted and arrested after a seven-month investigation, and that their $5.2 million-a-year drug operation had been destroyed.
He added that his office would seek to seize $11.4 million in gang assets, including cars, buildings and bank accounts.


Scouting the Series for Marketing Winners
JUST as baseball teams scout the sandlots of America in search of players who can throw a slider or steal bases, the advertisers of America scout the World Series in search of players who can throw a slogan or steal scenes.
In their never-ending quest for an athletic face that is both likable and believable, advertisers consider the World Series one of the two best places to prospect (the other being the Super Bowl).
This year, advertising and sports marketing executives say, the Atlanta Braves and the Minnesota Twins offer perhaps the most potential for nascent pitchmen since the Series-winning New York Yankees of 1977-78.


Wells Fargo Said to Seek Loan Sale
Apparently seeking to shed some of its riskier loans, Wells Fargo &amp; Company is said to be exploring the sale of $400 million of loans it made for various leveraged buyouts during the 1980's.
Mary Essary, a Wells Fargo spokeswoman in San Francisco, said the bank had no comment on the reports.
But one potential buyer who insisted on anonymity said he had been approached about the loan package by three different investment banks -- Goldman, Sachs; First Boston, and Bear, Stearns -- none of which had a firm assignment from the bank.


Bahr Still Uncertain for Redskins
Matt Bahr, the Giants' kicker, worked out today in pain from a strained adductor muscle in the right thigh.
He will take part in Thursday's practice, too, but there was no indication whether he could kick Sunday night against the Washington Redskins.
Coach Ray Handley listed Bahr as probable, which meant he gave him a 75 percent chance to play.
The Giants have a roster vacancy, and if Bahr cannot kick, Coach Ray Handley said he had a free-agent kicker in mind.


Sears Earnings Off 16.1% in Third Quarter
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said yesterday that third-quarter profits fell 16.1 percent, as a special charge against earnings, combined with weak results from the company's struggling retail operations, offset a strong performance by the the Dean Witter financial unit.
Profits for the third quarter were $150.3 million, compared with $179.2 million for the corresponding period last year.
The results were hurt by the company's setting aside $82.9 million to pay deferred taxes owed by the Allstate insurance group.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.12
5.18
7.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.04
5.05
7.23
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.10
5.11
7.18
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.35
7.35
8.49
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.07
8.09
8.77
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.10
9.18
9.89
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.89
6.89
7.75
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Winfield and Blyleven Dropped by Angels
Two of the game's veterans -- outfielder DAVE WINFIELD and pitcher BERT BLYLEVEN, both over 40 -- are being let go by the California Angels, who said yesterday that they would not pick up the 1992 options on the contracts of the pair, clearing the way for them to become free agents.
Winfield hit 28 homers and drove in 86 runs this season, hitting .262 while playing in 150 games.
He has 406 career home runs.
Blyleven, a right-hander, spent the season on the disabled list after having shoulder surgery on April 16.
He has 279 major league victories. . . .
The Los Angeles Dodgers have exercised the option to extend the contract of left-hander BOB OJEDA through the 1992 season.
Ojeda was 12-9 with a 3.18 earned run average in 31 starts for the Dodgers this season after being acquired from the Mets in the trade for HUBIE BROOKS.(AP)


In the Nation; Time for Action
Despite strong environmental warnings and intense international pressures, the Bush Administration has continued to advocate more research rather than immediate action to counter such threats as ozone depletion and global warming.
Two new developments put this business-as-usual approach in scary perspective:
*
A United Nations scientific panel reported that new data had disclosed significant and previously undiscovered depletion of the ozone layer over the United States and Europe
in summer
, when the sun's ultraviolet rays pose the greatest hazard; therefore, the incidence of skin cancers and the damage to crops will be much greater than previously predicted.
*
Richard Lindzen of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a respected scientific critic of global warming theories, told a group of scientists in Washington that he had "withdrawn" the complex hypothesis that was an important element of his skepticism.


Review/Dance; Not Ornery Enough to Be Dangerous
Susan Hefner surely had two meanings of "humor" in mind when she choreographed "Dangerous Humours": humor as a sense of comedy and as a person's temperament.
The seven-part suite that Susan Hefner and Dancers presented on Sunday night as part of the Events series at St.
Mark's Church did indeed have moments of wit and temperament.
But the choreography needed to be much more ornery for the work to deserve the word "dangerous" in its title.
Ms.
Hefner was most persuasive when she was creating on a small scale.
In a solo for herself called, like the suite itself, "Dangerous Humours," she tried to preserve decorum.
Yet because her body kept bursting into wiggles, the dance could be interpreted as a comic sketch of someone who, without warning, is attacked by such embarrassments as hiccups or stomach rumbles.


For Cyclists and Skaters, A Slowdown in the Park
How fast is 15 miles an hour?
On foot, it's a four-minute mile.
But to cyclists and roller-skaters in Central Park, it's not very fast -- a snail's pace, in fact.
It is now, however, the law -- and plenty fast enough in the mind of the Parks Department, which has posted a 15-mile-an-hour speed limit for cyclists and skaters as a response to increasing complaints from walkers and joggers who feel imperiled.
Choosing the Upper Limit
To select the speed, said Betsy Gotbaum, the Parks Commissioner, "We did a lot of testing, riding bicyles alongside our cars, seeing how fast you could go and then stop without killing someone. It's not scientific, but it's the best way we have."


Fight Crime, Not Liberty
Members of Congress call it, as they did its annual predecessors, a "crime bill." In fact it's a politics bill, meant to make Congress look tough on crime.
This lumpy grab-bag of provisions, some for liberals and some for conservatives, constitutes a brutally bad bargain -- unless the House and Senate can now remedy the recklessness as they reconcile their differences.
There are some welcome, constructive proposals in this legislation, notably one to establish a Police Corps that could help cities across the country.
But the negative side of the scale plunges down under the weight of three drastic assaults on individual liberty.


Cuomo Won't Talk Politics, for a Few Minutes
There was Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday, standing before a bank of television cameras on a Penn Station concourse, begging the assembled reporters for "one line, two lines, one picture in the newspapers tomorrow" to promote the subject of his news conference -- the plan to renovate the grimy terminal.
But minutes later, after Mr.
Cuomo had slopped some ceremonial cement onto a concrete block, the Governor willingly answered questions from a throng of reporters about his 1992 Presidential ambitions -- thereby quickly diminishing the chances that the Penn Station renovation would win the competition for headlines.


Review/Television; Women Who Have Made Viewers Giggle and Roar
On NBC at 9:30 tonight, "Funny Women of Television" could be just another one of those excursions into broadcasting's past via artful clip collages.
But it's not.
The difference this time can be traced to the 90-minute show's subtitle: "A Museum of Television and Radio Tribute." The standard name dropping is spiked with a sense of perspective about television itself, with an awareness of the medium's ability over decades to absorb and reflect major social and cultural changes.
And that can happen even in seemingly dizzy sitcoms.
Taped before a formally dressed audience in a Los Angeles theater, the proceedings open with Mary Tyler Moore, still clearly capable of turning the world on with a smile, describing the transition from the virtual invisibility of radio, where stars were usually tied to a single character, to the glaringly public showcases of television.
Some -- Gracie Allen, Gertrude Berg -- made the leap successfully.
Many of the newer performers, though, became "women of many faces": Imogene Coca, Carol Burnett, Gilda Radner, Lily Tomlin, Tracey Ullman.
Boundaries were expanded, if not demolished.


Failed Harlem Bank Auctions Off Its Assets


Review/Dance; Ted Shawn's Legacy: Men Tough and Tender
Ted Shawn, who would have been 100 years old on Monday, made remarkable contributions to American dance.
Not the least of them was the way he campaigned to have dance accepted as a respectable career for men.
His efforts were honored at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night when the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival presented "Men Dancers: The Ted Shawn Legacy," a program of old and new dances for men directed by Robby Barnett, with Norton Owen as artistic adviser.
They proved well worth seeing for their historical interest and contemporary relevance.


CHRONICLE
The name of Lieut.
Gen.
CALVIN A. H. WALLER, the ground forces commander in the Persian Gulf war, was overshadowed by those of Gen.
H.
NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF and Gen.
COLIN L. POWELL, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
But he had his day yesterday at a panoply of ceremonies and honors at the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum.
The highlight of the day, which was sponsored by the Congress of Racial Equality, came when some 800 schoolchildren boarded.
"We decided to bring General Waller here because here is a genuine American hero who happens to be black," said ROY INNIS, the national chairman of CORE.


Man Seized With 34 Guns Reported as Threat to Bush
A man who was seized with an arsenal of automatic weapons and 27,000 rounds of ammunition last weekend is being investigated by the Secret Service because of his reported threats to assassinate President Bush.
The 45-year-old suspect, Thomas Ward, was arrested by Ventura County sheriff's deputies on Sunday after they found 34 firearms, along with the thousands of rounds of ammunition, inside his apartment in this town 60 miles north of Los Angeles.
Among the guns were 12 automatic weapons, including an Uzi submachine gun and several AK-47 assault rifles.


Review/Dance; Battlefield of Squabbling, Pelting and Scampering
One never knows what to expect from the choreographic showcase programs that Movement Research is presenting this fall at the Judson Memorial Church.
Dancers made the church a battlefield on Monday night.
And some of them found it fun to do so.
Clarinda Mac Low and Rebecca Moore obviously enjoyed squabbling in their collaboratively devised "Sargasso," a boisterous and messy piece in which they pelted each other with telephone directories and littered the stage with pages ripped from these books.
When they weren't using the directories as weapons, they snarled like beasts and hopped and scampered like imps and gnomes.
They had such a wonderful time being bad that their behavior reminded dancegoers that within every adult may live a naughty child for whom destruction is as exhilarating as creation.


Inquiry Sought on Ex-Bush Aide
A Congressman who has been investigating the Bank of Credit and Commerce International asked President Bush today for an inquiry into a former White House aide's $600,000 contract to serve as a lawyer for a former Saudi intelligence official with ties to the bank.
The lawmaker, Representative Charles E. Schumer, a Brooklyn Democrat who heads the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Criminal Justice, cited the relationship between Edward M. Rogers Jr., who was a close aide to John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff, and Sheik Kamal Adham.
Mr.
Schumer added that Sheik Kamal was under scrutiny by the Federal authorities in connection with B.C.C.I.'s control of First American Bankshares.


Top Serb Leaders Back Proposal To Form Separate Yugoslav State
As fighting raged around the Croatian cities of Dubrovnik and Vukovar, top Serb government, military and civilian leaders meeting in Belgrade today gave complete support for a plan to create a rump Yugoslav state.
The meeting marked the beginning of a Serb campaign to create a nation that will amount to a greater Serbia and inherit the legitimacy of the now-defunct Yugoslav federation and control over whatever assets it possesses.


Hospital Chain In Stock Drop
The stock of Community Psychiatric Centers, a chain of 51 hospitals based in Laguna Beach, Calif., dropped $1.50 a share yesterday and closed at $12.875 as more than 1.4 million shares changed hands.
The stock of the troubled company had traded at $40 in late spring and at $24 late last month.
The New York Stock Exchange said the company declined to issue a statement explaining the activity in the stock.


Treasury Securities Move Up
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher and interest rates fell slightly in moderately active trading yesterday, helped by a set of reports reaffirming the notion that economic activity remains stagnant and a successful auction of new two-year notes.
The reports included auto sales, which remained weak; the sense from regional Federal Reserve Banks that economic conditions across the country were "weak or growing slowly" in September and early October, and a poll of the nation's home builders, which showed that customer traffic has receded to levels not seen since January.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Krickstein Upsets Stich  Aaron Krickstein made 72 percent of his first serves yesterday to upset the Wimbledon champion, Michael Stich of Germany, 6-7, 7-6, 6-0, in the second round of the Stockholm Open.
In other matches, David Engel, a Swedish qualifier ranked 165th on the Association of Tennis Professionals computer, upset 10th-seeded David Wheaton, 4-6, 6-4, 7-6; Brad Gilbert beat Patrick McEnroe, 6-2, 6-2, and Pete Sampras, seeded seventh, outlasted Thomas Hogstedt of Sweden, 7-6, 6-7, 6-3.
Ivan Lendl also advanced by beating Todd Woodbridge of Australia, 7-5, 6-2. (AP) Graf Wins in Two Sets: Top-seeded Steffi Graf of Germany defeated Andrea Strnadova of Czechoslovakia, 6-2, 6-3, yesterday to advance to the quarterfinals of the women's indoor tournament in Brighton, England.
The tournament, rescheduled for this week when its April 4-7 dates were rained out, was halted for the day by lightning midway through the first round with about two-thirds of the 156-man field still on the course. (AP)


Scrolls' First Editors Performed Unselfishly
To the Editor:
During the present controversy concerning the Dead Sea Scrolls, little or nothing has been written about the contributions made by the self-effacing editors of the first documents.
The late Prof.
Millar Burrows of Yale with his two associates, William Brownlee and John Trevor, and the late Prof.
Eliezer Sukenik of the Hebrew University, Jerusalem, without any thought of personal aggrandizement, published the photographs together with their own tentative transcriptions on the opposite page early and inexpensively.
They made it possible for scholars to look at the photographs and make up their own minds about the readings.
They did not, as have the subsequent editors, attempt to impose through translations and notes their own views of what the texts mean.
Those of us who came early to study of the scrolls will always revere the memories of true scholars who respected their colleagues, known and unknown.
I hope that younger scholars will turn their backs on those subsequent editions and work from the photographs as did those of us who dealt with the first scrolls.
They ought not waste their time correcting the many mistakes of the editors but move ahead with their own understandings and interpretations.
LU H. SILBERMAN  Tucson, Ariz., Oct. 1, 1991 The writer is Hillel Professor Emeritus of Jewish Literature, Vanderbilt University.


Times Mirror Net Falls 2%; Knight-Ridder Drops 22.7%
The Times Mirror Company said yesterday that third-quarter earnings fell 2 percent and would have declined more except for a gain on the sale of a cable system.
Knight-Ridder Inc. also reported an earnings decline, 22.7 percent.
The reports were the latest in series of depressed earnings from the media industry, where advertising demand has sagged with the economy.


Court Delays Call for Incentive to Settle
To the Editor:
Each day brings new announcements that New York court personnel are being fired and civil trial parts are being shut down to keep criminal trial parts open.
Even before the current round of budget cuts, waits of four to five years for a civil trial were not uncommon.
The waiting period threatens to expand to Dickensian lengths.
Insurance carriers have little incentive to settle cases for reasonable amounts within a reasonable period of time when the day of judgment is far off.
However, if interest were calculated during the period from the commencement of suit to the day of verdict, the incentive to settle would increase.
At present, prejudgment interest applies only in contract disputes and in wrongful-death suits.
A catastrophically injured plaintiff suffers damage starting the day of the injury.
Interest should run from that day.
BRUCE S. GINSBERG  New York, Oct. 10, 1991 The writer is a lawyer.


Executive of Miles Inc. Named Oncor President
Oncor Inc., a manufacturer of DNA probes for detecting cancer and genetic diseases, yesterday named George R. Evanega president and chief operating officer, effective Nov. 1.
Oncor is based in Gaithersburg, Md.
As president, Mr.
Evanega succeeds Stephen Turner, who will continue as chairman and chief executive officer.
Mr.
Evanega, who is 55, comes to Oncor from Miles Inc., a pharmaceuticals company, where he had been vice president and chief administrative officer and a member of the board.


U.S. Agents to Join Carolina Safety Inspectors
More than a month after 25 people died in a fire at a North Carolina chicken processing plant, the Department of Labor said today that it would send Federal inspectors to augment beleaguered state inspectors in enforcing workplace safety laws in the state.
At a news conference in Washington, Labor Secretary Lynn Martin said 14 Federal inspectors would supplement the state's procedures for investigating and responding to complaints.


George L. Bowen; Obstetrician, 95
Dr.
George L. Bowen, a New York obstetrician and gynecologist and a founding trustee of Pace University, died last Thursday at his home in Bluebell, Pa., where he had retired in 1985.
A former resident of Huntington, L.I., he was 95 years old.
He died of heart failure, according to a university spokesman.


Coslet Stands By His Trial Testimony
Jets Coach Bruce Coslet spent almost two more hours on the witness stand this morning and reiterated his earlier testimony about his reasons for sending a letter to Michael Blatt, which he has characterized as a "cheer-up note," on Feb. 15, 1989.
Blatt, a former sports agent and developer from Stockton, Calif., is charged with arranging the murder of his former business partner, Laurence Carnegie, in late February 1989.
The prosecution contends that Blatt paid two men to kill Carnegie in the belief that Carnegie had ruined his chances to become general manager of the Seattle Seahawks, a job he had held for three weeks on an interim basis.


CHRONICLE
As if they did not already have enough on their minds, WARREN E. BUFFET, the chairman of the beleagured Salomon Brothers, and THOMAS S. MURPHY, the chairman of Capital Cities/ABC Inc., stepped into new roles this week, enacting parts on the ABC soap opera "All My Children."
Playing themselves in a four-minute sequence for broadcast Nov. 18, they advise the well-known vixen Erica Kane on how to run her new cosmetics business.
In the scene, Erica, played by SUSAN LUCCI, asks Mr.
Buffet, who took over Salomon after a scandal over purchases of treasury notes erupted in August, if he might be interested in buying her company.
"I think I have all the irons in the fire that I can handle," he responds.


Dow Gains 1.12 Points, To 3,040.92
Stocks closed mixed yesterday but with a slight negative bias.
Blue chips mounted an afternoon rally to close about a point above their opening, and smaller issues closed just under.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 1.12, at 3,040.92, after being up as much as 11 points during a hectic morning.


Maxwell Unit Cancels Plan
A company controlled by Robert Maxwell, the British publisher, said yesterday that it had changed its plans and would not redeem a preferred stock issue that investors had refused to buy.
Official Airline Guides, a subsidiary of Maxwell Communication, had said last month that it would redeem the $75 million issue on Nov. 8.
But it said yesterday that it had been unable to arrange financing.


Driving in Brooklyn? Expect the Worst
Some of the most congested parts of Brooklyn can expect "nightmarish traffic" virtually until the end of the century, transportation officials said yesterday, as reconstruction continues on the Brooklyn Bridge and work has begun on the Gowanus Expressway.
A new chapter in the long, bad dream starts at noon tomorrow -- and will last until 6 A.M.
Monday -- as all Manhattan-bound lanes of the stately, 108-year-old suspension bridge are closed so new expansion joints can be fitted into the roadway.


Anderson and Nets Nearing a Deal
There is no contract agreement between Kenny Anderson and the New Jersey Nets, but there is, finally, anticipation on both sides.
Chances are the Nets will soon, if not today, sign their No. 1 draft pick.
In addition, Nets vice president Willis Reed acknowledged that he was ready to move point guard Tate George to help create additional salary cap space for Anderson.


Howard J. Crosby Jr., A Rutgers Dean, 72
Howard J. Crosby Jr., a retired dean of students at Rutgers University, died Tuesday at St.
Peter's Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.
He was 72 years old and lived in New Brunswick.
He died of heart disease, his family said.


Eastern Orthodox Prelates Name Ecumenical Patriarch
Metropolitan Bartholomew of Chalcedon, a 51-year-old veteran of international religious affairs, has been elected Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, spiritual leader for the world's nearly 200 million Eastern Orthodox Christians.
The new leader, who will be known as Patriarch Bartholomew I, was chosen unanimously on Tuesday by the Holy Synod, 15 prelates who head Turkish dioceses or serve the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople.
For some years he has been chief adviser and administrator for Patriarch Dimitrios I, who died Oct. 2 at the age of 77.


Cause for Alarm?; The Peace Treaty Brings the Khmer Rouge Into Government, and That Frightens Many
The Khmer Rouge, which was responsible for the deaths of more than one million Cambodians in its genocidal four-year reign in the 1970's, is granted a degree of power and legitimacy under the United Nations peace treaty signed today that many diplomats, and certainly many Cambodians, find frightening.
The peace treaty, signed in Paris by 19 countries, including the United States, allows the Khmer Rouge to share power in a coalition government that is scheduled to convene next month in Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital.


Baby Fed Tainted Food Dies, but Cause Is Unclear
The 5-month-old girl who was hospitalized after being fed from an apparently contaminated jar of baby food last week died yesterday, but the cause of her death has not been determined, officials said.
"The immediate cause of death was complications from multi-organ failure," said Myrna A. Manners, a spokeswoman for New York Hospital, where the girl, Linda Lin, had been in critical condition since last Wednesday.
"But we could not determine, despite a wide battery of tests, the nature or underlying cause of her illness."


'Devastated' Jackson Loses Home to Fire
REGGIE JACKSON's home was among those lost in the huge fire that ravaged the Oakland, Calif., area on Sunday.
Again.
"I was devastated, absolutely devastated," Jackson said.
"I was in the process of getting everything gathered for a move. My baseball memorabilia, my art collection, my gun collection, my bronze collection."


Timothy Cook, 38, Ex-Civil Rights Aide Who Set Off Storm
Timothy M. Cook, a lawyer who was executive director of the Washington-based National Disability Action Center and who formerly served a stormy tenure with the Justice Department's civil rights division, died Tuesday at Georgetown University Hospital.
He was 38 years old and lived in Washington.
His family said the cause of death was a cerebral hemorrhage.


The High Price of Peace in Cambodia
Even in real life, horror stories can have sequels.
There's a worrisome possibility that one entitled The Return of the Khmer Rouge might now be about to unfold in Cambodia.
The Cambodian peace treaty signed yesterday in Paris provides for a cease-fire, demobilization, repatriation of refugees and elections for a new democratic government -- all under international supervision.
But it also allows Pol Pot's gang of murderers to return to Phnom Penh in what is supposed to be a limited role.


Market Place; Investors Take a Wild Ride With New Anergen Issue
There are few stocks harder to evaluate than initial public offerings of biotechnology companies.
Nowhere is that clearer than in the case of Anergen Inc.
That small company went public to yawns earlier this month.
The day after the offering, its shares closed at $7.875 each, just under the offering price of $8.


Review/Theater; Author and Actor Converge To Resolve Old Family Horror
If you can get past the forbidding title, "Beggars in the House of Plenty," and the patches of overwrought writing that occasionally echo it, you will find that the new play at the Manhattan Theater Club Stage 2 crackles with the energy of artists who are going places.
The artists in question are the playwright, John Patrick Shanley, and his principal actor, Loren Dean.
Their fleeting convergence in an intimate Off Broadway playhouse is a theatrical event not likely to recur anytime soon.
For the young Mr.
Dean, the destination may be stardom.
Though little known, he has revealed an impressive range in supporting roles on stage (as a teen-age hustler in Paul Zindel's "Amulets Against the Dragon Forces") and screen (an affluent high-school kid in "Say Anything").
Now, as show-biz fate would have it, he is coming to prominence by playing variations on the same leading role -- a Bronx boy confronting manhood -- not only in Mr.
Shanley's play but also in the movie version of "Billy Bathgate," which opens next week.
While these assignments temporarily restrict Mr.
Dean to a single persona, that of a sensitive, gap-toothed man-child buffeted by violent adults, they do allow him to charm audiences in a big way.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Capital Bank, Miami, a Capital Bancorp subsidiary, appointed Daniel M. Holtz president and chief operating officer. *
Dayton Hudson Corp., Minneapolis, announced that Stephen E. Watson, president, would assume the additional duties of chairman and chief executive of the department stores division.
Also, Marvin W. Goldstein was named president and chief operating officer of the division.


Other Kenny From Molloy Signs Pact
KENNY ANDERSON of the Nets hasn't done it yet, but the other point guard named Kenny who played high school ball at Archbishop Molloy in Queens before playing college ball in the Atlantic Coast Conference has ended his holdout.
The Houston Rockets have signed KENNY SMITHto a five-year contract worth $1.9 million a year.


Lotus in Venture With South Africa
The Lotus Development Corporation authorized two South African distributors to sell Lotus products immediately and pledged a million rands annually, or $350,000, to expand business development in disadvantaged communities.


Fed Finds Recovery Has Stalled
In a survey that tends to confirm that the recovery has lost momentum, the Federal Reserve reported today that retail sales have been virtually flat in recent weeks and that factory output, while still improving, is doing so at a slower pace.
Over all, according to the Fed's compilation of anecdotal evidence from its 12 regional banks, the nation's economy was "weak or growing slowly" in September and early October, with merchants "cautious" about the holiday season ahead.


Yankees to Name Showalter Manager at End of Series
Buck Showalter, the third-base coach who was dismissed by the Yankees 17 days ago, is expected to be named their manager soon after the World Series, a club official said yesterday.
Special approval is needed from the commissioner's office to make a managerial move during the Series in an effort not to detract from the coverage of the games, so the appointment of Showalter is being delayed.
But the owners of the club have told Michael that Showalter is the man they want to be hired as the successor to Stump Merrill, who was dismissed on Oct. 7.


A Cappuccino During the Spin Cycle
SINCE the place opened in August, it has drawn a cadre of regulars: neighborhood residents who come in to chat and to sip espresso or cappuccino.
This is not the latest outpost of Dean &amp; DeLuca but the Suds Cafe, a self-service laundry and coffee shop in Greenwich Village, which has enough students and other washerless and dryerless folk to give such an establishment a raison d'etre.


Former Hostage Sees His Daughter for the First Time


Giants Must Face Obstacles, But History Isn't One of Them
On paper, Sunday night's game here between the Washington Redskins and the Giants looks one-sided.
The Redskins, with a 7-0 record, seem to be the best team in the National Football League.
The Giants, with a 4-3 record, have struggled weekly and hardly look like the Super Bowl champions.


Net Flat at Sun Microsystems
Sun Microsystems Inc. reported first-quarter earnings today that were at the low end of its own expectations, as well as those of Wall Street analysts.
Sun reiterated that after years of nearly uninterrupted growth, it had reached a size where it was more sensitive to seasonal fluctuations in the computer industry.


Lance Recalls Introductions Of People in B.C.C.I. Case
Bert Lance, who was President Jimmy Carter's confidant and briefly his budget director, told Congress today how he had introduced many of those caught up in controversies surrounding the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
But Mr.
Lance, testifying on the matter for the first time under oath and in public, added little to what was already known about the activities of the international bank and the people involved with it.


Ancestor Artifacts That Glow
TO most people, a lamp is just a lamp.
To Kim MacConnel, a San Diego artist, a lamp is an artifact.
"My lamps are about displaying African ancestor artifacts in a different way," said Mr.
MacConnel, who spent time in Burkina Faso in West Africa two years ago and came back thinking about how to use some of the objects he collected there.


Out! SAFE! Busy Night For Umpire
Seldom has a World Series plate umpire had three more important tag plays than Terry Tata did tonight in the Braves' 3-2 victory, which was decided in the ninth inning on Mark Lemke's slide past Brian Harper, the Twins' catcher.
"Harper was up the line waiting for the throw from the outfield," Tata was saying now in the umpires' dressing room.
"He gets the ball and he comes around with his elbow, but he never tagged Lemke with the glove."


Female Cadet at Texas A&amp;M Says She Made Up Story of Her Beating
A female cadet at Texas A&amp;M University has recanted accusations of assault that led to the temporary disbanding of an elite unit in its Corps of Cadets and prompted a university investigation.
On Monday the woman told the university police that the incidents of assaults, beating and abduction that she had described never occurred.
She has not told university officials why she made up the accusations.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The deficit in the fund that protects bank deposits will more than triple next year, to $9.6 billion, according to new estimates by Federal regulators.
This reflects the F.D.I.C. view that an increasing number of large banks are likely to fail in 1992.  [ Page A1. ]


Science's Newest Riddle: How Old Is Sphinx
Unwrapping an enigma to find the riddle inside, geologists studying the Great Sphinx of Egypt have found patterns of weathering and erosion that they say show the imposing monument was created thousands of years earlier than is generally thought.
Dr.
Robert M. Schoch, a Boston University geologist who directed the research, reported yesterday that an ancient civilization carved the Sphinx between 5000 B.C. and 7000 B.C., long before the dynasties of pharaohs.
Archeologists have long contended that it was built by Pharaoh Khafre about 2500 B.C.


Tibor Halasi-Kun, 77, A Turkic Scholar, Dies
Dr.
Tibor Halasi-Kun, a leading scholar on Turkic culture and a co-founder of Columbia University's Department of Near and Middle-East Studies, died on Saturday at General Hospital in New Milford, Conn.
He was 77 years old and lived in New Milford.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


The Lowdown on Curtains From Lady Velcro Herself
SOME people analyze the mood of a culture through politics.
Some use economics.
But Lady Caroline Wrey, otherwise known as Lady Velcro, the Barbara Woodhouse of windows, has a foolproof barometer.
Curtains.
World War II spelled "the death knell" for curtains.
But the 1980's turned out to be a "very, very energetic" time for them, with windows smothered in pagoda reef pelmets, trumpets and goblets.
Ah, the swags and tails of history.


White House Attacks Compromise on Rights Bill
Fighting for support of its threatened veto of civil rights legislation, the Bush Administration and its backers today made a series of attacks against a compromise measure pushed by Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri.
The Office of Management and Budget issued a denunciation of the bill, which is intended to make it easier to sue and collect damages in job discrimination cases.
It repeatedly called the measure a "quota bill," saying it "would drive employers to adopt quotas and other unfair preferences."


Mr. Butts, Duke et al. 'Sell Out' For Charity
GARRY TRUDEAU, the creator of one of the most popular comic strips in the nation, has sold out.
It says so right on the cover of the catalogue: "The Great Doonesbury Sellout."
After 21 years of considering the ethics of licensing products, Mr.
Trudeau decided that some of his favorite charities could use the money.
With the help of Paul Hawken, a founder of the gardening mail-order company Smith &amp; Hawken, Mr.
Trudeau developed 35 items and wrote the copy for the catalogue, which came out this week -- on recycled paper, of course.


New Solar Cell Takes Cue From Plants' Use of Energy
A Swiss scientist and his American colleague have borrowed chemical principles from living plants to create a new kind of photovoltaic cell that they hope will help reinvigorate the dream of harvesting vast amounts of electrical energy from the sun.
The new solar cell, devised by Dr.
Michael Gratzel and his American colleague, Brian O'Regan, working at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne, is described in a paper being published today by the British journal Nature.


CHRONICLE
When friends asked SAMUEL J. LEFRAK what he intended to give his wife, ETHEL, for their 50th wedding anniversary last May, he said, "I think I will give her a park."
Well, that was a bit of hyperbole, but thanks to their friends, the LeFraks are adding flowers to Central Park and other parks around the city.
When they renewed their vows at the Metropolitan Club, they asked guests for contributions to the City Parks Foundation instead of gifts.


Carter Defends Use of the Chop
Former President Jimmy Carter defended the use of the tomahawk chop by Atlanta Braves fans despite objections from American Indians who call the chop is demeaning and stereotypical.


I.R.S. Ruling On Takeovers
A ruling by the Internal Revenue Service could make it tougher for companies to deduct the cost of fighting hostile takeovers.
The Wall Street Journal reported yesterday that the ruling, to be released this week, referred to an I.R.S. decision that the Houston Natural Gas Corporation could not automatically deduct the costs of a successful 1984 takevoer defense.


New Jersey Drivers Raise Insurance Rates
To the Editor:
The many discussions of the New Jersey auto insurance situation, including the letter from Gov.
Jim Florio ("New Jersey Makes Headway on High Auto Insurance Problem," Oct. 9) have not really taken into account the way cars are driven in that state.
As one who negotiates the length of the New Jersey Turnpike several times a month, I can testify to a broad disregard of speed laws and safe driving practices.


Game 3 Was One for All Seasons
The game, a marathon of managing, a relentless contest of concentration and a riotous emotional ride for the players and fans alike, lasted 12 innings, consumed 4 hours 4 minutes, required the services of 42 players and produced nearly half a dozen World Series records.
"I'm not saying I'm glad we lost," said Tom Kelly, the manager of the Twins, "but it was a hell of a game."


House Bank Privilege
To the Editor:
House Speaker Thomas S. Foley says the "House Bank" will be closed by year's end (news article, Oct. 4).
Why should it be?
The public and taxpayers cannot be hurt.
The only money in the bank was deposited by legislators.
The institution has existed for almost 100 years according to reports in your paper.
If the depositors do not object to check overdrafts by other legislator-depositors, who are we to complain?
They are giving each other what are really interest-free loans by permitting overdrafts on individual accounts.
I wish I were part of such a group.
JOHN H. DOWNS  St.
Johnsbury, Vt., Oct. 7, 1991


Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Wins Moussy Account
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Chicago, yesterday was awarded the advertising account for Moussy, a non-alcoholic brew imported from Switzerland by the Coors Brewing Company of Golden, Colo.
Foote, Cone is also the agency for Coors beer brands, including Coors Light and Coors Extra Gold.
Heidelberg &amp; Associates, New York, had handled the account before Coors acquired Moussy's North American distribution rights in April as part of efforts to expand its product lines.
Coors is also introducing its own non-alcoholic brew, Cutter, in a campaign created by Tatham/RSCG, Chicago.


Battle of Insurers vs. Therapists
The 26-year-old woman's moods swung violently.
She went from joy to anger to sadness to despair, and was treated four times at a hospital emergency room after slitting her wrists.
She was finally admitted to Sheppard Pratt, a psychiatric hospital in Baltimore.
But after two weeks, her insurance company questioned her need for hospitalization.
Panicked, she threw herself down a flight of stairs.
The insurance reviewer, upon hearing this, remarked, "Clearly the treatment isn't working," according to Dr.
Steven S. Sharfstein, the hospital director.
Against her doctor's wishes, the reviewer ruled that the hospital would have to discharge her immediately, Dr.
Sharfstein said.


Review/Fashion; Playing It Safe In Paris
Yves Saint Laurent brought the French fashion showings to a satisfactory conclusion today.
On Tuesday, Oscar de la Renta, introducing his collection here for the second season, also received acceptable grades.
No major change in fashion is predicted by these two designers nor by any of the others who have presented their ready-to-wear collections in the last eight days of spring openings.
There have been many self-conscious attempts to open up a brave new world of fashion, but none have particularly jelled.
Two recurrent themes, neither new nor especially riveting, are the display of underwear as outerwear and the widespread use of transparent fabrics.
The visible bra looks fine in playclothes, but in everything else it seems an aberration.
Sheer fabrics have their place, but it can be assumed that when see-through blouses leave the runway, they will be worn with underpinnings.


9 Die in Railroad Violence in Soweto
At least 9 people were shot, stabbed or hacked to death and 36 others were hurt today when violence engulfed two commuter railway stations in the black township of Soweto.
Some passengers were hurt when they jumped off a train traveling between the Nancefield and Orlando stations in South Africa's largest black township rather than confront armed attackers rampaging through the carriages.


A Revamping for Ogilvy &amp; Mather
Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide announced a restructuring yesterday in which the subsidiary of the financially troubled WPP Group P.L.C. will scale back the services it directly offers to clients in order to concentrate on advertising and direct marketing.
Under the restructuring, said Graham Phillips, chairman and chief executive of Ogilvy &amp; Mather, its public relations and sales promotion units will become free-standing companies within London-based WPP.
Jonathan Rinehart, chairman and chief executive of the Ogilvy Public Relations Group in New York, and Keith Bantick, chairman and chief executive of Promotional Campaigns Inc. in London, will report to WPP rather than to Mr.
Phillips.


Joffrey in Los Angeles For 4 Weeks in Spring
The Joffrey Ballet has agreed to perform in a four-week spring repertory season at the Wiltern Theater in Los Angeles, where rehearsal space and offices will be created for the company.
The Joffrey's contract with the Los Angeles Music Center, where it had been resident dance troupe for seven years, was not renewed after a bitter public dispute among board members and artistic administrators in May 1990.
A spokeswoman for the Joffrey said that the company might establish a Los Angeles base at the Wiltern.


For Cleaner Air, Scrap Dirty Cars, U.S. Is Told
The way to cut down pollution from the nation's 123 million cars, and to make them use less gasoline, is not to make the new ones run cleaner, some economists say, but to stop the old ones from running at all.
When the Senate takes up the National Energy Strategy, probably next week, most of the debate will center on how far a 1995 Ford Taurus or a 1996 Plymouth Sundance should go on a gallon of gas, or whether they should run on natural gas or methanol to reduce pollution.
But the problem, according to more and more economists, may lie in the 1966 Ford Galaxie and the 1965 Plymouth Barracuda.


Forests of the Northeast Stir Scientists' Concern
Everybody is worried about the world's rain forests, but how about the Northeastern forest in this nation's backyard?
When the glaciers retreated, these trees migrated northward, and the 12,000-year-old history of their evolution lies deep in the forested wetlands.
The history, ecology and state of these trees will be the subject of "Our Northeastern Forests," an all-day symposium this Saturday at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.


3 Latin Presidents Press Castro for Faster Change
In a meeting that underscored their differences with the United States over how to promote democratic change in Cuba, three Latin American Presidents today urged President Fidel Castro to quicken the pace of reform in his country offered the prospect of closer relations in return.
In public, Mr.
Castro showed limited interest, insisting in tough, familiar language that Communism had not failed in Cuba.


Gulf Nations Said to Be Committed to U.S. Alliance
Saudi Arabia and its allies on the Arabian Peninsula have emerged from the year-long Persian Gulf crisis persuaded that their security in the foreseeable future depends on closer military ties to the United States and a significant expansion in the size and armaments of their own military forces, senior Arab officials say.
These officials acknowledged that the elements of a broad security pact that will institutionalize these convictions are still being discussed with the United States, France and Britain, but they disputed reports in the United States that the Saudi Government has been dragging its feet in wrapping up an accord.


Facing Reality, Townsell Retires
JoJo Townsell's career with the Jets was either a half-season too long or a half-season too short.
The wide receiver-kick returner announced his retirement from pro football today, four months after having surgery on his right foot for an injured big toe.
"For about a year, I had been anticipating retiring at the end of this season," said Townsell, a third-round draft choice of the Jets out of U.C.L.A. in 1983, who played in the United States Football League for three seasons before signing with the Jets in 1985.


Riots Continue Over Ouster of Mobutu Foe
Angry crowds put up barricades and battled the police today to protest the President's refusal to reappoint a leading opposition figure as Prime Minister.
Several people were reported injured in clashes in Kinshasa, the capital, where protesters threw up roadblocks and burned buses and private cars.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named Davey Lopes first base coach, Dick Bosman pitching coach and Greg Biagini hitting coach for the 1992 season.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Announced that they will not exercise the option of Jeff Robinson, pitcher, for the 1992 season.
Released Kent Anderson, infielder, and Barry Lyons, catcher.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Signed Cito Gaston, manager, to a 1-year contract. National League
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Named Cookie Rojas assistant to the general manager and Richard Andersen vice president of business operations.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CHICAGO BULLS -- Waived Oliver Taylor, guard, and Chris Munk, forward.
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Waived Demetrius Calip, guard, and Tony Farmer, forward.
SACRAMENTO KINGS -- Released Ralph Sampson, center.


3 Dodgers Need Jobs
The Dodgers, who didn't even get as far as the National League playoffs this year, have decided to begin the 1992 season without three veterans, second baseman JUAN SAMUEL, shortstop ALFREDO GRIFFIN and catcher GARY CARTER.
The three, all potential free agents, have been told they will not be offered new contracts so the team can make room for some promising youngsters.(AP)


Navy Brings Drug Charges Against Dozens in Capital
The Navy has brought drug charges against three dozen enlisted men, including members of a ceremonial unit that sees duty at the White House, Navy officials said Wednesday night.
Confirming a report in Thursday's issue of The Washington Post, Lieut.
Comdr.
William W. Clyde, a spokesman for the National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md., said 11 hospital corpsmen had been court-martialed on drug charges in recent months.
About a dozen other enlisted men have received nonjudicial punishments, he said, and other cases are still pending.


Poland's Cure Is Taking, but Side Effects Hurt
After 22 months of economic shock therapy, Poland's stores are bursting with goods, the once-gray cities are splashed with brightly painted new shops and the private sector is growing at a dizzying rate.
Poland's cities, from Warsaw to Cracow to Gdansk, bustle with signs of economic rebirth, and local newspapers bulge with help-wanted ads.
But the tough medicine -- coupled with the collapse of trade with the Soviet Union -- has caused some severe side effects that will sorely test the resolve of the new Government emerging from this Sunday's parliamentary elections.
Unemployment has topped 10 percent in a country where jobs were once guaranteed.


What's Baseball Without a Beer?
SOMEONE must have watered the booze at the national Happy Hours because the World Series feels flat, without kick, even though the teams are inspiring and the games have been absorbing.
There are, after all, only three major American sports holidays: the Super Bowl, which is plastic and anticlimactic; the Kentucky Derby, which lasts two minutes, and this harvest celebration that always felt as though it grew naturally from native soil.
So what's the problem, and is it only mine?


2 Bills Seek Affordable Health Insurance
The powerful chairmen of two Congressional committees introduced bills today to guarantee that private health insurance would be readily available to all people who work for small businesses with fewer than 51 employees.
In offering the companion bills, Representative Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, and Senator Lloyd Bentsen, chairman of the Finance Committee, signaled the Democrats' intention to seize the election-year initiative on one narrow aspect of the health-care issue without waiting for a consensus in support of comprehensive changes.


Treasury Issues Increase in Price
New signs of economic weakness helped push up prices of Treasury notes and bonds yesterday, sending interest rates lower.
Traders said that statements by Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, also contributed to the price rises.


Topics of The Times; New Coup
Walking in Moscow last week, an American visitor turned a corner near the Russian parliament and froze.
In the distance he saw a huge convoy of Soviet tanks, guns pointed skyward.
He was horrified: Another coup?
Westerners held hostage?
Worse?
Quickly he recognized that such imaginings made no sense.
Muscovites were milling calmly around the tanks.
The soldiers carried no sidearms.
So the visitor edged forward warily.
He tried to ask passers-by what was going on but none spoke English.
So he rushed back to his hotel where, on BBC television, he got his answer.


Floating Hospital Helps Fight Measles


Meet the Lucky Devils: No Gretzky or Lemieux
With the opposing lineups missing players named Gretzky and Lemieux, the Devils have posted victories over the Kings and the Penguins two nights apart after losses in their previous four games.
"It may have made a difference for the other teams with Gretzky and Lemieux, but the way we played team defense it didn't matter," said Kevin Todd, who scored the go-ahead goal in the Devils' 4-2 triumph over the Penguins tonight at Civic Arena.


Brazil Ignores Protests And Begins to Privatize
As riot police and left-wing protesters traded rocks and tear gas canisters outside Rio de Janeiro's stock exchange today, investors inside inaugurated Brazil's privatization campaign, bidding $1.1 billion for controlling shares in a state steel company.
In a rare victory for the beleaguered government of Fernando Collor de Mello, the bids represented an 11 percent premium over the minimum asking price of $1 billion for the company, Usiminas Siderurgicas de Minas Gerais.


Holyfield Will Fight Damiani
Has Mike Tyson dropped his promoter, Don King, and gone over to Harold Smith, a Los Angeles-based promoter?
That's the gist of speculation among boxing people yesterday after Tyson met Smith on Wednesday.


BUSH LAMBASTES HOUSE AND SENATE
Moving to exploit public discontent with Congress, President Bush today denounced the Senate and House as "a privileged class of rulers who stand above the law."
Apparently hoping to capitalize on the Senate's handling of the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court and the House's use of special banking and other privileges until recently, Mr.
Bush spoke with a vehemence that was rare even by the standards of Washington politics.


Accounts
*
Emporium/Weinstocks, a subsidiary of Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., to Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley, San Francisco, for broadcast advertising.
Commercials had previously been created in-house.
Cole &amp; Weber, Seattle, will continue to handle media buying, and the retailer will continue to produce its own print advertising.
According to Leading National Advertisers, $9.2 million was spent on broadcast and print in the first six months of 1991.
Atlas Citron Haligman Bedecarre and Goldberg Moser O'Neill, both San Francisco, were the other agencies in the review. *
Albert Nipon Fragrances, a new line from Parlux Fragrances Inc., to Henszey &amp; Albert, New York, which handles the advertising accounts of other Parlux brands.
Billings were not disclosed.


Voters to Weigh Canal Tolls
New Yorkers will decide on Nov. 5 whether to end a 109-year-old state Constitutional ban on tolls along New York's canals, including the Erie Canal.
The proposed amendment, advanced by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, would also permit long-term leases for commercial development of state land along the 524-mile barge canal system.


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on Wednesday about soft drink consumption misstated the sales of bottled water and fruit drinks in 1990.
The correct figure is three billion gallons.


Ousted New York Hospitals Chief Says He's a 'Witch Hunt' Victim
Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo, who resigned this week as head of New York City's hospital system, said yesterday that he was a victim of "targeted assassination" by City Hall officials.
"They have smeared me," he said, accusing City Hall of orchestrating a series of damaging disclosures.
"These leaks constitute a witch hunt."


Bush Is Reported Ready to Cut Back on Buying of Stealth Bombers
Bowing to budget constraints and a decline in the Soviet threat, the Bush Administration is quietly retreating from its goal of buying 75 Stealth bombers, Pentagon and Congressional officials say.
And even the Administration's new aim, the purchase of perhaps half that many planes, may be in jeopardy, the officials say.


Review/Theater; A Drama of Language, Not Necessarily of Words
WHENEVER an Irish dramatist writes a great play, or even a not-so-great one, habit demands that non-Irish audiences fall all over themselves praising the writer's poetic command of the English language.
Those audiences may be in for a shock at "Dancing at Lughnasa," Brian Friel's new play at the Plymouth Theater, for its overwhelming power has almost nothing to do with beautiful words.
Just as living is not a literary experience, neither is theater at its fullest -- theater that is at one with the buried yearnings and grave disappointments that are the inescapable drama of every life.
In "Dancing at Lughnasa," Mr.
Friel and an extraordinary company of actors, most of whom originated their roles at the Abbey Theater in Dublin, uncover that eternal drama in stolen glances, in bursts of unexpected laughter, in an idle fox trot to a big-band tune on the radio.
That is the poetry of this play -- its "dream music," in the narrator's phrase -- and like the most fragrant music, it strikes deep chords that words cannot begin to touch.


Senators Dimmed Focus of Thomas Hearings; Admissible Polygraph
To the Editor:
As a former prosecutor I could only look on with dismay as two lawyers, Senators Arlen Spector and Orrin Hatch, brusquely dismissed the significance of Prof.
Anita F. Hill's polygraph test.
As both Senators must certainly know, the rules of evidence have no applicability to the committee's proceedings, since triple hearsay was routinely entered into evidence by them as well as by their colleagues.


Review/Art; Matthew Barney's Objects and Actions
Thanks to a May showing in Los Angeles and a cover article in the September Artforum, Matthew Barney's first New York exhibition has been widely anticipated.
Now that it has actually arrived, at the Barbara Gladstone Gallery in SoHo, it has gained a sizable number of admirers and detractors: in other words, an aura of notoriety that may or may not signal genuine significance.
Some visitors to Mr.
Barney's opening last Saturday saw his work as a seismic shift in sculpture, something on the order of Jeff Koons's provocative mixings of kitsch objects and high art.
Others condemned it as little more than astute rehashings of 1970's art issues conducted by a muscular young gladiator who spends a great deal of time on video in elegant drag or wearing almost nothing.


On Stage, and Off
Playwright Retained by AIDS Patient
The talk in the theater this week is about the playwright Lee Blessing ("A Walk in the Woods"), who has been retained by the family of Kimberly Bergalis to write a play about her life.
Ms.
Bergalis is the woman from Florida who says she contracted the AIDS virus from her dentist, a homosexual.
Through her testimony before Congress and her family's interviews in the last few weeks, the Bergalises have made their views clear: that there are innocent and guilty people with AIDS, and that the guilty ones -- promiscuous homosexuals and drug users -- are being punished for their behavior.
Gay civil rights groups have labeled statements like these homophobic and their views are echoed in the theater, whose own gay community has been severely hit by AIDS.
A factor that furthers the perception of the Bergalis case as a symbol of discrimination among people with AIDS is the family's alliance with William Dannemeyer, a Congressman from California who has publicly distinguished between homosexuals and "decent people who acquired the virus innocently." He is also the author of a book, "Shadow on the Land," which terms homosexuality "a psychological illness."
Robert Montgomery of West Palm Beach, who is the lawyer for the Bergalis family, says there is more to the story than "what you read in the papers" and he is confident Mr.
Blessing will portray the family situation effectively.
In addition to the play, he says, Mr.
Blessing has been entrusted with all decisions on future book and television deals about the case.
Mr.
Montgomery recommended Mr.
Blessing after he saw a production of his play "Eleemosynary" at the Theater Club in Palm Beach, and met him.
Tom Viola, the administrative director of Equity Fights AIDS, says, "I don't know Lee Blessing, but perhaps he will bring an overview and compassion to all people with AIDS that the government and the media have missed."
Larry Kramer, a founder of both the Gay Men's Health Crisis and the AIDS protest group Act Up and the author of the play "The Normal Heart," says: "I find Lee Blessing's decision alarming. If he writes something sympathetic to her, it will be flying in the face of what everyone in the theater stands for. I don't think that play stands a chance of opening."
Mr.
Blessing did not return calls to his home in Minneapolis, and his agent, Judy Bowles, says the playwright feels it is premature to comment.
Ben Mordecai, the managing director of the Yale Repertory Theater, who has worked with Mr.
Blessing, says: "I am confident Lee would be sensitive in dealing with this subject. It's too bad that people are reacting before he has a chance to work on it." A New Double Bill of 'Falsettoes'
The bets are on for who will bring "March of the Falsettos" and "Falsettoland" to New York.
The double bill of one-act musicals by William Finn and James Lapine has been playing to sold-out houses at the Hartford Stage Company, where it ends its run on Nov. 2.
Graciela Daniele directed this production, which joins the two musicals set in New York in 1980 and 1981 about Marvin, who leaves his wife and son for a man.
Here are some scenarios for what comes next:
Andre Bishop, who will become artistic director at Lincoln Center on Jan. 1, is the frontrunner to move the show to the Vivian Beaumont Theater after "Six Degrees of Separation" closes on Jan. 5.
Mr.
Bishop produced both "Falsetto" musicals separately at Playwrights Horizons, in 1981 and 1990.
He has a long-standing affiliation with both Mr.
Finn and Mr.
Lapine, not to mention with Ms.
Daniele, who directed the musical "Once on This Island" at Playwrights before it moved to Broadway.
Also, the physical configuration of the Beaumont, with its thrust stage and steeply raked audience, is almost identical to the space at the Hartford Stage, so the show could move without any extra work.
Two additional benefits of the Beaumont: "Falsettos" would be eligible for Tony Awards, and in this very slim season has a real shot at winning.
And because "Falsettoland" deals with AIDS, which is not a commercially enticing subject, Lincoln Center can offer its membership of 46,000 as a built-in audience to generate enough positive word of mouth to bring in others.
More potential players include: The producers Elizabeth I. McCann and Terry Allen Kramer; Barry and Fran Weissler; Bernard B. Jacobs and Philip J. Smith of the Shubert Organization, who will see the show this weekend.
Mr.
Finn says he is still undecided about the show's future.
Ms.
Daniele says, "Wherever they point me, I'll go." Four Stars for 'Three Sisters'
All directors start auditions with a dream cast in mind, and when they are done, most of those names are no more than memories.
But Emily Mann, the artistic director of the McCarter Theater at Princeton, is getting her wish list and then some for her production of Lanford Wilson's translation of Chekhov's "Three Sisters," which is scheduled to run from Jan. 7 through Jan. 26.
Linda Hunt will play Olga, Frances McDormand is Masha, Mary Stuart Masterson is Irina and Laura San Giacomo is Natasha.
Josef Summer, Jeffrey DeMunn and Mark Nelson will join them.
Tickets: (609) 683-8000.
Carey Perloff San Francisco-Bound
Carey Perloff, 33 years old, the artistic director of the Classic Stage Company in Manhattan, is completing negotiations with the Actors Conservatory Theater in San Francisco to succeed William Ball as its artistic director.
Ms.
Perloff is expected to finish her fifth season at the Classic Stage and begin in San Francisco next fall.
One legacy she will leave is her production of "Arturo Ui," starring John Turturro, which played at her theater last spring and will be taped for "Great Performances" on PBS.
Good News for Adler and Hagen
Two grandes dames of the theater are celebrating this week.
Stella Adler, the actress and teacher, will receive her fourth honorary degree on Monday, Doctor of Performing Arts, from the University of Cincinnati.
And Uta Hagen, the actress, teacher and author of the actor's bible, "Respect for Acting," has written a new book, "A Challenge for the Actor." Ms.
Hagen continues to teach at HB Studios in New York.
opportunity.


Exxon's Earnings Rise 3.7% On Surge in Global Refining
Citing sharply higher profits in global refining that overcame sluggish domestic demand for its products, the Exxon Corporation today reported a 3.7 percent gain in its third-quarter profits.
Net income rose to $1.12 billion, or 88 cents a share, from $1.08 billion, or 85 cents a share, in last year's third quarter.
But revenue fell 5.2 percent, to $27.5 billion from $29.0 billion.


Senators Dimmed Focus of Thomas Hearings; Worst Moral Relativism
To the Editor:
Orlando Patterson concludes in "Race, Gender and Liberal Fallacies" (Op-Ed, Oct. 20) that Clarence Thomas was justified in ". . . denying making the remarks, even if he had in fact made them . . . on the utilitarian moral grounds that any admission would have . . . incurred a . . . grossly unfair punishment." This is not only moral relativism of the worst kind, but bad law as well.


Dollar Falls After New Data On Economy, and Gold Is Off
The dollar closed lower yesterday after a new round of statistics showing poor performance in the United States economy.
Gold prices fell.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery closed down 20 cents at $362.10 an ounce.
A late bid at New York Republic National Bank showed gold down 50 cents, to $361.50.


Ten Writers Win $30,000 Whiting Awards
Ten writers were named yesterday as recipients of the 1991 Whiting Writers Awards.
Each will receive $30,000.
Candidates for the award were proposed by unidentified panelists from around the country chosen by the Mrs.
Giles Whiting Foundation, which was established in 1963 through a $10 million bequest by Flora E. Whiting.
The winners were decided by a five-member committee.


Books of The Times; The Magic Act of a Novelist (Contd.)
Odd Jobs Essays and Criticism  By John Updike  919 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $35.


Coming to a Station's Aid
The way the rock underground has been shrinking over the last few years, it's no surprise that eventually it would become a political cause.
Tomorrow night at the Ritz, Sonic Youth and the saxophonist John Zorn, two of the staunchest supporters and survivors of the underground scene, will headline a benefit for WFMU-FM (91.1), a listener-sponsored radio station in East Orange, N.J.
For more than 25 years, WFMU has been operating as a free-form radio station; these days you might hear Sonic Youth and Mr.
Zorn back to back with James Brown, Fugazi and completely obscure independent rockers and homemade tapes.
WFMU is high-concept radio: all sounds are created equal, with an emphasis on music that can't be heard on commercial or even college radio.
The station's charter is in danger from other areas stations trying to increase their power; the money raised will go toward a legal-defense fund.
Sonic Youth will be mixing new, unreleased material with their standard noise-guitar groove jams.
Mr.
Zorn will offer the American debut of a new noise-thrash combo called Painkiller, which features Bill Laswell on bass.
Richard Hell, the author and former leader of the 1970's punk band the Voidoids, will give his first New York performance in eight years, fronting a grunge-guitar group called Dim Stars, which also feature members of Sonic Youth.
Also on the bill are the bands Gumball and Love Child.
The concert is tomorrow night at the Ritz, 254 West 54th Street in Manhattan.
Doors open at 7 P.M.; the show begins at 8.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 541-8900.


So How About McCarver and Kaat?
Mark Lemke had just tripled in the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 4 of the World Series, prompting CBS's Jack Buck to ask innocently: "Who is this little fellow with the single, double and triple?"
His boothmate, Tim McCarver, ignored Buck's question for more pressing analysis.
"You've got a lot of ways to go, Jack." Twins manager Tom Kelly, he said, "can walk Blauser, then allow Cabrera to be announced, bring in Bedrosian and make Cox waste a man." Which, of course, happened, leading to pinch-hitter Jerry Willard's game-winning sacrifice fly.


I.B.M. Sues Comdisco Inc.
The International Business Machines Corporation sued a leading marketer of computers yesterday, accusing it of counterfeiting integral components of I.B.M. mainframes and selling or leasing them to unsuspecting customers.
The I.B.M. suit against Comdisco Inc., filed in Federal court in Chicago, contended that the Rosemont, Ill., company was secretly counterfeiting mainframe memory cards that do not comply with I.B.M. standards and are likely to fail.


Dow Drops 24.60 on Fear About Profits
Stock prices fell in active trading yesterday, with analysts citing concern about corporate profits and the Commerce Department's report of a larger-than-expected decline in September orders for durable goods.
The Dow Jones industrial average was off 24.60 points, to 3,016.32.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was a moderate 179 million shares, down from 187.5 million on Wednesday.
Declining issues outpaced advancing ones by 2 to 1, 1,072 versus 518.


CHRONICLE
Dame BARBARA CARTLAND, the 90-year-old author of romance novels, is taking no chances on how her obituary will read: she has written it herself, 46 pages long, and distributed it, tied in pink ribbons, to newspaper libraries in Britain.
Excerpts began appearing this week in British newspapers, even though Dame Barbara, who has just started writing her 550th novel, appears to be in the pink of health.
She said she was circulating the obituary because she was upset by the way her daughter, RAINE, COUNTESS SPENCER, the stepmother of the PRINCESS OF WALES, had been depicted in recent news accounts about sales of family treasures.
Dame Barbara said she did not want to be inaccurately portrayed herself.


IRAQI OIL MINISTER REJECTS U.N. PLAN
Iraq's Oil Minister said today that he had recommended that his Government reject a United Nations Security Council plan to allow the sale of $1.6 billion in Iraqi crude oil to finance the purchase of food and medicine.
The Oil Minister, Osama A. R. al-Hiti, charged in an interview that the terms laid down by the council's sanctions committee are "impractical" and "damaging" to Iraq's oil industry.
He also said that the measures were an attempt by the United Nations to take away Iraq's control over its principal resource as a way to undermine President Saddam Hussein.


Bank of Boston Posts a Profit
The Bank of Boston Corporation yesterday reported its first quarterly profit in more than a year.
The company said earnings in the third quarter totaled $18 million, or 20 cents a share.
That result was in contrast to a loss of $254.9 million in the 1990 period.
The bank had a $394.5 million loss in 1990.
The results, which helped lift the company's share price by 62.5 cents yesterday, to $11, is a sign that the bank's problems with bad loans are easing.


Art in Review
Judith Barry  Nicole Klagsbrun Gallery 51 Greene Street SoHo Through Nov. 9
A strangely poignant gigantic head, seemingly encased in a cube, sits in the middle of this gallery.
In "Imagination Dead Imagine," the latest of Judith Barry's visceral video installations, four shots of an androgynous head -- face, back and both sides -- appear on giant video screens on the sides of a 10-foot-high cube, giving the sense that the head is somehow caged within the block. (In the work's first presentation earlier this year in Madrid, a fifth image was projected on the top of the cube.)
The action of the 15-minute videotapes that play on the four screens is simple, if somewhat enigmatic: the head is subjected to a succession of floods, of a red liquid that looks a bit like raspberry jam, of a green liquid that suggests pea soup, of snow, of sand.
Through it all the head doesn't flinch, seldom blinks.
The only sound is the amplified noise of the person breathing.
Occasionally, the image dissolves from one shot into another that is virtually the same, with a video wipe that appears to drip down the screen serving as transition.
The liquids that pour over the figure's head suggest various bodily fluids -- urine, vomit, excrement.
The figure seems trapped, unable to avoid being drenched.
Ms.
Barry here is exploring the charged territory, prominent in infantile psychology, where the erotic and the scatological overlap.
With its blend of the sensual and the repulsive the piece recalls Andres Serrano's photographs combining religious symbols and bodily fluids.
But Ms.
Barry's installation takes on a narrative dimension, as the mammoth, enigmatic head suffers the plague of indignities it is subjected to with a compelling, almost heroic impassiveness.


Political Memo; Political Memo A Cuomo Bid Or a Hamlet On Hudson?
If Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is running for President, his public agonizing in the last two weeks makes perfect political sense.
If he is not running, his recent actions are hard to understand and could prove a political embarrassment, cementing his position in political mythology as a Hamlet on the Hudson.
With any other politician, that theorem might suggest strongly that Mr.
Cuomo plans to join the race.
But Mr.
Cuomo is not any other politician.


Autopsy Performed on Baby Who Was Given Tainted Food
An autopsy was performed yesterday on the body of an infant girl who died a week after eating apparently tainted baby food bought at an East Harlem bodega, but the need for more tests will delay a report on the cause of death until the middle of next week, the New York Medical Examiner's office said.


Review/Film; A Sea-Sprite's Advice to the Lovelorn
A mermaid is a welcome sight in Manhattan.
She really stands out in a crowd.
Even a mermaid of the two-legged variety, like the beautiful sea-sprite played by Demi Moore in "The Butcher's Wife," is a wonder, especially if she is willing to hand out free advice to every lovelorn person she meets.
There are many such people in this new-age romantic comedy, and all are enchanted by sweet, guileless Marina (Ms. Moore), with her long, flowing locks and her magical powers.
Audiences will be, too.
Ordinarily a lot more hard-boiled, Ms.
Moore comfortably inhabits the role of a country clairvoyant from a tiny island off the North Carolina coast.
This place is presented as a rustic paradise in the film's swift, confidently staged prologue, a sequence filled with omens that persuade Marina she must fall in love with a fisherman who appears on her shores.
"My Adonis, my Poseidon -- no, my Zeus!" she declares to the plump, understandably perplexed Leo Lemke (George Dzundza), who happens to be a butcher from New York City.
They are married that very same day and Marina immediately follows Leo home to the kind of safe, clean, neighborly Greenwich Village block that is every bit as fanciful as Marina's original home.


Residents' Supervision at Kings County Hospital Is Criticized
Kings County Hospital routinely failed to keep track of whether residents, including those working in the operating room, were properly supervised by qualified doctors, New York City hospital officials acknowledged yesterday.
In addition, they said that $300,000 provided by the state to increase the supervision of residents at the Brooklyn hospital was spent instead on raises for doctors.
Of 13 physicians now at Kings County who received extra pay to provide closer supervision, only 2 actually worked extra hours.


BRIEFS
*
American Express Travel Management Services, New York, has been selected by International Business Machines, Armonk, N.Y., to provide business-travel services for I.B.M.'s locations in the United States over the next five years.
The value of the contract was not disclosed. *
Asea Brown Boveri Inc., Stamford, Conn., a provider of power-generation services, said that one of its units had received a contract from Commonwealth Edison Co., Chicago, a utility, to provide services for all 12 of the company's nuclear power plants.
The contract was valued at more than $10 million.


Washington at Work; Polite and Yet Dogged, An Ohio Senator Gives Opponents Heartburn
Howard M. Metzenbaum promised to behave during the Thomas and Gates confirmations.
"I intend to make every effort to be fair, judicious and restrained," he said just before the confirmation hearings on President Bush's nominations for Supreme Court Justice and Director of Central Intelligence started.
"I don't believe a bellicose manner is appropriate, nor do I think it would be useful."


Serbian Forces Push Up Coast Toward Dubrovnik
Serbian-dominated army and naval forces drove Croatian forces from coastal villages southeast of the besieged city of Dubrovnik today, pushing into positions just three miles from the Adriatic port's historic Old City walls.
Under a barrage of shelling from land-based and seaborne artillery, army units mounted a successful amphibious assault on the beaches of Kupari, a village with a military resort.
Croatian troops had driven attacking Serbian units from the village on Wednesday.


Hard-Hitting Braves Run the Twins Out of Town
No matter what may happen when the World Series resumes in Minnesota's Metrodome Saturday night, the awesome Atlanta Braves tonight gave the tepid Twins a lot to ponder.
Before they meet again, the Twins have to figure out a new way to pitch to Mark Lemke and Lonnie Smith, and they have to figure out how to resist the temptation to use David West in relief.
They also have to muster enough courage to show up after the humiliating debacle they experienced tonight.


Executive at Hachette To Leave His New Post
Gerald S. Wroe, who joined Hachette Magazines Inc. in August in the new position of senior vice president and director of cross-media sales, has decided to leave and become a consultant to the company, a Hachette spokeswoman said yesterday.


London Journal; In the War on Drugs, Thugs Have the Firepower
It was well after midnight and the hundreds of people jammed into the Podium, a dance hall in Vauxhall in southwest London, were still swaying to the beat of the reggae band when, suddenly, there were screams and the explosion of gunshots.
One man fell to the floor, dead, and two other victims stumbled away, wounded in the legs.
The gunman escaped in the confusion and, two weeks later, the police have yet to find a witness willing or able to furnish them with a description.


People
*
Jim Ferguson and William E. Morden, creative directors at Leo Burnett Co., Chicago, have been promoted to senior vice presidents from vice presidents.


Alice R. Bachrach, 89; Was Volunteer Leader
Alice R. Bachrach, a volunteer leader of numerous national social service agencies who was involved in a landmark discrimination suit, died Wednesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 89 years old.
Mrs. Bachrach died of cancer, her family said.


Nyet Is the Old Word. Net Is New One.
For 30 minutes today at the Playland Ice Casino, an interpreter sat next to Sergei Nemchinov and the blond, soft-spoken Ranger from Moscow became somewhat less mysterious to reporters.
Nemchinov, it turns out, bought a Toyota three days ago.
His mother-in-law might be moving soon to the United States.
He felt "joy and happiness" at his winning overtime goal Oct. 5 in the Montreal Forum.


Quotation of the Day
"He wasn't pushed out, shoved out -- he opted out, for what he said were health reasons. It is worth noting that not withstanding the remarkable power ascribed to deputy mayors, deputy mayors cannot give health commissioners diverticulitis." -- Leland T. Jones, the Mayor's press secretary, on Dr.
J.
Emilio Carillo's assertion that he was forced out.  [ B2:1. ]


Salomon Estimates Illegal Gain
Salomon Brothers said yesterday that it had made profits of $17 million to $19.7 million from its illegal bidding in the Treasury securities market and from the one squeeze in the May 22 auction for two-year notes.
But the firm contended that only $3.3 million to $4.6 million in profits resulted from illegal bidding in eight auctions.
Of that, $3 million to $3.6 million was from the May auction.


Topics of The Times; A Second Chance for Voters
A state appeals court has ordered a new primary election to select the Democratic candidate for New York's City Council in the Eighth District, covering East Harlem and part of the Bronx.
The ruling is a triumph for fairness.
The special primary, scheduled for Monday, is clearly necessary.
The apparent victor in September was William Del Toro, who defeated Adam Clayton Powell 4th by a mere 34 votes.
When an investigation turned up 740 voting irregularities, Mr.
Powell filed a challenge, only to be rebuffed by a lower court.


Boulder Journal; In Search Of the Male Just Right For Today
As any student of Oprah, Phil or Sally Jessy knows, the problem with men -- one of them, anyway -- is their failure to open up emotionally.
Intimacy, it seems, scares the blazes out of them.
Even the failures in Washington have been blamed on "high levels of testosterone," as Representative Patricia Schroeder of Colorado put it.
And when it comes to the male perspective on issues like sexual harassment, they just don't get it.
Today, maybe Eliza Doolittle would ask, "Why can't a man be more like a woman?"


BRIEFS
DEBT *
California plans to sell $441 million in general obligation bonds on Wednesday through competitive bidding. *
General Host Corp., Stamford, Conn., has filed for $75 million in convertible subordinated notes due in 2001 through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.


TV Weekend; A Portrait Gallery of Macho Men
Fed up with the typecasting of Hispanic actors, largely trapped in the drug-pusher-or-terrorist syndrome, John Leguizamo devised his one-man theater presentation, "Mambo Mouth," as a portrait gallery of Latin prototypes usually ignored in mainstream culture.
The show had a healthy and widely praised run Off Broadway.
Now, trimmed a bit for an hourlong format, "Mambo Mouth" will run on cable television as an "HBO Comedy Hour" special, making its debut tomorrow at 10 P.M..
At the moment, but certainly not for much longer, Mr.
Leguizamo's face may be more familiar than his name (pronounced leg-wee-ZAH-mo).
He has worked with some prominence on television series ("Miami Vice") and in the movies ("Casualties of War"), most recently grabbing most of the critical praise for the feature film "Hangin' With the Homeboys." Obviously taking a cue from the success of Eric Bogosian's character collections, Mr.
Leguizamo, born in Colombia and raised in Jackson Heights, Queens, is determined to make his creations as writer and performer serve as something of a squad advocating Hispanic Power.


Anderson? Not Yet
The New Jersey Nets yesterday appeared no closer to signing KENNY ANDERSON, their first-round draft pick, despite indications by the team on Wednesday that an offer estimated at $14 million for five years was about to be put on the table.
RICHARD HOWELL, Anderson's Atlanta-based attorney, said he still had not been presented with any specific offer but was told by the Nets he would soon have one.


Offices Unite Agencies of U.S. Courts
After years of scurrying around Washington among the eight buildings that house offices of the Federal court system, employees of the Federal judiciary will be gathered next year in a large building being constructed a few blocks from the Supreme Court.
Expected to be completed in the fall of 1992 at a cost of almost $100 million, the seven-story building resulted from decades of growth by the court system and years of effort to bring the offices of the system together under one roof.
It is one of the few major Federal Government buildings to be built here in the last two decades.


INSIDE
Furor Over 'Suicide Doctor'
Michigan officials threatened to act against Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, who assisted in the suicide of a woman last year and two Wednesday.
Page A10.
Jobless Claims Mount
New applications for unemployment benefits rose 6.8 percent, to 452,000, in the second week of October, the highest level since May.
Page D1.
Braves Hold Upper Hand
The Atlanta Braves trounced the Twins, 14-5, and will carry a 3-2 lead into Minnesota tomorrow night with a chance to wrap up their first World Series title.
Page B7.
Gray Days for Bomber
Already under attack in Congress, the Stealth bomber is losing support in the White House, Congressional and Pentagon officials said.
Page A16.


Review/Film; Gothic Tale From France
"La Maison Assassinee" ("The Murdered House"), George Lautner's French melodrama opening today at the Quad Cinema, is set in 1920 in Provence, but all similarity to Marcel Pagnol ends there.
The film is a lethargic gothic tale about Seraphin, a young man who returns to his village 24 years after all of the other members of his family were mysteriously murdered.
Seraphin, 3 weeks old at the time of the massacre, was spared.
Now he wants to know what happened and why.


U.S. RAISES HOPES ON 'BOAT PEOPLE'
The announcement by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d on Wednesday that the United States was ready to seek normal relations with the Hanoi Government has raised hopes among diplomats and officials of international refugee agencies that a turning point is at hand in the unceasing flow of "boat people" from Vietnam.
They believe that the ending of Vietnam's virtual international isolation could alter a mood of hopelessness and encourage Vietnamese to see their future at home.


Opponents Weigh Action Against Doctor Who Aided Suicides
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, a Michigan pathologist who aroused a national debate last year with his homemade suicide machine, helped two more women kill themselves Wednesday evening, promting threats by Michigan officials today to revoke his medical license or perhaps charge him in connection with the deaths.
In the new suicides, a 43-year-old woman with multiple sclerosis and a 58-year-old woman with a severe but unspecified pelvic disorder were attached to two new suicide devices and died within an hour of each other at a cabin in the Bald Mountain Recreation Area, about 40 miles north of Detroit.


Review/Film; McCartney On Tour On Screen
Paul McCartney can still do cute things with his eyebrows, and he still has the kind of hair that can be tossed.
But "Get Back," the stitched-together concert film documenting Mr.
McCartney's 1989-90 world tour, is enough to shake the faith of even the staunchest fan.
Compiled so soullessly and arbitrarily from a variety of live shows that Mr.
McCartney often appears to change outfits during the same song, "Get Back" also draws upon scrambled, incoherent news clips to bolster its performance scenes.
All this is the doing of Richard Lester, who still has "Help!" and "A Hard Day's Night" to his credit but hereby forfeits any claim he ever had to being the Fifth Beatle.
It must be said, to Mr.
McCartney's credit, that there are times when viewers can close their eyes and hear very solid renditions of old Beatles songs, and some of his more recent compositions sound even better.
It must also be said that as soon as the eyes open there are disastrous problems.
The film is desperately busy, not only in its cobbled-together musical numbers but also in the appallingly glib material that has been thrown in to accompany them.
Although the star is noticeably hoarse and off key in places, he would have come across better without these distractions.


Disparities Are Found In Top Officers' Pay
Some executives are vastly overpaid and some greatly underpaid, says Graef S. Crystal, a compensation specialist.
And, Mr.
Crystal said, his research showed little correlation between executive pay and corporate performance.
After studying 500 of the nation's largest public companies, Mr.
Crystal, editor of a newsletter on compensation issues, found: "When you ask, 'What drives C.E.O. pay?' the answer is, 'Hardly anything.' "


Review/Film; Delving Deep Into Pockets Of Fashion, Intellectually
The meeting of the minds that is documented in "Notebook on Cities and Clothes," Wim Wenders's film about the Japanese fashion designer Yohji Yamamoto, began fairly inauspiciously.
Mr.
Wenders bought a shirt and a jacket that bore Mr.
Yamamoto's label.
Perhaps there was nothing cataclysmic in this, and yet it sent Mr.
Wenders into a flurry of meditation and reflection, just as so many things do.
"I felt protected like a knight in his armor -- by what, a shirt and a jacket?" he observed.
"This jacket reminded me of my childhood and my father as if the essence of this memory were tailored into it." Later on, he asked, "What did Yamamoto know about me -- about everybody?"
To paraphrase Freud, sometimes a jacket is just a jacket.
But not this time: Mr.
Yamamoto, it turns out, is a match for Mr.
Wenders when it comes to probing simple acts and objects in search of their philosophical underpinnings, no matter how small.
So Mr.
Yamamoto can solemnly discuss the importance of a warm coat on a cold day and can contemplate such questions as "which comes first, the touch of the material or the shape?" Mr.
Wenders, who having expressed his disdain for fashion in general was commissioned by the Pompidou Center in Paris to make a film on that subject, is more than ready to respond in kind.


Review/Television; Nursing Homes: Filth and Cruelty
After innumerable exposes, America's nursing homes for the elderly are still providing grist for undercover cameras.
Tonight's offering from "20/20" on ABC at 10 is devoted largely to an investigation of institutions in Texas to which few viewers will hasten to consign their nearest and dearest.
Tom Jarriel, the evening's correspondent, says that well-run homes, like the clean and orderly one near Dallas that he visits first, are the exception.
Elsewhere, the program's reporters found filth, inadequate meals, inexperienced staff, chronic inattention and downright cruelty.
Some patients seemed to be in pain; others seemed to be drugged to stupefaction.


At Shoreham, a Somber Beginning of the End
After generating only bills and controversy in more than 20 unhappy years, the Shoreham Nuclear Power Station is about to make history as the first fully licensed nuclear plant in the United States to be dismantled without ever operating commercially.
The decommissioning of Shoreham should put an end to a long and tangled saga of politics, energy policy and money that derailed careers, divided Long Island and elevated the plant into a national symbol of either the welcome demise of the nuclear power industry or the short-sighted folly of caving in to local pressure, depending on one's point of view.
But now that the last chapter is at hand, no one seems happy, not even the people who worked hardest to close the plant, situated along a quiet, winding road in this rural Suffolk County community.


Traffic Alert
Brooklyn Bridge: Manhattan-bound lanes will be closed from noon today to 6 A.M.
Monday.
Use Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, Manhattan Bridge or Williamsburg Bridge.
Amsterdam Avenue Fall Festival: Amsterdam Avenue will be closed tomorrow between 86th and 96th Streets from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.


Net Cost of Energy Bill Is Put at $7 Billion
The energy bill that the Senate plans to take up next week would require Federal expenditures of more than $9 billion from 1992 through 1996, according to the Congressional Budget Office.
But the office said there would be offsetting receipts of $1.6 billion for the sale of oil leases in Alaska and possible royalty revenue of $83 million if oil is found there.
The Congressional Budget Office analysis is in a July report to Senator J. Bennett Johnston, Democrat of Louisiana, the chairman of the Senate Energy Committee and the co-sponsor of the bill with Senator Malcolm Wallop, Republican of Wyoming.
The report was distributed Wednesday in Washington by opponents of the bill.


American Express Net Plunges 91%
The American Express Company, reeling from recession-induced problems in its charge- and credit-card businesses, said yesterday that its earnings for the third quarter plunged by nearly 91 percent, to $31 million, or 5 cents a share.
The company added that the problems were likely to continue into the fourth quarter, when earnings might drop by as much as 45 percent.
The quarterly earnings performance, worse than the company had predicted only three weeks earlier, reflects the disproportionately large effect of the recession on American Express's white-collar customers.
World Travel Off
It also reflects a drop in lucrative international air travel because of the Persian Gulf war, as well as American Express's own mistakes in dealing with the widening consumer debt crisis, especially in the company's ambitious Optima credit-card program.
The company is investigating why the operation faltered, reporting better results than were warranted.


Art in Review
'Mark Tobey: Paintings From the 1950's
Philippe Daverio Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Through tomorrow
The 19 works in this outstanding show present the American artist Mark Tobey (1890-1976) at the height of his career, when he turned away from depictions of figures and cityscapes to painting abstractions.
He had a searching mind and a sure touch that allowed him to range in many directions.
In the 1950's, he produced works as diverse in appearance as the broken field of color of "Chios," the frenetic crisscrossing strokes of "Battle of the Lights" and the patient mosaiclike construction of "Composition." Add to this the calligraphic splashing of the sumi ink paintings and the densely webbed colored lines and squiggles that create the all-over pattern of "Visual Extensions."
Tobey's art has occasionally been compared to Jackson Pollock's, but the nature of their energies was different.
Tobey's art had a modesty, a quality of quiet, meditative concentration.
He achieved during the 1950's and 60's an international prominence that has not dimmed in Europe as much as it has in New York.
This is the second exhibition at the gallery devoted to the worthy task of restoring to prominence one of the most engaging painters of his generation.


Transport Strike Adds to France's Woes
With France's Socialist Government already reeling from a sharp drop in its popularity, rail, sea, air and road transportation was badly disrupted today by a 24-hour general strike of state employees protesting low wages and increased unemployment.
The strike itself fell well short of paralyzing the country, with most factories and offices working close to normally.
But it seemed to reflect the mood of irritation that has increasingly characterized French society as economic growth has slowed down here throughout this year.


Two British Newsmen Accuse Author of Libel
A libel suit was filed here today against Seymour Hersh, author of a new book alleging that a British newspaper editor and a publisher have had ties to Israel's secret service.
The book, "The Samson Option," centers on Israel's nuclear weapons program.
The suit was filed by Nicholas Davies, foreign editor of The Daily Mirror, one of Britain's leading tabloid newspapers; Robert Maxwell, the paper's publisher, and Mirror Group Newspapers P.L.C.
They had filed a similar suit on Wednesday against Faber &amp; Faber Ltd., which published the book in Britain.


A.T.&amp;T. Service For Armenia
A.T.&amp;T. expanded international telephone service between Armenia and the rest of the world yesterday, providing a possible model for improving the backward phone system of the Soviet Union.
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company installed in Armenia advanced digital-switching equipment that now makes direct-dial calls possible.
Before, as other Soviet republics still do, Armenia had to funnel all of its calls through operators in Moscow, where international lines were scarce and closely monitored.


Review/Photography; Constructing A Universe Of Chimeras
The wave of appropriationist photography that washed over the art world in the 1980's has receded a bit, as a number of artists involved in the movement -- including Richard Prince, Sherrie Levine and Cindy Sherman -- have moved away from the sort of deadpan quotation of images from television, film and advertising that was the stylistic trademark of the group.
While these and other artists have shifted their focus to new means and subjects, they continue to develop their critique of contemporary culture in interesting and provocative ways.
The latest example of this phenomenon can be found in SoHo, where Laurie Simmons, an early member of the appropriationist group, is showing work at Metro Pictures that blends an impudent sense of humor with a smart and cutting social critique.
Ms.
Simmons continues to mine the metaphoric possibilities of the strange hybrid creatures she has been building and photographing for the past several years.
These chimeras combine women's legs (many taken from sexually explicit Japanese figurines) with various symbolic implements of contemporary society.
One figure here is half woman, half microscope, while another, with perfect bluntness, is a pistol with legs.
The symbolic quality of the figures is emphasized by the fact that they are seen as if on stage, centered in a spotlight against a bare background.
This gives them the theatrical lewdness of burlesque dancers, the dehumanized sexiness implicit in the dolls themselves.


CHRONICLE
There is something irresistible about giving -- and getting -- awards, and plenty are bestowed on luminaries in all fields in October.
Take this week and next.
C.
EVERETT KOOP, the former Surgeon General, received the Albert Schweitzer Prize for Humanitarianism at Johns Hopkins University on Tuesday.
Tonight, KATHARINE GRAHAM, chairwoman of the Washington Post Company; BETTY FRIEDAN, the feminist leader; DR.
DOROTHY HEIGHT, the president of the National Council of Negro Women, and Prime Minister GRO HARLEM BRUNDTLAND of Norway will be inducted into the 1991 Hall of Fame of the International Women's Forum.


Progress Is Reported in Korean Talks
Dropping some of their extreme demands, the Prime Ministers of North and South Korea achieved the first modest progress today in their series of talks when they agreed to try to negotiate one comprehensive accord to ease tensions.
The main step forward appeared to be North Korea's abandonment of a demand for an immediate severing of South Korea's alliance with the United States as a condition for improvement of relations between the two Koreas.


Review/Art; Japanese Prints Made Under a Censor's Gaze
The print depicts a man seated in serene comfort, surrounded by nearly a dozen women.
Almost like a frieze in its arrangement of figures roughly in a line across the foreground, "The Taiko Hideyoshi and His Five Wives," of 1804, is a formal and sedate image, remarkable on first glance mostly for the subtle interplay of the patterned robes in which the artist, Utamaro, clothes his characters.
For this work, and for a trio of prints on related themes, Utamaro spent 3 days in jail and 50 more in handcuffs under house arrest.
One of the supreme practitioners of the ukiyo-e woodblock print, Utamaro never recovered from the punishment and died a year later at the age of 53.
Under the Tokugawa family, which ruled Japan for the better part of three centuries, it was treasonous simply to depict Hideyoshi, the warlord who had been treacherously overthrown at the end of the 16th century by the founder of the Tokugawa shogunate.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9
Mideast peace talks offer great hope, Prime Minister Shamir said.
The Israeli leader has spoken of possible landmines in the negotiations, but on the eve of the peace conference, he has chosen to emphasize the potential for agreement.
Page A1


Review/Dance; Reality Wrapped in a Taylorish Riddle
It was Marcel Duchamp, Dada's distinguished daddy, who popularized the notion that a work of art never said something overt and should be "completed" by the viewer's response.
In the 1940's a weekly American radio show invited listeners to identify the voice of a female mystery guest who threw out clues about herself in the recording.
In 1948, this Miss Hush turned out to be Martha Graham.
Paul Taylor calls his latest dance premiere "Fact and Fancy," and it looks like a cross between Duchamp and Miss Hush.
Perhaps members of the audience could be invited to submit their interpretations as they leave the theater, with a prize awarded to the winning entry.


5-Month High for Jobless Claims
The number of first-time applications for unemployment insurance benefits climbed 6.8 percent, to 452,000, in the second week of October, the highest level since May, the Labor Department reported today.
While weekly claims figures tend to be erratic -- and for that reason are often viewed skeptically by analysts -- today's report represented the fifth consecutive advance for claims when they are averaged over the latest four weeks.
That, analysts say, is strong evidence of a faltering economy.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
The F.C.C. proposed that local phone companies be allowed to package and transmit TV programming.
It was a surprising and controversial move to promote competition in cable TV.  [ Page A1. ]
First-time applications for unemployment benefits climbed to the highest level since May, the Labor Dept. reported.  [ D1. ]


Senators Dimmed Focus of Thomas Hearings
To the Editor:
In one obscure way I do agree with Anna Quindlen that Anita Hill was "the perfect victim," but certainly not for the reasons outlined in her Oct. 16 column.


Open Positions on Short Sales Up 5.8% on Nasdaq
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the number of actively traded shares sold short, and not yet covered, in the month ended on Oct. 15 rose by 17.8 million, or 5.8 percent, to a record 324.8 million.
The previous record was set in the monthlong period ended Sept. 15, when open positions on short sales of active issues totaled 307.1 million shares.


Senators Dimmed Focus of Thomas Hearings; Two-thirds to Confirm
To the Editor:
The confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas by a Senate vote of 52-to-48 gives rise to serious concern about the process (front page, Oct. 16).
It is disturbing to contemplate the prospect that a man about whose qualifications so many senators had serious doubt has been appointed to the Supreme Court for life -- perhaps three or four decades.


Energy Prices in Rebound; Crude Oil at $23.49 a Barrel
Energy futures prices rebounded in active trading yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange to recover some of the losses posted in the previous session.
Crude oil for December delivery, which lost 39 cents Wednesday, rose 23 cents to settle at $23.49 a barrel; November home heating oil rose 1.13 cents, to 69.28 cents a gallon, and November unleaded gasoline gained 1.32 cents, to 65.26 cents a gallon.
The November natural gas contract, which expired Thursday, dropped 1.2 cents, to $1.772 for 1,000 cubic feet.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 569 money market mutual funds increased by $3.80 billion, to $466.45 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 209 institutional funds increased by $4.63 billion, to $145.82 billion.
The assets of th 268 general-purpose funds were down by $183.2 million, to $173.96 billion.
The 92 broker-dealer funds decreased by $652.2 million, to $146.68 billion.


Charges of Naming Woman In Rape Case Are Dismissed
Saying that First Amendment guarantees outweighed the right to privacy, a Florida judge ruled here today that the state had no right to bring criminal charges against a weekly supermarket tabloid that published the name of the woman who has accused William K. Smith of raping her.
The decision came as prosecutors and lawyers for Mr.
Smith, a 31-year-old nephew of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, began their final round of pretrial hearings in the rape case.
Mr.
Smith, accused of raping a 30-year-old Florida woman at the Kennedy family's Palm Beach estate in March, is scheduled to go on trial here on Dec. 2, but selection of a six-member jury is scheduled to start Oct. 30.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Defeats Engel  Pete Sampras was extended to three sets by a Swedish qualifer yesterday before joining his fellow Americans Richey Reneberg, Jim Courier and Aaron Krickstein in the quarterfinals of the Stockholm Open.
It was the best United States showing in the $1.1 million tournament since 1981, when five Americans made the final eight.
Sampras, seeded No. 7, overcame David Engel, 6-7 (1-7), 6-2, 6-4, to set up a meeting with the defending champion, Boris Becker.
Becker advanced with a 7-6 (7-3), 6-1 victory over Goran Prpic, who eliminated 39-year-old Jimmy Connors in the second round earlier yesterday, 7-6 (8-6), 6-7 (5-7), 6-1, in a match that ended at 2 A.M.
In another third-round match, top-seeded Stefan Edberg extended his match-winning streak to 19, two short of his personal record, with a 6-2, 6-3 victory over Brad Gilbert of the United States.
Edberg's next opponent is Reneberg, who beat No. 9 Karel Novacek of Czechoslovakia, 2-6, 6-3, 6-3.
Petr Korda fought back from a set down to beat No. 5 Ivan Lendl, 5-7, 6-1, 6-4, and will meet the French Open champion, Jim Courier next.
Courier, seeded third, beat Derrick Rostagno, 7-5, 6-1.
The remaining quarterfinal will match Krickstein against Goran Ivanisevic.
Garrison Advances: Third-seeded Zina Garrison, suffering from a stomach virus, managed a 6-4, 6-4 victory over Ros Fairbank-Nideffer yesterday in the Midland Bank Championships in Brighton, England, and advanced to the quarterfinals.
Second-seeded Katerina Maleeva also won, 6-4, 6-4, beating Jo Durie. (AP) GOLF  Tie at the Woodlands  Jeff Maggert and Steve Jones completed their weather-delayed first rounds with seven-under par 65's yesterday in the Woodlands, Tex., joining Robert Wrenn to share the lead by one stroke in the Independent Insurance Agent Open.
Wrenn completed his round Wednesday before morning fog and afternoon lightning forced postponement of the first round until yesterday.
Maggert played five holes on Wednesday and had teed off on No. 6 when lightning stopped play.
Jones got in three holes on Wednesday. (AP) BASEBALL  Hiroshima Leads Series  Rod Allen hit his second home run of the Japan Series, a two-run drive, as the Hiroshima Toyo Carp beat the Seibu Lions, 3-0, yesterday in Hiroshima.
The victory gave the Central League champions a lead of three games to two in the four-of-seven series. (AP) HORSE RACING  Easy Now Wins  Easy Now, a half-sister to Easy Goer, drew away in the final furlong and cruised to a 2 3/4-length victory Thursday in the Astarita Stakes at Aqueduct.
The 2-year-old filly, who made a stunning debut at Belmont's fall meeting with an 11 1/2-length victory, held off a brief challenge by Stolen Beauty and covered the seven furlongs in 1:224/5 .
Owned by Ogden Phipps and trained by Shug McGaughey, Easy Now paid $2.20, $2.20 and $2.10 for $2 across the board. (AP) HOCKEY  Canadiens Rout Quebec  Guy Carbonneau had two goals and an assist and goaltender Roland Melanson made 21 saves to record his second straight shutout as the Montreal Canadiens routed the Quebec Nordiques, 5-0, last night in Quebec.
The victory was Montreal's second in two nights over the Nordiques, whose streak without a victory reached eight games.
Melanson, obtained from the New Jersey Devils last month in a trade involving Montreal's Stephane Richer, has a shutout string of 150 minutes 12 seconds. (AP)


Moderates Seen as Key To Louisiana's Election
Jim McPherson idolized John F. Kennedy, and almost dropped out of law school to join the Peace Corps.
He wore a black armband in a parade to commemorate the death of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., and he was once a member of the American Civil Liberties Union.
Today Mr.
McPherson, now a 59-year-old lawyer here, was rushing to finish a trial and clear his desk so he could spend the next three weeks working full time on State Representative David Duke's campaign to become governor of Louisiana.


Jays to Keep Gaston
If Manager CITO GASTON hadn't gotten himself thrown out of the fifth and final game of the American League Championship Series 12 days ago, his job would probably have never been in jeopardy.
After all, winning a division title and then losing the playoff is a Toronto tradition.
The Blue Jays have won the American League East three times but have never made it to the World Series.
Not firing managers who make it as far as the playoffs but no further is also a Toronto tradition.
Gaston kept his job after losing to the Oakland A's in 1989, and Bobby Cox left of his own accord after losing to the Kansas City Royals in 1985.


Thomas Hearings May Be Over, But Senators Find a War Looming
The Senate caucus room where the Supreme Court confirmation battle over Judge Clarence Thomas unfolded was transformed today into the backdrop for another tense confrontation between women and male Senators.
The spirit of the encounter, one of a type that has become increasingly common on Capitol Hill, was captured by the response of a nonpartisan women's group to Senator Alan K. Simpson, a Wyoming Republican who was a leader of his party's attack on Prof.
Anita F. Hill, who accused Judge Thomas of sexual harassment.


The Spoken Word
READING, the Drawing Center, 35 Wooster Street, Manhattan.
Kathy Acker, Hilton Als, Karen Finley, Richard Hell, Hapi Phace, Simon Watney and David Wojnarowicz will read from Mr.
Wojnarowicz's new book, "Close to the Knives," to benefit Act Up's Needle Exchange Program.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M; a cocktail reception is at 7 P.M.
Admission to the reception and reading is $15.
Information: (212) 219-2166.
WALKING TOURS AND LECTURE, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Peddler's Pack" walking tour, Sunday at noon, followed at 1 P.M. by "La Dolce Via," a walk through Little Italy, and at 2 P.M. by "House of Heritage," a lecture on the history of the museum building.
Fee for each walking tour: $12 ($10 for the elderly and students); lecture, $4.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"American Life in American Art," by Leslie Heiner, tomorrow at 2 and 3:30 P.M.; "Paintings as Artifacts: A Historian's Reflections on Her Parents' Generation," by Virginia Yans-McLaughlin, Sunday at 12:30 P.M.; "American Life in American Art," by Carl Palusci, Sunday at 2 and 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.


Ondieki to Run
Ten days before the starting gun is scheduled to go off, Australian LISA ONDIEKI, the 1988 Olympic silver medalist, two-time Commonwealth Games champion and the fourth-fastest women's marathoner in history, entered the New York City Marathon yesterday.
Ondieki, formerly Lisa Martin, was second to Grete Waitz in the 1985 and 1986 events here.(AP)


PHONE COMPANIES COULD TRANSMIT TV UNDER F.C.C. PLAN
In a surprising and controversial move to promote cable television competition, the Federal Communications Commission proposed today that local telephone companies be allowed to package and transmit television programming.
The proposed rules, which were unanimously endorsed in a 5 to 0 vote, are likely to be adopted by the commission within a year, after it asks for and receives public comment in preparation for a final vote.


Shamir Detects Chance of Success Amid Obstacles to Mideast Peace
A day after taking personal control of the Israeli delegation to next week's Middle East peace conference, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said today that the Madrid talks offered hope for "revolutionary change" in the Middle East and that, while things could easily go wrong, "there are many chances for success."
"It will be difficult," Mr.
Shamir said in an interview.
"It will be complicated. There will be many obstacles in these negotiations, maybe many crises. But we have to begin because one thing is clear: Without negotiations, we will never get peace. Emphasizing the Potential
"So far," he said, "our situation is characterized by a hostile attitude of all the Arab countries except Egypt, and we want to change it. It could be a revolutionary change."


Sounds Around Town
Homage to Graciela
"A Tribute to Graciela," Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-2824.
Graciela has lent her hearty, husky voice to some of Cuba and New York City's finest Latin bands since the 1930's.
Now her past and present colleagues are to gather for a tribute.
They include Mario Bauza and his Latin-jazz band; Tito Puente, the timbales virtuoso; Paquito D'Rivera, the exuberant Cuban alto saxophonist; members of Orquesta Anacaona, an all-women band formed in the 1930's, and many other musicians.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Concert tickets are $20 to $25 in advance and $25 to $30 at the door; tickets for the concert and a reception afterward are $45 to $75.
Information: (212) 307-7420.
Jazz With a Laugh
Willem Breuker Kollektief, Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, Manhattan, (212) 219-3055.
Somewhere between a jazz big band and a Spike Jones orchestra, with more than a touch of Kurt Weill's sardonic humor and a tinge of Frank Zappa, the Willem Breuker Kollektief uses split-second timing and exacting discipline to play (mostly) jazz that makes listeners laugh out loud.
Tonight at 9 and midnight; tickets are $12.
Buddhist Tones
Gyuto Tantric Choir, Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-2824.
As they meditate on the attributes of Buddha, the Tantric monks of Tibet chant astonishingly deep, sonorous low notes and multiple overtones simultaneously, filling the air with phantom chords -- transparent pillars of sound -- that are punctuated by low, implacable trumpets and crashing cymbals.
It is music that is supposed to bring peace to mankind; to Western ears, it is both rough and reverent, almost unearthly.
Tonight at 8.
Tickets are $22.50.


Market Place; Almost Everyone Is Faulted In Interco Bankruptcy Case
A bankruptcy examiner said yesterday that Interco Inc., whose brands include Converse and Florsheim shoes and Lane and Broyhill furniture, had been forced into bankruptcy in part because company officials breached their fiduciary duties.
The examiner, Sandra E. Mayerson, who has investigated the company's collapse, is the head of the bankruptcy practice at the law firm of Kelley Drye &amp; Warren.
She was critical of almost everyone involved in Interco's 1988 defense against a hostile takeover, which ended in the company going deeply into debt.
That debt, she concluded, left the St.
Louis-based company insolvent and led to its bankruptcy filing earlier this year.


M. Goshen-Gottstein, A Biblical Scholar, 66
Moshe Goshen-Gottstein, an internationally known scholar of Semitic languages, Hebrew philology and the Bible, died on Sept. 14 at Hadassah Hospital in Jerusalem.
He was 66 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Art in Review
'Marguerite Zorach: Cubism and Beyond'  Kraushaar Galleries 724 Fifth Avenue (near 57th Street) Through Nov. 2
While Marguerite Zorach (1887-1973) exhibited in New York City intermittently throughout her life, this often delightful show of paintings and drawings is something of a rarity.
Its title and brochure emphasize her Cubist works, and perhaps for good reason, since she lived in Europe between 1908 and 1912 and absorbed its revolution first hand.
But the show's real strengths lie unequivocally in the areas beyond Cubism, those moments when Zorach stopped trying to look quite so up to date and simply sprinkled Cubist touches into essentially realistic scenes.
The results are a series of small, delicately structured landscapes dotted with flat little squares that signal houses and roofs or, when she draws the East River, piers and factories.
They have an endearing, almost naive charm that doesn't obscure their essential sophistication.
The sophisticated and the naive achieve a more muscular alliance in the warmly colored "Man and Woman" of 1936, thought to be a painting of Zorach's first dealer, Edith Greogor Halpert, and a collector; it is the best figurative painting in the show.
Also good are three little portrait drawings from 1913, their subjects outlined in a few deft but solid strokes of colored pencil.
Altogether, this show sketches in the intriguing career, interrupted by children and other obligations, of an artist who improved as she ventured away from the mainstream and who deserves to be better known.


Sports of The Times; The Downs And Ups Of Harper
Brian Harper is the catcher for the Minnesota Twins, their guardian of home plate, their source of last resort.
Last night he had the best and most despairing vantage point for a Twin.
He stood, glove hand on hip, and watched the long parade of Braves runners score and score and score, as his team went down to defeat, 14-5, and fell behindby 3 games to 2 in the World Series.
Armored to the teeth in his tools of ignorance -- the melancholy name by which a catcher's protective gear is commonly and unfortunately known -- Harper concluded Games 3 and 4 with frustration and indignation.
Except for observing the scoring, things were otherwise quiet for him around the plate last night -- no collisions, no close plays -- and it seemed he deserved the rest, though hardly any more grief.
In the very last play in Games 3 and 4, the first two World Series games the Atlanta Braves franchise ever won, Harper caught a relay throw and lunged, only to miss the tags on the steaming runners.


General Cinema Names Chief
The General Cinema Corporation said yesterday that Robert J. Tarr Jr., its president and chief operating officer, would succeed Richard E. Smith, as its chief executive.
Mr.
Tarr will assume the day-to-day responsibility for running the company, but Mr.
Smith, who is 66 years old, will remain chairman, the company said.
Both Mr.
Smith and Mr.
Tarr, who is 47, were traveling yesterday and could not be reached for comment.


Islanders Win One, Lose One
The Islanders, who aren't winning much lately, won an exhibition game tonight but lost something larger and more symbolic.
When they defeated the United States Olympic team, 3-0, at Nassau Coliseum, the game was played beneath three large banners commemorating their Stanley Cup championships.
There was only one problem.
The Islanders won the cup four times from 1980 through 1983.
Missing was the banner from the first championship, in 1980.
"It was stolen," said Greg Bouris, director of public relations.
"We assume it was taken when they were tearing down the sets from the 'American Gladiators' show here on Sunday night." The banner is made of white nylon and measures about 12 by 8 feet, Bouris said.
Is there a reward for its return?
"There might be if we get it back," Bouris said.
"If someone calls, we'll discuss it."


Senators Dimmed Focus of Thomas Hearings; Like Rosa Parks
To the Editor:
The brave performance of Anita F. Hill during her grueling testimony before the Judiciary Committee puts her in the same category as Rosa Parks when she took a seat in the front of the bus and thereby changed the course of the American story.
Ms.
Hill accomplished the same kind of feat; no man will ever again come on to a reluctant woman without considerable risk.
ANNE BERNAYS Cambridge, Mass,.
Oct. 12, 1991
The writer is the author of "Professor Romeo," a novel about sexual harassment.


Twins Hope That Dome, Sweet Dome Will Be Remedy
For the Minnesota Twins, the World Series pattern has been the same as it was four years ago.
Win the first two games in the Metrodome, lose the next three in the National League city, as they did in St.
Louis four years ago and as they did in Atlanta this year with tonight's 14-5 rout by the Braves.
To win this World Series, the Twins now must do what they did four years ago: win the final two games in the Metrodome, beginning Saturday night.


Out of Their League, The Twins Are Lost
The Minnesota Twins may be one of only 14 teams in the American League who believe in the designated hitter, but no team could possibly believe in it more than the American League champions.
It is because the Twins know they cannot win without one, and know that playing by National League rules throws them completely out of kilter offensively.
Three losses in the 1987 World Series suggested that strongly.
Three losses to the Atlanta Braves in Games 3, 4 and 5 of this World Series, culminating in a 14-5 embarrassment tonight, drove the point home completely.


Senators Dimmed Focus of Thomas Hearings; Minimum Age for Court
To the Editor:
The contentious debate surrounding the appointment of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court is the latest, and perhaps most acrimonious, of recent appointments to the Court in a highly political atmosphere.
Claims of popular mandate, the right advice and consent, and the potential length of terms of the justices are involved.


Rhoda Koenig Wed To Peter Marston
Rhoda Koenig, the daughter of Pearl Koenig of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Philip Koenig, was married yesterday in London to Peter Marston, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Marston of London.
The ceremony was performed at the registry of the Chelsea Town Hall.
Mrs.
Marston, 41 years old, is a book reviewer for New York magazine and a theater critic for Punch in London.
She graduated from the City College of the City University of New York.


Abroad at Home; Politics of Resentment
When a former Ku Klux Klan leader and neo-Nazi has a good chance to be elected governor of an American state, it is time to think about what is going wrong in the politics of this country.
David Duke came a close second in the Louisiana gubernatorial primary, finishing just two percentage points behind former Gov.
Edwin Edwards.
Because it happened in Louisiana, there was a certain tendency to put it down as another example of that state's eccentricity.
But it is not a joke.


Beef Industry Account Is Won by Leo Burnett
The Beef Industry Council, as had been expected, awarded its $25 million to $30 million advertising account yesterday to the Leo Burnett Company, Chicago.
The three other finalists in the review were the incumbent, Ketchum Advertising, San Francisco; GSD &amp; M Advertising, Austin, Tex., and DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago.


Man in the News: Norodom Sihanouk; The Prince of Survivors
Fifty years ago this year, the Vichy French occupiers of Cambodia searched for a new, pliable Cambodian monarch, and they passed over more seasoned candidates among the country's royalty in settling on Prince Norodom Sihanouk, an 18-year-old lycee student who seemed to prefer horses and moviegoing to statecraft.
In the half-century since assuming the throne of the Angkor kings, Prince Sihanouk has not only outlasted the French -- he led Cambodia to independence from France in the early 1950's -- he has also somehow managed to survive a coup by rightists, years of imprisonment by maniacal leftists, a civil war and more than a decade in exile.


Senators Dimmed Focus of Thomas Hearings; Symbolic Rape
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen's "Perfect Victim" (column, Oct. 16), on the Senate's treatment of Prof.
Anita F. Hill, is accurate.
If anything, she understates the case.
I suggest that Professor Hill was the victim of a symbolic and low-tech gang rape, meant to humiliate and control her.


New Soviet Era Opens With Israel's Embassy
The Israeli Embassy officially reopened in Moscow today after almost 25 years, clearing the way for the Kremlin to take its seat alongside the United States at the head of the Middle East conference opening in Madrid next week.
But what should have been the triumphant culmination of a longstanding Soviet goal only raised questions about a future Soviet role in world affairs.


Charges of Naming Woman In Rape Case Are Dismissed
Saying that First Amendment guarantees outweighed the right to privacy, a Florida judge ruled here today that the state had no right to bring criminal charges against a weekly supermarket tabloid that published the name of the woman who has accused William K. Smith of raping her.
The decision came as prosecutors and lawyers for Mr.
Smith, a 31-year-old nephew of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, began their final round of pretrial hearings in the rape case.
Mr.
Smith, accused of raping a 30-year-old Florida woman at the Kennedy family's Palm Beach estate in March, is scheduled to go on trial here on Dec. 2, but selection of a six-member jury is scheduled to start Oct. 30.


Giants Sign a Familiar Foot to Replace Injured Bahr
A year ago, when Raul Allegre strained a groin muscle, Matt Bahr replaced him as the Giants' kicker.
Today, in a strange turnabout also caused by an injury, the Giants signed Allegre again.
He seems sure to kick in Sunday night's big division game here between the Giants (4-3) and the Washington Redskins (7-0).
Bahr had been having a splendid season, with 16 field goals in 20 attempts.
His field goal with five seconds left beat the San Francisco 49ers in the season opener, and his field goal with four seconds left beat the Pittsburgh Steelers in the Giants' last game.


CHRONICLE
What does it take to plan for dinner parties for 300 guests that will be going on simultaneously in seven different places in Manhattan?
"Four telephones, three faxes, a very cool head and extra-strength Tylenol," said LEWIS UFLAND, a special-events planner who with his partner, DAVID JANNES, is coordinating dinners being given on Wednesday for the 65th anniversary of Yaddo, the retreat for writers, artists and composers in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.


Miscellany
*
WPP Group P.L.C., London, said yesterday that as expected it would probably postpone paying dividends on its convertible preference shares.
The dividend, due on Thursday, is likely to be paid in June 1993, the company said, adding that it continues to operate within its current banking covenants. *
Carey Bus Lines, which operates routes from midtown Manhattan hotels to Kennedy International and La Guardia airports, will sell advertising space on its buses.
Van Wagner Communications, New York, has been named to sell the space.


SENATORS AND BUSH REACH AGREEMENT ON CIVIL RIGHTS BILL
The White House, Senator John C. Danforth, other Senate Republicans and Senator Edward M. Kennedy reached agreement tonight on the shape of a compromise for a civil rights bill.
Senate Democrats scheduled a caucus for Friday morning to consider it, and Senator Kennedy, their leader on the issue, said he would recommend that his colleagues vote for the compromise on the measure, which would make it easier to sue in job discrimination cases.


Clifford Again Denies Knowledge of B.C.C.I. Link
For the second time in six weeks, Clark M. Clifford went before Congress today to defend his good name.
He insisted, as he had last month, that he had been "grossly deceived" by representatives of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
"Our consciences are clear," Mr.
Clifford said as he painstakingly answered question after question about his relationship, and that of Robert A. Altman, his law partner and protege, with the corrupt international bank.


At the Bar
After all these years, most large law firms are still loath to advertise.
But when Kirkpatrick &amp; Lockhart hired Dick Thornburgh in August, shortly after he stopped being Attorney General and shortly before Pennsylvania voters are to decide whether he should be a United States Senator, it trumpeted the news as loudly as it knew how.
It placed dignified-looking notices in the financial pages of several important newspapers.
It issued press releases, short on what Mr.
Thornburgh would do to earn his keep but long on logrolling.
"His perspectives and counsel on a broad range of issues will be invaluable," said the firm's managing partner, Edward A. Craig 3d.
In reply, Mr.
Thornburgh issued a daring declaration: "I look forward to making a contribution to the firm's practice."


Sampson Is Bought Out
The Sacramento Kings bought out the remaining two years on RALPH SAMPSON'S $2 million annual contract Thursday, enabling the injury-prone center to become a free agent.
The Kings declined to disclose the terms of the buyout.


Big Board Profit Rises
The New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that it earned $7.7 million in the third quarter, up from $2 million a year ago, thanks to lower expenses and more active trading.
The stock exchange said revenue in the three months totaled $89.4 million, up from $86.1 million.
The gains were attributed largely to the upsurge in trading activity in the quarter compared with a year ago, when the market was in the doldrums.


The Big Apple Circus Salutes Coney Island in Its Golden Years
The Big Apple Circus's new show at Lincoln Center, "Greetings From Coney Island," is the troupe's own Victorian riposte to the arrival of recent high-tech art-circus newcomers like the Cirque du Soleil from Montreal, the Circus Oz from Australia and the Flying Cranes of the Moscow Circus.
The production is a lovingly re-created evocation of Coney at the turn of the century, "when it was the world's most famous resort," Paul Binder, the artistic director, said recently.
During the Big Apple's annual 11-week holiday run in Damrosch Park, through Jan. 5, there will be 110 performances in the 1,534-seat heated tent.
"We would like people to see the two sides of Coney Island," Mr.
Binder said.
"The world of the renowned resort as well as the hurly-burly of street life in an era when 300,000 people a day were visitors."


What Some People Will Do in Macy's and Other Windows


Beauty and the Breast
Every year about 150,000 American women undergo breast implant surgery.
Some want to correct a deformity; others, to replace breasts lost to cancer.
Most simply want a bigger, firmer bosom.
And why not?
This is, after all, a country in which the word "cleavage" evokes only one image -- and where there are 101 presumably affectionate nicknames for big breasts.
To hear some of them, "knockers," for instance, is to doubt they were coined by women.
A small proportion of breast implants are filled with saline, which means that if they burst accidentally the fluid is absorbed without adverse effects.
But saline implants can deflate spontaneously, and about 40 percent need to be replaced.
That's why silicone implants are more common, although the scar tissue that often forms around them can make the breasts feel rock-hard.


At the Movies
Hoover Film
Quincy Jones and Francis Ford Coppola.
That's the team that is planning to bring to the screen the Curt Gentry best seller, "J. Edgar Hoover: The Man and His Secrets" (Norton).
The production is the first feature film to come from Quincy Jones Entertainment, a multi-media corporation that is a co-venture by Mr.
Jones and Time Warner Enterprises.
"I'm a musician who is very cinematically oriented," said Mr.
Jones, who was a producer of Steven Spielberg's "Color Purple." "And Francis is a film maker with a strong musical orientation," he added, noting that Mr.
Coppola's father, Carmine, was a musician and composer.
Discussing the study of Hoover, Mr.
Jones, speaking in his capacity as chairman and chief executive officer of Quincy Jones Entertainment, said: "The property, I think, is one of the most exciting possibilities to be put on the screen." It goes to "the core of American power, pros and cons," he said, during Mr.
Hoover's tenure under eight Presidents as head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
"We don't have to make anything up," he added. "That's the best part."
Mr.
Jones, whose company is involved not only in films but also in television, magazines and records, said he hoped the Hoover film would be in production in about a year.
"We're working on the script now, getting the right writer."
Among the company's other feature film projects, he said, is one about Aleksandr Pushkin -- "an epic with a black hero, which you haven't seen before -- a man of literature with the same stature as Dante, Shakespeare and Goethe. But he admitted he was of Ethiopian heritage."
Mr. Jones said the script for the film was being revised.
"Once you get the right script," he said, "it's a roll."  Looking Forward
In the splendid surroundings of Palm Beach, Fla., look for these visitors beginning Nov. 4: Lorraine Bracco, James Belushi and Tony Goldwyn.
It's not vacation time for the three. Far from it.
Work is bringing them there: a thriller titled "Beyond Suspicion," in which Mr.
Belushi and Mr.
Goldwyn play police partners.
Ms.
Bracco plays a wealthy Palm Beach resident who is one of two women Mr.
Belushi's character is involved with.
The other is murdered, and as the detectives delve into the mystery, all of the principals become suspects.
The film, a production for the Samuel Goldwyn Company (Samuel is the father of Tony, the memorable villain of "Ghost"), directed by Andrew Wolk and based on a screenplay by Jim Piddock, will probably be released next summer.
Looking Back
Also planning a Florida visit is Gerard Depardieu.
The ever-busy French star is expected to put in an appearance at the third annual Sarasota French Film Festival in conjunction with a screening of his new comedy, "Mon Pere, Ce Heros" ("My Father, the Hero"), on Nov. 16.
During the festival, from Nov. 14 to 18 at the Sarasota Opera House, 18 French features will receive their world or United States premieres, and tribute will be paid to the 82-year-old Marcel Carne, who will be on hand for a screening of his 1945 classic, "Children of Paradise," on Nov. 17.
The festival, under the direction of the critic Molly Haskell, will open with "Une Epoque Formidable," a dark comedy about four unlikely friends who descend from bourgeois life to life as street people.
The festival gala, a black-tie event on Nov. 15 on the grounds of the John and Mabel Ringling Museum of Art, is to take place in conjunction with a screening of "Les Amants du Pont Neuf" ("Lovers on the Bridge"), Leos Caras's story of a young man and young woman who camp out on Paris's most famous bridge while it is being renovated and move from being neighbors to lovers.
The festival is to close with "La Neige et le Feu" ("Snow and Fire"), Claude Pinoteau's story of a platoon of young men fighting during World War II.


CUNY Teacher Might Lose Post For Racial Talk
The board of the City University of New York plans to vote on Monday on whether to retain Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. as chairman of City College's Afro-American Studies Department, an issue that has divided the university's leadership and prompted energetic lobbying by the professor's opponents.
Since the vote was abruptly scheduled earlier this week, trustees angered by remarks that Dr.
Jeffries made last summer have begun working to win the two votes they say they still need to block his reappointment.
They are hoping to enlist Governor Cuomo, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and other politicians who criticized Dr.
Jeffries's statements in an attempt to bring pressure to bear on CUNY officials and undecided board members.


Realty Groups Suing to Freeze Property Taxes
Stepping up their pressure for a freeze on New York City property taxes, major real estate groups charged yesterday that any further increases would not only be a bad idea but would violate a ceiling set by the State Constitution.
They have also filed a lawsuit seeking to block any increases.
City officials promptly dismissed the claim as overblown.
They said the city could raise taxes by hundreds of millions of dollars without hitting the constitutional ceiling set in 1953, though they acknowledged the city will approach the limit in coming years.


Du Pont Net Down by 5.4%
Citing lower sales and slumping prices for its commodity chemicals and products, the E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company yesterday reported a 5.4 percent decline in third- quarter net income to $504 million, or 75 cents a share.
The earnings, which were near the high end of analysts' expectations, compared with $533 million, or 79 cents a share, earned a year earlier.
The company noted that the current quarter's earnings were bolstered by 15 cents a share from nonrecurring items, mostly asset sales, compared with 7 cents a share a year earlier.


The Fearsome Term-Limit Fire
Voters in the state of Washington and the city of White Plains, N.Y., soon will have a tempting opportunity to throw the rascals out, wholesale.
Propositions on the Nov. 5 ballot in both places would impose limits on politicians' terms in office.
A tempting opportunity, maybe, but term limits are a frighteningly popular delusion.
They would make government worse.
Fed up with bumbling, semi-permanent, self-aggrandizing incumbents, a solid majority of Americans are coming to believe that a complete turnover is the only remedy.
Their frustration is justified but their belief is romantic -- that somehow, inexperienced "citizen politicians" are better than seasoned professionals for jobs that have become steadily more demanding.


Diner's Journal
Homey Southern French
The most enchanting new restaurant in Greenwich Village is not really a new restaurant but a much expanded older establishment.
La Metairie, at 189 West 10th Street, used to hold the distinction of being among the smallest white-tablecloth restaurants in Manhattan, just 16 seats in a barnlike motif.
This year, the owner, Sylvain Fareri, took over an adjacent grocery and enlarged the restaurant to seat 60.
The expansion was done with exquisite care, including rustic-looking white walls and dark wood trim holding barnyard artifacts, firewood stacked on overhead ledges, dried flowers, banquettes wrapped in vibrant Provencal fabrics and windows that open onto the sidewalk in warm weather.


Foreign Buyers Pushing Up Condo Prices
While the values of most apartments have stabilized or are still falling in New York City, those pied-a-terre along Manhattan's most elegant streets continue to climb, with well-heeled foreign investors setting new price records for high-end condominiums, real-estate studies show.
Most of the buyers, many of whom are seeking that fourth home or refuge from tumultuous times in their own countries, continue to pour cash into a sliver of New York's vast residential real-estate market -- expensive condos.
They are bidding up prices along the city's "Gold Coast" avenues while the values of cooperative apartments are stabilizing or still declining.


5 Charged as Heads of Brooklyn Numbers Ring
Five men were charged yesterday with running a Brooklyn gambling ring that the authorities said took in $10 million a year and operated under the protection of the Bonanno crime family.
The 58-count state racketeering indictment said the defendants conducted an extensive numbers operation, using more than 50 storefront betting sites in Brooklyn, including Fort Greene, Red Hook, Bedford-Stuyvesant, East New York and Coney Island.
Several "policy banks" to collect and disburse cash for the ring were also operated in Brooklyn and Manhattan, the indictment said.
Investigators said a secretly taped conversation indicated that the ring collected $200,000 a week.


Review/Film; 2 Derelicts Easily Win The Heart Of a Lawyer
A special sound, that of palms smacking foreheads in disbelief, was heard all over Hollywood when the John Hughes production "Home Alone" emerged as last year's runaway hit.
But on the evidence of his most recently released efforts, Mr.
Hughes is not likely to create similar shock waves any time soon.
With projects like "Career Opportunities," "Dutch" and now "Curly Sue," a film maker who had seemed uncannily well attuned to American audiences now looks badly out of touch.
"Curly Sue," his film in which two derelicts win the heart of an affluent lawyer, hasn't a clue about how either half lives.


On My Mind; Cuomo and U.S. Policy
One of these days a Democratic Presidential candidate may wake up, rub his eyes and shake his head and decide it is time to challenge President Bush on foreign policy.
This country, so deeply involved in the world, somehow leaves foreign policy to diplomats except in time of crisis.
Foreign policy is life and death and too important to leave to diplomats or any other single group of Americans.


2 Advocacy Groups Set For TV Duel
IN households across America on Tuesday, the duel over the remote control for the television set could take on added intensity when two groups compete in urging viewers to turn off, or turn on, their sets.
Their diametrically opposed advice, though largely symbolic, underscores the continuing struggle by special-interest groups to redirect the content of television programming in ways more to their liking.
On one side is Turn Off Your TV Day, organized by Concerned Viewers for Quality Television in Wilmington, Del., a group allied with conservative groups like the American Family Association and Morality in Media.


Senators Dimmed Focus of Thomas Hearings; Legitimate Inquiry
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 9 reprint of a floor statement by Senator John C. Danforth contained a serious and incorrect allegation concerning the work of People for the American Way on the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.


I.R.S. Selects Maryland for New Center
The Internal Revenue Service is planning to consolidate its scattered headquarters operations in a new $200 million center in Prince Georges County, Md.
The new building, containing 1.1 million square feet, will house 4,400 people who now work at 20 different sites in the District of Columbia.
The I.R.S. will retain only its main building at 1111 Constitution Avenue, where the commissioner and his top aides have offices.


Senators Dimmed Focus of Thomas Hearings; Staying in Touch
To the Editor:
Why did Anita F. Hill follow Clarence Thomas from job to job?
How could she have had anything to do with him afterward?
Here is an anecdotal response.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.18
5.12
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.99
5.04
7.21
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.05
5.10
7.16
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.32
7.35
8.46
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.02
8.07
8.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.05
9.10
9.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.88
6.89
7.73
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Film; A Comedy About Life After Margaret Thatcher
"Life Is Sweet," opening today at the Angelika Film Center, is a very special new English comedy by Mike Leigh, the English director whose "High Hopes," one of the hits of the 1988 New York Film Festival, revealed him to be a film maker not quite like any other.
Among other things, Mr.
Leigh makes movies in which the actors participate in the creative process, discovering and refining their characters in the course of long rehearsal periods.
Such collaboration would have sent Hitchcock into permanent retirement.


Auctions
'Master I Am Free'
A 19th-century quilt emblazoned with American flags and depicting white and black people in a variety of activities is among the most discussed folk-art items in the Americana sale taking place at 10:15 A.M. and 2 P.M. tomorrow at Sotheby's in New York.
Nancy Druckman, the director of Sotheby's folk-art department, said this week that the red, white and blue images reflect the optimism felt after the Civil War for a strong Union.
She said the quilt was completed in 1867, a date embroidered on a square showing a black man, wearing a straw hat and striped coat, leading a goat-drawn cart labeled "Ice Cream Done."
"This is one of the most remarkable quilts I've handled in my 20-year tenure here," Mrs.
Druckman said.
"It's most unusual to see a number of black and white people represented on a 19th-century quilt. It was made in New York State, where many people had supported the abolitionist movement. To me it represents the first blush of hopefulness after the Civil War."
Mrs.
Druckman said the unidentified seller, an elderly widower, told her that it had been handed down in his wife's family in New York.
Each of the 42 squares is appliqued and embroidered with a different image of people, flowers, animals or birds banded in red.
On one, a black man speaks to a white man on horseback and his words, "Master I am free," are embroidered between them.
The house estimates the quilt will bring $50,000 to $80,000.
At the same session, Sotheby's will auction 26 weather vanes from a collection of about 70 acquired over 20 years by David L. Davies, a San Francisco graphics designer and real-estate investor.
The rest are to be offered in Americana sales in January and next October.
Mr.
Davies decided this summer to send his weather vanes to Sotheby's after he sold his carriage house in New Jersey, where they were housed.
"He had tapered off collecting weather vanes in recent years," Mrs.
Druckman said.
Sotheby's estimates that the collection will bring $700,000 to $1 million; the group to be auctioned tomorrow is estimated to sell for $110,000 to $150,000.
Weather vanes of vehicles, a special interest of Mr.
Davies, include a rare mid-19th-century copper vane of a fire-hose reeler, which is estimated to sell for $20,000 to $25,000, and a copper fire engine from the late 19th century made by Harris &amp; Company of Boston, at $25,000 to $35,000.
Others depicting horses, cars, a bicycle, a biplane and a hook and ladder are estimated to bring $5,000 or less each.
Important Pedigrees
Several impressive German silver vessels to be auctioned in a sale at 10 A.M. and 2 P.M. on Wednesday at Christie's in New York were bought in the 1930's and 40's by Siegfried Kramarsky, a German-born banker, philanthropist and art collector who died in 1961.
Mr.
Kramarsky also owned van Gogh's "Portrait of Dr. Gachet," which brought $82.5 million at Christie's in New York last year in a sale to a Japanese industrialist.
"These are marvelous things with important pedigrees that are fresh to the market," said Christopher Hartop, who heads Christie's silver department.
For example, he said, Mr.
Kramarsky paid $160 for a gilded silver squirrel perched on a tree, an item made in Nuremberg, Germany, about 1600 and bought at a 1947 New York auction of silver originally owned by J. Pierpont Morgan.
Christie's estimates the squirrel will bring $40,000 to $60,000.
A silver-gilt cup in the form of a leather-covered shoe, a vessel made for the shoemaker's guild about 1580 in Nuremberg, was bought by Mr.
Kramarsky for $650 at a 1949 sale in New York of the collection of Joseph Brummer, an art dealer.
Christie's estimates the shoe will sell for $40,000 to $60,000.
Another Kramarsky object from Nuremberg combines gilded silver and a nautilus shell to make a covered cup on a stand with finials of a snarling winged dragon and Neptune.
Christie's presale estimate for this richly embellished object from about 1630 is $50,000 to $80,000.
A Bankrupt Toy Store
Christie's in New York announced this week that it would auction on Dec. 16 the period toys from the Manhattan branch of Mint and Boxed.
The three-story toy shop was opened a year ago by Jeffrey S. Levitt, a British collector turned dealer.
The store, on Madison Avenue at 84th Street, closed in May when Mint and Boxed filed for bankruptcy.
The 550 toys are to be auctioned without starting prices in a sale that Christie's estimates will total more than $1.5 million.
The contents of Mr.
Levitt's store in Edgware, Middlesex, near London, are to be auctioned on Jan. 16 by Sotheby's in London in a sale of 500 toys that it estimates will total $850,000.
The store went into receivership this year.
. . .
SOTHEBY'S, York Avenue at 72d Street, Manhattan,(212) 606-7245.
Viewing hours for the Americana: 10 A.M. to 1 P.M. today.
CHRISTIE'S, Park Avenue at 59th Street, Manhattan, (212) 546-1010.
Viewing hours for the silver: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. today and tomorrow; 1 to 5 P.M.
Sunday; 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday and 10 A.M. to 2 P.M.
Tuesday.


Economic Scene; Damage Control On Banking Bill
THE nation's largest banks joined the Treasury Department in damage control yesterday, clearly caught off guard by the agreement reached Wednesday by two long-feuding House chairmen on comprehensive banking legislation.
For months, the Treasury and the banks have called for sweeping legislation to broaden bank powers -- legislation far different from what was hammered out by the two Democrats.


P.&amp; G. Net Is Off 3.4%; Sales Rise
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company said yesterday that profits fell 3.4 percent for the quarter, although sales increased by 8.4 percent.
Profits for the big Cincinnati packaged-goods concern were $536 million, or $1.52 a share, down from $555 million, or $1.57 a share, a year ago.


For Children
Pumpkin Parade
New York Botanical Garden  Southern Boulevard and 200th Street  Bedford Park, the Bronx  (212) 220-8982  All ages  Sunday
Children dressed in costumes will have the chance to show off by parading through the New York Botanical Garden's formal gardens.
The parade, in its third year, will start at the Museum Mall, lined by tulip trees and hushed with autumnal colors, and proceed over Compass Garden Hill and down Perennial Garden Way to the elegant Conservatory.
Afterward, a drawing for prizes will be held, jugglers and clowns will entertain and an edifying moment or two will be provided by Earth Tunes, a folk group that sings ecology-mined songs.
Babies and children in strollers can make their way easily on the parade route.
The activities are from 1:30 to 3:30 P.M.; the procession starts at 2.
Suggested garden admission is $3 for adults and children 6 and over; free for children under 6.
All Hallow's Eve Campfire  Richmondtown Restoration  441 Clarke Avenue  Richmondtown, S.I.  (718) 351-1611  Recommended ages: 5 and up  Tomorrow
Fred Housman is a character actor who lives on Staten Island.
For Halloween, he likes to tell stories that relate to his favorite borough.
Some of the stories he'll spin tomorrow night will also be a little scary.
Families can listen as they sit outdoors near a campfire, behind the Richmondtown Restoration tinsmith's shop.
Everyone is encouraged to bring a blanket or a beach chair to sit on, though benches will be provided for those who forget.
The storytelling lasts about two hours, with a break midway for sustenance: hot chocolate and doughnuts (about 50 cents each).
The moon was officially full on Wednesday, but it should still shed a good dose of light tomorrow.
Admission to the storytelling, which starts promptly at 7:30 P.M., is $7 for nonmember adults and $5 for members; $3.50 for nonmember children and $2.50 for member children.
People do not usually wear costumes, but they are hardly verboten.
Haunted Walk  The Nethermead Prospect Park Ninth Street and Prospect Park West entrance  Park Slope, Brooklyn  (718) 788-0055  All ages  Tomorrow and Sunday
The Haunted Walk is a tradition that the Prospect Park Alliance, a group of volunteers, has kept for the last 12 years.
Its intent is to scare people.
With the help of about 50 volunteer "actors" dressed as ghouls, goblins, vampires, Snow White, the Wicked Witch, the Headless Horseman, armless and legless monsters and otherwise creepy creatures, the group usually succeeds.
A 10-minute walk, arranged by the alliance but led by the Urban Park Rangers, takes brave visitors through a ravine and past coffins, monsters with daggers, and spooky tombstones.
The less courageous can merely head over to the kiddie carnival on the Nethermead and partake in such harmless activities as toss games, dancing, singing or eating.
The tours are from noon to 3 P.M., as is the carnival.
Admission is free. 'Go Batty'  Central Park Zoo Fifth Avenue at 64th Street Manhattan (212) 861-6030 All ages Tomorrow and Sunday
Halloween takes on a feral dimension at the Central Park Zoo, where children will get to pose with a giant fruit-bat poster.
Costumed ghosts of extinct species -- including a dodo bird -- will haunt the zoo, and passports will be given out to help visitors travel around the world to such places as the Polar Circle.
Children will also get the chance to become, say, a snow monkey -- which has a reddish face and hails from Japan -- for a day by having their faces painted.
Paper towels will be on hand.
Argentina Ziegler, from Panama, will regale zoogoers with her own animal stories, and the Bat Cart, a resource of bat facts, will show children how to build their own bat box to hang outdoors and attract the flying marsupials.
Visitors are encouraged to wear Halloween costumes.
Zoo admission is $2.50 for adults and 50 cents for children aged 3 to 12.
The special activities will be held rain or shine from 11 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
The cafeteria will be serving caramel apples and cider. 'Sleepy Hollow' Weekend
Sunnyside  Route 9  Tarrytown, N.Y.
Philipsburg Manor, Upper Mills  Route 9  North Tarrytown, N.Y.  (914) 631-8200  All ages  Tomorrow and Sunday
Up in Tarrytown along the Hudson River, where somnolent valleys vie with steep ledges and dense woods, Washington Irving lived and wrote "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow." At Sunnyside, his 19th-century country estate, Halloween will be celebrated with showings of "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow," an animated film narrated by Glenn Close, and with shadow-puppet performances.
On the estate lawn overlooking the Hudson, a storyteller dressed in 19th-century clothing will recount some of Irving's tales.
Children will be asked to write a new ending to the Sleepy Hollow story.
The film and puppet shows will take place continually in the house's theater.
Two miles upriver, at the Colonial Philipsburg Manor, Upper Mills, the animated Walt Disney film "The Legend" will be shown in an auditorium, and in the manor house a storyteller will relate local folklore.
Tours will be given of the manor house, the working grist mill, farm and barn, which is home to sheep, oxen, chickens and cats.
Visitors can then cross a bridge over Route 9 and run along the path on which the Headless Horseman pursued Ichabod Crane, past the Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow and the burying ground.
There, in the dark shadow of the grove, Ichabod "beheld something huge, misshappen, black and towering." Church and graveyard tours will be given at 1 and 2:30 P.M. both days; activities are from 1 to 5 P.M.
Cider and cookies will be sold at Philipsburg Manor and Sunnyside; picnicking is welcome.
Admission to both sites is $10 for adults and $5 for children ages 6 and up.
Admission to one site is $6 for adults, $3 for students.
Children under 6, free.
KEEP IN MIND
"THE GHOSTS OF CLEAR COMFORT," where costumed "ghosts" bring the former residents of the 300-year-old Alice Austen house back to life.
Visitors may wear costumes and participate in a parade, bob for apples and paint pumpkins.
At the Alice Austen House, 2 Hylan Boulevard, Rosebank, S.I.
Tomorrow from 1 to 4 P.M.
Admission, $3 a person (children under 5 free).
Registration: (718) 816-4506.
HALLOWEEN NIGHT WALKS, with museum volunteers wearing costumes presenting scary skits along wooded trails, for children 5 years old and up.
Take flashlights or glowing light-sticks.
Tonight and tomorrow from 7 to 9:30 P.M. at the Greenburgh Nature Center, Dromore Road off Central Avenue, Scarsdale, N.Y.
Admission, $5 for members, $7 for nonmembers.
Reservations: (914) 723-3470.
HALLOWEEN FUN, featuring "The Polka Dot Pigs," a short Halloween play, and face and pumpkin painting.
The play begins at 11 A.M. and 12:30 and 2 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday.
Play admission, $4 per person; there is a $3 parking fee.
At the Planting Fields Arboretum, Planting Fields Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.
Information: (516) 922-9206.
"DEEPAVALI FESTIVAL OF INDIA," featuring, among other things, a mela (children's fair) with elephant rides, clay workshops, mask-making, face-painting, puppeteer and toy-making demonstrations, folk-dancing lessons, games and traditional foods.
Sunday from noon to 5 P.M. at the South Street Seaport, South Street, Manhattan.
Free.
Information: (212) 825-0385.
HOMECOMING FAIR, with children's activities, contests and homemade food.
Tomorrow from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. at the Nightingale-Bamford School, 20 East 92d Street, Manhattan.
Admission, $1.
Information: (212) 289-5020.
"LANGUAGE THROUGH THE ARTS," an art exhibition by Chinatown's P.S. 130 students, some of whom were taught by the performance artists Eric Bogosian and Laurie Anderson; sponsored by the Franklin Furnace museum.
At the Chatham Square Public Library, 33 East Broadway, near Market Street, Manhattan.
Tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Monday, noon to 6 P.M.; Tuesday, noon to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 964-6598.
"BALLET AND MUSIC," presented by the Little Orchestra Society for children ages 6 to 12, featuring students from the School of American Ballet and music from "Coppelia," "A Midsummer Night's Dream" and "The Firebird." Tomorrow at 11 A.M. and 1 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
Tickets, $15 to $28.
Information: (212) 704-2100.


Charges of Naming Woman In Rape Case Are Dismissed
Saying that First Amendment guarantees outweighed the right to privacy, a Florida judge ruled here today that the state had no right to bring criminal charges against a weekly supermarket tabloid that published the name of the woman who has accused William K. Smith of raping her.
The decision came as prosecutors and lawyers for Mr.
Smith, a 31-year-old nephew of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, began their final round of pretrial hearings in the rape case.
Mr.
Smith, accused of raping a 30-year-old Florida woman at the Kennedy family's Palm Beach estate in March, is scheduled to go on trial here on Dec. 2, but selection of a six-member jury is scheduled to start Oct. 30.


Art in Review
Dike Blair  Ealan Wingate 578 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Nov. 2
With its deep maroon walls and carpeting, blue mood lighting, and new-age synthesizer music in the background, this gallery has been transformed by the sort of high-concept decor that is intended to be soothing but invariably sets one's teeth on edge.
The futuristic tone of the surroundings fits in perfectly with the work on view: large Cibachrome photomontages of pictures made at Epcot Center, the world's-fair-like theme park at Disney World in Orlando, Fla. (Epcot is officially an acronym for Experimental Prototype Community of Tomorrow, but as Dike Blair points out, workers there say it stands for Every Person Comes Out Tired.)
Mood is everything here.
Mr.
Blair photographs elliptically, recording fragments of roof, rows of mirrors that don't reflect anything, patterns of bubbles in water.
He then combines these into more or less abstract but suggestive montages, in some cases spraypainting certain areas to provide smooth transitions between different sections of the image.
He laminates the resulting prints to large sheets of glass on which he has etched computer-generated patterns.
In two pieces here he finishes off these dense image-sandwiches by painting small pictures of clocks on the surface of the glass.
These smart pieces strive for the impossibly smooth seamlessness of the environments they are based on.
There's a pseudo-religiosity to these pictures, with their pop Surrealistic touches and turbid theatricality.
At the same time, they seem suffused with a bittersweet sense of loss, a nostalgia for the sort of optimistic future based on new technology that Epcot promises.
Like many others these days, Mr.
Blair appears to regard such promises with a blend of mistrust and yearning.


Harley Gains in Profits But Loses on Wall St.
Over the last decade, Harley-Davidson Inc., has managed to fend off an onslaught by Japanese motorcycle makers, reverse a reputation for shoddy quality and attract domestic and foreign buyers with distinctly styled machines.
This week, when its third-quarter earnings grew but failed to measure up to analysts' estimates, its stock was hammered.
Harley shares dropped sharply for a second day yesterday, closing at $40.75, down $11.50, in heavy trading.
Shares changing hands totaled 4.2 million, making Harley the second-most-active issue on the New York Stock Exchange.
Since the selloff began, the stock has lost $18.125, or nearly a third of it value.


Ford and Mazda Warn Consumers About Defect
The Ford Motor Company and Mazda Motor of America today warned consumers of a potential transmission defect on several pickup, minivan and utility vehicle models built at Ford's plant in Louisville, Ky.
The defect could allow a vehicle to roll even if the shift lever is in the park position.
Ford said it had not figured out the exact nature of the defect and was advising affected drivers to use the parking brake when their trucks were not in use.
Ford officials said they hoped to announce a recall before the end of the year, when the company would repair or replace defective parts.


Sounds Around Town
Appalachian Sophistication
Gail Wynters, Terrace of the Village Gate, 160 Bleecker Street, Manhattan, (212) 475-5120.
The singer Gail Wynters provides a mixture of down-home Appalachia (a heritage of her Kentucky upbringing and a family singing group), jazz and blues (learned from her father's record collection) and sophisticated cabaret (acquired since she reached New York City in the early 1970's).
The mixture has been polished to create an authenticity that is as much at home at Carnegie Hall and the Monterey Jazz Festival as it is in the country church where she was trained by her father, a Nazarene preacher.
Accompanied by the rising young jazz pianist Bill Charlop and the bassist Sean Smith, she sings tonight and tomorrow from 10 P.M. to 3 A.M. and on Sunday from 10 P.M. to 2 A.M.
There is a $6.50 minimum but no cover charge.
A Whyte Anniversary
Ronny Whyte, Knickerbocker Bar and Grill, 33 University Place, at Ninth Street, Manhattan, (212) 228-8490.
The pianist, singer and composer Ronny Whyte is celebrating the 10th anniversary of his collaboration with the bassist Frank Tate this weekend at the Knickerbocker, a spacious, open room that has been one of their regular stops in New York City.
For the occasion, they are adding new material to their repertory, including Bill Evans's tune "For Nanette," which has been given lyrics by Roger Schore and retitled "In April," as well as Joanne Brackeen's "African Aztec" and a song called "High on You," which has music by the saxophonist Al Cohn.
The pair will play -- and Mr.
Whyte will occasionally sing -- tonight and tomorrow, starting at 9:45 and continuing until 2 A.M.
There is a $3 cover charge but no minimum.


Frugal? A Cheap Shot, Maintains Nederlander
Robert Nederlander, the managing general partner of the Yankees, yesterday denied recent reports that the team planned to become more frugal and maintained that the club would pursue free agents this winter.
Several published reports have said that the Yankees would pass up potentially expensive free agents like Bobby Bonilla and that the team was heading toward an economic downswing.
Nederlander sounded agitated that the Yankees, perhaps the richest team in baseball, were being cast as cheap and denied any economic changes had occurred within the organization.


Governor of Massachusetts Seeks to Overhaul Schools
Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts today proposed an overhaul of the state's elementary and secondary schools that would include turning over some school management to private companies and shifting policy-making power from local elected school committees to principals, parents and teachers.
The Governor's plan comes at a time when Massachusetts public schools are grappling with the effects of three years of state aid reductions, including widespread teacher layoffs.
Critics immediately attacked the plan for its absence of new funding proposals.


N.F.L. or C.I.A.? Giants Hide
And now, a real spy drama involving the Giants.
Of their three major practices each week, the Giants usually work Wednesdays and Thursdays on a grass field adjoining Giants Stadium and Fridays on the Astroturf field inside the stadium.
This week, they moved the Wednesday and Thursday practices inside the stadium to head off any spies from Sunday night's opponent, the Washington Redskins.


Coach Is Suspended
The Indiana football coach, BILL MALLORY, has been suspended for one game because he criticized game officials and conference personnel, the Big Ten Conference said yesterday.


Police Union Says Calling Poor Shiftless Was Just a Joke, Sort of
In an appeal for raises, the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association has characterized welfare recipients in court papers as "lazy and shiftless." But a lawyer for the union said yesterday that it was just kidding -- for the most part.
The union, which has been frustrated in efforts to negotiate a new contract, argued that money used for welfare would be better spent on pay increases for police officers.
The reference to welfare recipients may reflect what labor experts called the anger of the union's president, Phil Caruso, at the city's resistance to granting raises.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday about trading in the stock of Anergen Inc. misstated the relationship between Merck &amp; Company and the Repligen Corporation.
Merck is no longer working with Repligen on developing a method of preventing infection in a person who has been exposed to the AIDS virus, but the two companies are working on a possible vaccine for people not yet exposed to the disease.


How the Budget Gap Is Estimated
Estimating New York State's budget deficit is an exercise that is partly technical, partly speculative and, certainly, partly political.
The Cuomo administration, which has already projected that the deficit would range from $500 million to $800 million, is expected to come up with a more precise figure next week.


New Fight In Albany Over Budget
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and top lawmakers are not sure yet how big the budget deficit announced yesterday is, but today they appeared to be heading for a collision over the question of how to get rid of it.
Governor Cuomo said today that he favored a broad approach to finding the savings, or the revenue, to close the $500 million to $800 million gap.
He gave no details, saying he would not do so until he knew the deficit's exact size.


Army of 70 Agents Investigates Fires at 2 Dozen Florida Churches
Federal arson investigators converged here today to join a task force trying to track down an arsonist who has set fire to five churches in the last week and who may be responsible for two dozen other church fires this year.
"I've never seen anything like it," said Malcolm Boyd, the special agent in charge for the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, which is leading the investigation.


EXECUTIVES
*
A.T.&amp; T., New York, appointed John R. Smart to the new position of senior vice president-international public affairs.
He had been president-business communications services. *
Blount Inc., Montgomery, Ala., a manufacturing and construction company, named Frank H. McFadden executive vice president-legal affairs and D. Joseph McInnes senior vice president-administration.


Minorities Join to Fight Polluting Neighborhoods
Asserting that minorities suffered the most damage from industrial pollution and attracted the least attention from the Environmental Protection Agency, community groups today opened a national conference intended to prevent their neighborhoods from being the targets of toxic contamination.
The four-day event here is expected to attract 500 to 600 leaders of black, Hispanic, Indian and Asian groups from around the country who have built one of the vibrant new movements in American environmentalism.


SmithKline Executive To Take Red Cross Job
The American Red Cross said yesterday that Frederick W. Kyle, a senior United States executive with the SmithKline Beecham P.L.C., the large British-based pharmaceutical company, will direct a previously announced $120 million reorganization of the Red Cross network of blood banks.
Mr.
Kyle, 59 years old, will resign as president of commercial operations at SmithKline Pharmaceuticals in Philadelphia to become a Red Cross senior vice president.
He will direct the implementation of new quality control and computerized data systems in the $700 million annual program that supplies 52 percent of the nation's blood needs.


Surprise! We Gave Hussein the Bomb
Iraq's nuclear "surprise" is one of the best-known secrets the world has ever chosen to ignore.
We should shake our heads sadly when officials like Hans Blix, Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency, claim ignorance of Saddam Hussein's nuclear intentions, as he did only months ago.
The facts suggest a very different record of events.
Information about the Iraqi bomb has been available for nearly 15 years.
More than 450 Western companies helped build Mr.
Hussein's nuclear machine, sending thousands of technicians into Iraqi weapons facilties on lucrative commercial contracts.
But neither the U.S., its Western allies nor the atomic energy agency have wanted to hear the truth about Iraq, let alone take the steps to do something about it.


Restaurants
John Clancy's
John Clancy's, the 11-year-old fixture in Greenwich Village, was one of the first upscale downtown fish houses, a place where mesquite grilling was pioneered and where presentation was always as provocative as the arousing flavor sensations.
Founded by John Clancy, the chef and cookbook author, the restaurant has been owned for the last five years by his original partner, Sam Rubin.
The main dining room and bar, which are several steps below street level, are done in cheerful whitewashed brick and pearl gray, with bucolic pastels on the walls; an upstairs dining room is done in similar shades, although the lighting is so low you have to hold your menu next to the candle to see it.
John Clancy's traditionally has been an urbane spot where diners dressed well, although on recent visits I saw everything from designer suits to T-shirts and sneakers.


Plan to Pinpoint Gay Jurors Debated
An aide to a Queens judge said yesterday that the judge was not likely to permit defense lawyers to ask about the sexual orientation of prospective jurors in the case of a slaying that prosecutors attribute to anti-homosexual violence.
But a defense lawyer's remark Wednesday that he would seek to ask this question ignited sharp disagreement yesterday among legal experts -- including those who battle for gay rights -- over whether such a question was permissible or appropriate in such a case.


For Haiti: The Essential First Step
The crisis in Haiti will not be over until the legitimate President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, is restored to office.
Despite resistance to his return by much of Haiti's narrow political elite, and disturbing allegations about his style of rule, the entire hemisphere has a stake in his return.
What's at stake is not Mr.
Aristide's personal franchise but constitutional legitimacy, a principle not yet secure in nations like Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Peru, Uruguay or Paraguay.
All have recently liberated themselves from long periods of military rule.
But all suffer from economic and social problems that make them vulnerable to military pressure.


Critic's Choice/Music; Silent Films With Live Accompaniment
There has always been a devoted audience in New York for old black-and-white silent films, and musicians who have kept alive the compositional and improvisatory skills needed to accompany them.
Tonight and tomorrow, the Metropolitan Museum of Art is presenting three silent films with live orchestral accompaniments by Armin Brunner, a conductor and composer, and the excellent Orchestra of St.
Luke's.
The first, tonight at 7, is Friedrich Wilhelm Murnau's "Nosferatu" (1922), the first filmed version of the Dracula story, with a score Mr.
Brunner put together based on works by Bach. (On Wednesday at 8 P.M., the organist Lee Erwin is to play his score for a showing of the film at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street in Manhattan.)


Pop/Jazz; Singing The Praises of Cabaret
"AN endangered art form that asks us to strip away our urban defenses for an hour and admit a little vulnerability."
That is how the writer James Gavin distills the essence of the cabaret experience in the final chapter of "Intimate Nights: The Golden Age of New York Cabaret" (Grove Weidenfeld), his richly atmospheric history of Manhattan nightclub life over the last half-century.


SURGEONS REBUFF U.S. AIDS REQUEST
The nation's largest organization of surgeons has joined other medical groups in refusing to draw up a list of procedures that might pose a high risk of transmitting the AIDS virus from doctor to patient.
The group, the American College of Surgeons, said Monday that there had not been a single documented case in which a patient had acquired the virus from a surgeon.
As a result, it said, there is no scientific basis for suggesting that a particular surgical procedure carried a high risk.


Gretzky's Dad Better
All he did was sit up and speak to his family, but the words WALTER GRETZKY spoke not only thrilled his relatives, but were also music to the ears of the Los Angeles Kings.
His brief conversation on Wednesday meant that the 53-year-old Gretzky had regained consciousness after surgery for a brain aneurysm and that his son, WAYNE GRETZKY, who had maintained a hospital vigil in Hamilton, Ontario, would soon be rejoining the Kings.
The younger Gretzky, who said he expected to play against the Red Wings on Monday, suggested that he, too, had benefited from the stay in the hospital after hurting his back in the Canada Cup last month.


Industry Wins Bid For Insurer
California regulators today selected an industry-backed bailout of the Executive Life Insurance Company as the best solution to the insurer's failure, but said the plan would have to be clarified before it could win their final approval.
John Garamendi, California's Insurance Commissioner, said he had chosen the plan from among eight competing bids because it offered the best deal for Executive Life's 372,000 policyholders nationwide, and because it had the financial backing of virtually every life insurer in the country.


DDB Needham Laying Off 35
In another sign that the advertising industry recession continues unabated, DDB Needham Worldwide, New York, has dismissed an additional 35 employees.
In a memo from Peter Falcone, president of the agency's New York office, the layoffs were attributed to further erosion in client spending levels.
The cutbacks, which follow the dismissal of 22 people earlier this year, are being made from the ranks of corporate employees as well as from New York office staff.
Total employment in New York now stands at 672.


Gene Roddenberry, 'Star Trek' Creator, Dies at 70
Gene Roddenberry, the Hollywood writer and producer who created the 1960's science-fiction television series "Star Trek," which inspired six feature films, a sequel series in the 1980's and legions of space-age devotees known as Trekkies, died yesterday at Santa Monica Hospital Medical Center in California.
He was 70 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Roddenberry had been ill for about six weeks and died of a blood clot, said John Wentworth, a spokesman for Paramount Pictures.
But Wendy Gullies, a spokeswoman for the hospital, said the cause of death was listed as cardiopulmonary arrest.


Investors in UJB Suggest a Merger
An investor group led by Neil J. Weisman, which has recently acquired 9.9 percent of the UJB Financial Corporation, a Princeton, N.J., bank holding company company that owns the various United Jersey banks, has asked the board to consider merging with another banking concern.
Mr.
Weisman, who is president of the Chilmark Capital Corporation, said other banks were interested in acquiring UJB, the third-largest banking company in New Jersey, with about $13 billion in assets.


Our Towns
One year ago Lisa Hedley took a brief vacation from her career as a Los Angeles entertainment lawyer to return to this northwest corner of Connecticut to visit her parents.
She's still here.
And so is the Bantam Cinema.
That's no coincidence because Ms.
Hedley canceled her departure in order to buy the 73-year-old barn-like structure, believed to be the state's oldest continuously operated movie house.
These are difficult times for theaters in general, even those in populous New York, which lost two hallowed theaters in recent months.


On Capitol Hill, More Ripples From the Thomas Confirmation Process


Braves Grabbing Whatever It Takes
For weeks, the sign has been a fixture at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium: "The Braves -- Too Legit to Quit." Given the events of the last three nights, the claim appears too true to be questioned.
The Braves have shown more than a flair for the dramatic, demonstrating a post-season passion for the improbable and performing best when the tension has been the highest.


Arabs Meeting in Syria Bar Separate Deals With Israel
Palestine Liberation Organization representatives and Arab diplomats who will take part in the Madrid peace conference agreed today that none of the Arab participants would make any separate deals with Israel.
But they failed to endorse a Syrian proposal that would preclude Arab participation in regionwide talks on environmental and arms control issues until Israel had returned occupied Arab lands.
After two days of meetings here, the representatives from Lebanon, Jordan, Syria, Egypt and the P.L.O. agreed in a joint statement to "guarantee a unified Arab stand throughout all the phases of the conference and the talks that complement it."


Senators Dimmed Focus of Thomas Hearings; Iago Said It
To the Editor:
On Oct. 12, at about 5 P.M., Senator Alan K. Simpson, a Republican member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, told Judge Clarence Thomas to take heart and read Shakespeare, particularly "Othello." He would find comfort there for a troubled heart.
Then Senator Simpson proceeded to read the following lines with a precise passion:
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord, Is the immediate jewel of their souls: Who steals my purse steals trash; 'tis something, nothing; 'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands; But he that filches from me my good name Robs me of that which not enriches him, And makes me poor indeed
. -- (Act III, Scene iii)


No Headline
In a board-room revolt against a computer industry legend, directors of the Compaq Computer Corporation have ousted the company's president and chief executive, Joseph (Rod) Canion.
The dismissal came late Thursday, a day after Compaq reported its first loss since Mr.
Canion and two colleagues started the company in 1982.





Pearl Harbor and Asian-Americans
Franklin Roosevelt said Dec. 7, 1941, was "a date which will live in infamy," but he could not have imagined all the reasons.
As many Americans prepare to observe the 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, other Americans note a rise in acts of anti-Asian bias and fear the observance will bring more.
They have reason to be concerned.
In January 1990, a scuffle in a Korean-American grocery in Brooklyn resulted in a long and ugly boycott of all the Korean-owned stores in the neighborhood.
Pickets handed out leaflets to discourage shopping "with people who do not look like us."
In Orange County, California, in June three Japanese women were assaulted in a bar because they were speaking Japanese.
The attack reflected a sharp rise in anti-Asian incidents in southern California.


Traffic Alert
BROOKLYN BRIDGE CLOSED WESTBOUND Manhattan-bound lanes closed until 6 A.M.
Monday while expansion joints are installed.
Delays likely on the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway and other roads leading to the bridge.
ALTERNATE ROUTES Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, Manhattan Bridge or Williamsburg Bridge.


This Halloween Loot Won't Cause Cavities
Halloween inspires children's visions of ghosts and pirates and a bounty of candy to be smuggled home in trick-or-treat bags.
But parents are often wary of the damage done by excessive amounts of sugar.
One alternative to door-to-door sweets, particularly for younger children, is books.
Miniature versions (less than 3 inches square) of the classic Little Golden Books have been packaged as Halloween party favors.


Court Says Holders' States May Bar Charge-Card Fees
In a victory for holders of bank credit cards, a Federal court in Boston has ruled that banks issuing cards may not charge fees to customers in states that prohibit such fees, even if the fees are allowed under the laws of the state where the bank is based.
States vary widely in the amount of fees they allow card issuers to charge for late payments, annual renewals and bounced checks.
Bankers worry that the court ruling, if not overturned, will require them to adjust their prices for each state, or perhaps charge higher interest rates to compensate for fees they would no longer be allowed to collect.


Sears Alters Rules Governing Its Board
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, moving to make its corporate governance appear more responsive to shareholders, announced a series of measures today that some experts said would indeed give investors greater say in how the troubled retailing and financial-services giant is run.
Other corporate-governance experts disagreed, saying the measures were either insignificant or could easily be undermined by management.
The measures include making confidential the voting by shareholders in elections for board seats and placing more outsiders on various Sears boards.


For Skiers, Bargains if Not Snow
This is a great year for bargains in ski equipment.
Since early August, ski shops around the nation have been holding sales with markdowns of up to 70 percent.
It's not always clear that the equipment on sale is left over from the 1990-91 year, but that's not much of a drawback.
With changing technology in skis and boots, is last year's equipment as good as what is coming on the market this season?
The answer is a qualified yes.
"Every year skis are getting better," said Bill Tanler, a former editor of Ski Tech, a publication for ski-shop mechanics, as the artisans are called, "but the basic technology has been pretty well mastered, so there are not many dogs on the market anymore.


Florida Church Fires Up to 23
A series of church fires across the state that has stumped investigators grew to 23 today.
Since July 1990, churches of various Christian denominations have been ravaged by fires that were ruled arson, suspicious or of an undetermined cause.
A fire today at the First Lutheran Church of Gainesville was listed as suspicious, officials said.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Bridge
In the past 13 months there have been four situations at major championships in which committees have had to make decisions changing, or not changing, the result of a match.
The most recent was during the Venice Cup competition in Yokohama earlier this month.
At the end of the quarterfinal the United States II team, which eventually won the title, appeared to have won by just 5 imps after a 64-deal struggle.
The British then complained to the tournament director about the diagramed deal.


Review/Film; A Plain Jane, a Chic Friend and All Their Creepy Men
"Antonia and Jane" is probably the only film that will ever be made in which the English novelist Iris Murdoch plays a catalytic role without appearing or receiving a writing credit.
In the tale of a friendship between two Englishwomen -- the sleek blonde Antonia McGill (Saskia Reeves) and the nerdy, owlish Jane Hartman (Imelda Staunton) -- Miss Murdoch serves as an unwitting sexual guru.
The weirdest of the creepy men who wind in and out of the two women's lives is one of Jane's boyfriends, a literary type named Norman (Richard Hope) who requires readings aloud from Miss Murdoch's novels before he is capable of making love.
Jane happens to detest Miss Murdoch's writing, so this presents problems.


Review/Opera; The True Elixir of Love Is in the Music, Not the Bottle
At the very end of the Metropolitan Opera's new production of "L'Elisir d'Amore" by Donizetti, which received its first performance on Thursday night, backdrops of pink and white clouds and flying cupids descended, blocking out the painted countryside of the Italian village.
Scaffolding in the shape of a mock proscenium descended as well, lighted up as if Christmas had arrived, framing the pastel heavens.
And finally the carriage of Dr.
Dulcamara rolled onstage, pulled by cardboard horses nearly as pink and white as the clouds surrounding them.
The Doctor, having sold his supply of love elixir, prepared to ride off into the clouds as two extras ran on stage with a scroll and unrolled it to reveal the words "Viva l'amore."
No doubt John Copley, in conceiving this bizarrely fantastical finish to his production, and Beni Montresor, in designing the sets and brightly colored costumes nearly everybody was wearing, wanted to create a sense of irrepressible joy, acknowledging the light-hearted pleasantries of this Rossini-ish score.
Donizetti wrote the work in less than two months to restore his reputation as a composer of popular hits after an operatic failure ("Ugo").
If the score is played with just the right touch of simplicity, stylish grace and virtuosic ease, the audience should feel that the true elixir is not the quack's potion or the money the peasant Nemorino inherits that wins him the attentions of every girl in the village, but the florid seductions of the music itself.


New Jersey Law to Limit Guns Is Being Ignored
More than a year after New Jersey imposed the toughest assault-weapons law in the country, the law is proving difficult if not impossible to enforce.
Only four military-style weapons have been turned in to the State Police and another 14 were confiscated.
The state knows the whereabouts of fewer than 2,000 other guns, even after owners were given a year's grace to register their arms as legal sporting weapons or have them certified as inoperable -- and despite the fact that it is now a felony to possess unregistered weapons.


Next Stop, Yugoslavia
It's not that they don't have drug tests in Yugoslavia, but that they do in Italy that explains why MICHEAL RAY RICHARDSON has left his Italian league team and is negotiating with a Yugoslav club.
Richardson, the former Knick and Net who was banned from the National Basketball Association in 1986 for violating its drug policy, failed two drug tests after he returned from a visit to the United States last month to begin his fourth season in Italy, with Knorr Bologna.


Supporters of Ousted Leader Freed by Haitian Authorities
Two prominent supporters of Jean Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's ousted President, were released today after the United States Embassy condemned human rights abuses.
The two, popular singer Manno Charlemagne and wealthy businessman Antoine Izmery, were ordered released in a hastily called court appearance and immediately went into hiding to avoid being rearrested by security forces.


Palermo Goes Home
American League umpire STEVE PALERMO yesterday left the Dallas Rehabilitation Institute, where he had been undergoing therapy for a gunshot wound he sustained in his spinal cord in July while trying to break up a robbery.
The 41-year-old Palermo will continue to recuperate at his home in Kansas City, the institute said. (AP)


Committee Cites No Misdeeds By C.I.A. Nominee in Report
The Senate Intelligence Committee today made public a comprehensive report on the confirmation hearings of Robert M. Gates as Director of Central Intelligence that offered bits of new evidence in support of some accusations against the nominee but did not find him guilty of any wrongdoing.
The 245-page report, which has been sent to all senators, is essentially a documentary compilation of the complaints -- some serious, others spurious -- made against Mr.
Gates since President Bush nominated him to the nation's top intelligence post in May.
The report, assembled by the committee's staff and issued by the full committee, also includes rebuttals of those charges by the nominee and his supporters.


John Cotter, 48, Editor at Papers In New York City
John Cotter, an editor who worked for two of New York City's tabloid newspapers and who was about to become a managing editor of a third, The Daily News, died yesterday at his home in Darien, Conn.
He was 48 years old.
Mr. Cotter apparently died of a heart attack in his sleep, his family said.


Anti-Apartheid Conference in South Africa


Bush Icily Distances Himself From Aide Hired by Sheik
In remarks dripping with annoyance, President Bush cut himself off today from a former senior White House aide who has agreed to represent a Saudi Arabian sheik linked to the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Edward M. Rogers Jr., who was an aide to John H. Sununu, the President's chief of staff, left the White House in August and a month later disclosed a two-year, $600,000 legal contract to represent Sheik Kamal Adham.
Sheik Kamal, the former head of intelligence in Saudi Arabia, was a big investor and borrower from B.C.C.I. and is under investigation by Federal authorities.


Review/Pop; Fruit Piled on Her Head, An Icon of Joyful Excess
The Next Wave festival has a hot topic with Carmen Miranda.
Her story is timely, a cautionary parable about roots and assimilation, about the ways images are created and about mixing, exploiting and misapprehending cultures.
Born in Portugal and raised in Brazil, Maria do Carmo Miranda da Cunha became a leading samba singer and Brazilian movie star before she arrived in the United States in 1939.
Here, she reigned on Broadway and turned into a Hollywood icon of sensuality and cheerful excess.
When she returned to Brazil, she was booed for having become Americanized.
She came back to Hollywood, piled tropical fruits higher on her headdresses and played an even more successful caricature of the south-of-the-border siren.
But she died young, at 46.


A Friend of the Consumer Says She Will Keep Fighting
There is a determination in Florence Rice's round and stoic face, the glow of a powerful will that has persevered through 72 years of challenges and appears ready for much more.
"My whole thing is that you can't let anything defeat you," Ms.
Rice said without a suggestion of hubris.
"If you let yourself worry about anything long enough, you're not going to be able to help other people."


The Middle East Talks; Spain Is a Willing Host to Mideast Talks
Delighted to be at the center of world attention, Spain seems more than happy to exchange the inconveniences of extensive security measures and huge traffic jams for the honor of serving as host of next week's long-awaited Middle East peace conference.
While Spain's direct role will be limited to a speech by Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez welcoming delegates to the conference hall in the 18th-century Royal Palace on Wednesday, the Government will be responsible for handling organizational aspects of the meeting and, above all, insuring the safety of those attending it.


Classical Music in Review
Marc Ponthus Pianist Weill Recital Hall


Gene Roddenberry, 'Star Trek' Creator, Dies at 70
Gene Roddenberry, the Hollywood writer and producer who created the 1960's science-fiction television series "Star Trek," which inspired six feature films, a sequel series in the 1980's and legions of space-age devotees known as Trekkies, died yesterday at Santa Monica Hospital Medical Center in California.
He was 70 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Roddenberry had been ill for about six weeks and died of a blood clot, said John Wentworth, a spokesman for Paramount Pictures.
But Wendy Gullies, a spokeswoman for the hospital, said the cause of death was listed as cardiopulmonary arrest.


Head of CUNY Wants Jeffries to Keep Position
The Chancellor of the City University of New York has begun lobbying university trustees to allow Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. to remain chairman of the City College Afro-American Studies Department, but under restrictions that would amount to a year's probation, trustees and officials said yesterday.
Aides to the Chancellor, Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds, began contacting trustees on Thursday to line up support for her position before a meeting of the board on Monday at which Dr.
Jeffries's status will be considered, said the trustees and officials.
They said that Dr.
Reynolds will recommend reappointing him as department chairman for one year instead of the usual three, with the appointment to be reviewed in June.


A Playful (if Not Too Productive) Attempt to Pick Up After Mother Nature


Facing Questions of Private Life, Kennedy Apologizes to the Voters
Senator Edward M. Kennedy went to the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University today to discuss his future in politics, and to do so he stepped back and tried to address the hurdle of his past.
The Senator apologized to his constituents in Massachusetts without specifying what he had done wrong in his private life, but he suggested that in the future he would mend his ways.


Treasuries Mixed Amid Reactions to Bush
Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in slow trading yesterday, as credit market participants shifted in and out of positions on speculation that an announcement from the Bush Administration on changes in tax policy might be imminent.
Prices dipped a bit, early in the session, after it was announced that President Bush would hold a news conference, then rose again after Mr.
Bush said that any changes in tax policy should be within the guidelines established by last year's budget accord.


C.I.A. Played Catch-Up on Soviet Terror
To the Editor:
In his Oct. 7 column, dealing with the Senate hearings on the nomination of Robert M. Gates to head the Central Intelligence Agency, Anthony Lewis spoke of my seemingly inordinate and regrettable political influence on Mr.
Gates and on former C.I.A.
Director William Casey.
Mr.
Lewis blamed this on my books, "The Terror Network" (1981) and "The Time of the Assassins" (1984).


Chrysler to Start Viper Car Output
The Chrysler Corporation said it would begin building its hand-crafted, $50,000 Dodge Viper sports car at a refurbished stamping plant in Detroit on Nov. 18.
Only three Vipers will be built this year and just 200 to 400 of the V-10-powered roadsters, reminiscent of the Shelby Cobra of the 1960's, are scheduled to be built in 1992.
Production could increase to about 5,700 cars a year if demand is there, the company said.
Chrysler says the $69 million program is on time and under budget.
Initially, only 15 workers will be used to assemble the plastic-bodied, two-seat car.
Chrysler says it hopes the Viper will establish its Dodge division in the high-performance car market shared by cars like Corvette ZR-1 and Ferrari.


The Ever-Changing Literary Past
One of the best contributions to the debate on the classics and the curriculum was written 40 years ago in Buenos Aires.
Jorge Luis Borges's essay "Kafka and His Precursors" is a fable about how Kafka's work somehow influenced writers who preceded him.
His point is that they begin to look Kafkaesque once we've read Kafka himself.
Borges's choices are fanciful but his conclusion is not: "Each writer
creates
his precursors.
His work modifies our conception of the past, as it will modify the future."
The critic Harold Bloom once cited Borges's partly tongue-in-cheek essay as a key to poetic influence, but we can see it as a parable of the ever-changing canon, our literary past, always being reoriented by new departures in contemporary culture.


SENATE DEMOCRATS BACK A COMPROMISE ON CIVIL RIGHTS BILL
Senate Democrats unanimously backed a compromise civil rights bill today, but President Bush staked the first claim for major credit in shaping the legislation, which makes it easier to sue in job-discrimination cases.
In a morning news conference, Mr.
Bush insisted that the bill validated him as a supporter of real civil rights without sacrificing his opposition to hiring quotas.
The bill, which was hammered out in 12 hours of meetings at the Capitol on Thursday, "does not resort to quotas and it strengthens the cause of equality in the workplace," he said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Government announced that auctions of Treasury securities would be open to all brokers rather than just Wall Street's largest banks and investment houses.
The move came in response to the trading scandal at Salomon Brothers.  [ Page 33. ]


Get Out of Zaire Now, West Warns Its Expatriates
Western countries today stepped up pressure on President Mobutu Sese Seko to make peace with the opposition and told their citizens living or working in the Central African country to flee before they pulled out the troops protecting them.
Looting continued in several parts of the nation, mainly in the west and in the southern copper belt.


Horn &amp; Hardart Gets Investment
The Horn &amp; Hardart Company said the private investment firm North American Resources Ltd. would become a major shareholder in its mail order subsidiary Hanover Companies by making a $40 million investment in "various securities" of Hanover and Horn &amp; Hardart.
Horn &amp; Hardart said N.A.R.'s investment had received the approval of its shareholders, holders of its 11 percent debentures, and its senior lenders.
Horn &amp; Hardart said N.A.R. had "sunstantial experience in corporate restructuring," and had already provided Hanover with a $30 million credit facility for working capital needs.


Gorbachev's a Natural for United Nations Post; Arab Resistance
To the Editor:
As you note in "The Right Choice for the U.N." (editorial, Oct. 4), there are a number of first-rate contenders (including Africans) vying for the post of Secretary General.
Among them is your choice, Boutros Boutros Ghali, although he was not foreign minister of Egypt "from 1977 until this year," as you indicate, but rather Minister of State, and is now Deputy Prime Minister.


Consultant Is Accused of Taking Voter Signs
A New York City political consultant was arrested today in Westchester County and accused of tearing down local campaign posters.
Herson Cabreras, 45 years old, was arrested in Harrison at 2 A.M., after a homeowner reported seeing two men ripping Republican campaign posters from his lawn.


Marlins Hire Rojas
CARL BARGER, the president of the Florida Marlins, has named COOKIE ROJAS, the former major leaguer who was born in Havana and now lives in Miami, to the Marlins' scouting staff.
A two-league All-Star second baseman during his playing days with four teams from 1962 to 1977, Rojas was a coach for the Chicago Cubs and coach and manager of the California Angels before becoming a scout for the Angels.
For Rojas, whose Angels days seemed numbered when DOUG RADER was dismissed as manager, the new post offers a rare sense of job security.
The Marlins aren't scheduled to begin their first campaign until 1993, and scouts are rarely dismissed before a season begins. (AP)


Greece Backs Sending Ship Hijacker to Italy
The Greek Supreme Court ruled today in favor of extraditing a Palestinian to Italy, where he has been sentenced to life in prison for masterminding the hijacking of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro in 1985.
Under Greek law, the final decision for extraditing the 57-year-old Palestinian, Abdul Rahim Khaled, will be made by Justice Minister Athanassios Kanellopoulos.
Faces 2 1/2 Years
Unless the minister orders his immediate extradition, Mr.
Khaled will first have to serve a two-and-a-half-year sentence that was handed down last week for his attempted escape from


A. Edward Miller, 73; Magazine Executive
A.
Edward Miller, a marketing expert who became publisher of McCall's magazine and president of the Berlitz language schools and several other companies, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan and Sherman, Conn.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Opera to Open Without Orchestra
The Washington Opera has canceled the orchestra rehearsals for its opening production of Verdi's "Don Carlo" after negotiations between the company and the Kennedy Center Opera House Orchestra broke down on Tuesday.
Martin Feinstein, the company's general director, said on Thursday that the production would open as scheduled on Nov. 9 with accompaniment provided by two pianists and a synthesizer player.
He has sent a letter to the company's subscribers giving them until Nov. 1 to request refunds.


About New York
A man puffing a king-size stogie was lost in the stock listings of his newspaper.
Some passers-by studied the pouring of concrete on East 45th Street.
Most, in time-honored New York fashion, walked past briskly, looking straight ahead and thanking their lucky stars that Friday had finally dawned.
But a few glanced at an exhibit of photographs in the windows of what is still quaintly labeled the Pan Am Building.
And some of these strode a trifle slower, some seemed vaguely startled, some actually stopped for a minute.


Corrections
A report in the "On Stage, and Off" column of Weekend yesterday about Carey Perloff's negotiations to become artistic director of a San Francisco theater misidentified the theater and the person she is to succeed.
The institution is the American Conservatory Theater and its artistic director is Edward Hastings.


Early Black Burial Ground Recalls Alleged Slave Conspiracy; A Uniform Clue
To the Editor:
As a sometime archeologist I read with interest your Oct. 9 news article describing the excavation of the old burial ground near New York's present City Hall.
The presence of items in apparently incongruous circumstances in archeological excavations occurs frequently, but the presence of naval uniform buttons in a cemetery for blacks in New York may not be quite as mysterious as first appears.


From the Inside, Things Look Better for Twins
Without the sage of baseball's ages on the scene to comment, it was left to Kent Hrbek to offer his Yogi Berra-ish view of the World Series.
"I certainly hope that deja vu strikes again," the Minnesota first baseman said.
After Thursday night's 14-5 shellacking, the Twins returned home today to await the peace and comfort of the Metrodome, where they never have lost a World Series game.
If they want to win this Series, they will have to extend that streak from 6-0 to 8-0 with victories on Saturday night and Sunday night.


Fernandez May Replace Some School Janitors
Amid controversy over the independence and performance of public school custodians in New York City, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday announced a plan to give them competition by hiring private contractors for some schools.
The Chancellor said in an interview to be broadcast that he planned to seek bids from companies to provide custodial services at 50 to 100 schools whose present custodians are expected to leave over the next two years.


U.S.C. vs. Notre Dame. That Sums It Up
It is not uncommon to hear the words across the street from Notre Dame Stadium when Southern California is on the way, even if the game is not for another 24 hours.
"Who needs tickets?" the man said.


Oakland Struggles to Restore Hills, and Faith
For the second time in two years, the resilient citizens of Oakland are cleaning up their ruined neighborhoods, burying their dead and comparing themselves to latter-day Jobs.
The deadly one-two punch of earthquake and firestorm has driven home the lesson that rich and poor alike can be bowed by nature, since the 1989 quake devastated the city's poorest area and this week's roaring blaze devoured the lush hillsides where Oakland's wealthiest and most powerful lived.


C.I.A. Admits It Failed to Tell Fed About B.C.C.I.
The Central Intelligence Agency admitted today that it had failed to tell a regultory agency what it knew about the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, including B.C.C.I.'s secret control of an American bank.
Richard Kerr, the Acting Director of Central Intelligence, told a Senate subcommittee that although the agency knew in the mid-1980's that B.C.C.I. was involved in illicit activities, including money laundering and terrorism, it had failed to report that information to the Federal Reserve Board.
And the C.I.A. did not tell the Fed that B.C.C.I. had gained control of First American Bankshares in 1981, he said, after the agency learned of the secret takeover in 1985.


Franco: Batting Champ And Now U.S. Citizen
Do you hereby declare, on oath, that you absolutely and entirely renounce and abjure all foreign allegiance, that you will support and defend the Constitution and laws of the United States of America against all enemies, domestic and foreign, and that you will guard the plate against all third strikes, fastball or curve?
O.K., so that's not exactly the way it went for JULIO FRANCO in Arlington, Tex., on Thursday, but when Federal Judge DAVID BELEW got to the part about performing work of national importance under civilian direction, Franco knew just what he was talking about.


Just What Are You Worth? Figure It Out
Where do I stand financially and where am I going?
Those are good questions to ask as any year nears an end, particularly when the national economy is slow.
A good way to find out is to draw up a statement of personal net worth.
An individual can do what all corporations do: list what is owned on one side of a sheet of paper and what is owed on the other.
Net worth is what is left after subtracting liabilities from assets.


Conviction Upheld In Martin's Death
An appeals court has upheld the drunken-driving conviction of William Reedy, the Detroit bar owner who was driving the pickup truck in the accident that killed Billy Martin on Christmas Day, 1989.
Broome County Court Judge Patrick H. Mathews ruled in a decision dated Tuesday that the results of a blood-alcohol test given to Reedy the night of the accident were admissible because there was evidence the blood sample had been properly taken.


Right Road for Transportation
The Federal transportation bill finally approved by the House this week shows a keen appreciation for traditional practices like building more highways and passing out more pork to individual members.
It shows less appreciation for the nation's changing needs.
Now the House will wrestle with the Senate, which passed a different and better bill in July.
When the two reach a compromise, they'll wrestle with President Bush, who wants a smaller program.
But this multibillion-dollar melon, however it's finally sliced, will represent the Government's commitment to roads, bridges and mass transit for five or six years.


Dow Declines 11.40 More, to 3,004.92
Blue-chip stock prices declined steadily throughout a rocky afternoon session yesterday, but they recovered slightly in late trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which was down more than 25 points within an hour of the close, rebounded a bit to finish at 3,004.92, down 11.40 for the day and 72.23 for the week.


Smith Barney To Add Jobs
Frank Zarb, the chairman of Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, said yesterday that he planned to hire up to a thousand retail brokers and to expand international operations.
Mr.
Zarb said the move was justified because wealthy retail investors would probably put more of their money into stocks and bonds in the next few years.


Beliefs
When the movie "Black Robe" is released by the Samuel Goldwyn Company in the next two weeks, someone will inevitably call it "Son of Dances with Wolves." In fact, the new movie is a leaner, less favored younger brother of the acclaimed Kevin Costner film, lacking the spectacular good looks and the winning ways, but far more interesting both intellectually and spiritually.
"Black Robe," like "Dances with Wolves," is the story of a journey into the American wilderness and an encounter between white and native cultures.
In both films, a white protagonist comes to question the superiority of his own civilization's claims and to accept the Indians' as equally valid if not superior.


Quotation of the Day
"I recognize my own shortcomings, the faults in the conduct of my private life. I realize that I alone am responsible for them, and I am the one who must confront them. I believe that each of us as individuals must not only struggle to make a better world, but to make ourselves better, too." -- Senator Edward M. Kennedy.  [ 1:3. ]


Mideast Peace Conference Threatened by Debate Over Delegates


Where Has All The Plutonium Gone?
To the Editor:
With the recent reporting on massive cuts in nuclear weapons, a crucial question has gone conspicuously unanswered.
What is happening to the nuclear material in the warheads?


NATO, Victim of Success, Searches for New Strategy
The NATO alliance won the cold war, but it is not yet clear how it will survive the victory.
The corridors of the sprawling headquarters building here are bustling with urgency these days, with 4,000 military officers and diplomats all trying to put the finishing touches on a sweeping new strategy in time for a meeting of the alliance's 16 leaders in Rome on Nov. 7 and 8.


Price of Oil Drops Again; Week Shows Big Decline
Oil prices fell yesterday, wrapping up a week that broke the ack of an extended rally.
Light crude oil for delivery in December settled at $23.12 a barrel, down 37 cents, on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
For the week, oil for next-month delivery fell $1.02 a barrel.


EXECUTIVES
*
Ames Department Stores Inc., Rocky Hill, Conn., has named David H. Lissy to the newly created position of general counsel and corporate secretary. *
First Bank System, Minneapolis, named Peter E. Raskind senior vice president for the cash management group.


Dinkins Denies Hospital Chief Was Forced to Quit by City Hall
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday flatly dismissed Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo's charges that City Hall had forced him to resign as head of New York City's municipal's hospital system and suggested that the unusual four months' salary settlement granted the doctor might be revoked.
"Let me just say that I'm exceedingly distressed," the Mayor said of Dr.
Carrillo's assertion that he was the victim of a "targeted assassination" and a political "witch hunt" by City Hall.
Mr.
Dinkins said such comments were not in Dr.
Carrillo's best interests, and he denounced as "lies" suggestions by Dr.
Carrillo and others that First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel was spearheading conservative social policies at the behest of Wall Street.


Braves and Twins Serve Series Pie and Crumbs
Even though Mike Bielecki and Damon Berryhill didn't join the Braves until the last week of the regular season and hardly contributed to the team's division championship, the Atlanta players have voted them $500 each as World Series shares.
The Braves obtained Bielecki and Berryhill from the Chicago Cubs with one week left in the season, too late for them to be eligible for the playoffs.
Bielecki relieved twice for a total of one and two-thirds innings, and Berryhill caught the last three innings of one game, striking out in his one time at bat.
No Record for Braves
The Braves were also generous in voting 36 full shares to players, manager and coaches.
If they win the World Series, they each will receive $110,174.05.
That would fall short of the record winner's share of $114,252 gained by the Oakland Athletics in 1989.


Avon Posts A Deficit In Quarter
After taking a $75 million charge for discontinued operations, Avon Products Inc. yesterday reported a $27.3 million loss for the third quarter, in contrast to a $44.6 million profit in the corresponding quarter a year ago.
Earnings per share for the cosmetics manufacturer were 59 cents in the period a year earlier.


Early Black Burial Ground Recalls Alleged Slave Conspiracy
To the Editor:
In 1741 Hughson's Tavern on "upper" Broadway (located a short distance from the recently discovered 18th-century Negro burial ground in lower Manhattan, news article, Oct. 9) was at the conspiratorial center of the story of the Great Negro Plot, an alleged slave cabal to burn down the city.


Your Money; I.R.S. Watching Co-signed Loans
A recent ruling by the Internal Revenue Service is causing tax professionals to worry about a time-honored way parents have helped their children get off on a sound financial footing: co-signing, or guaranteeing, loans.
A young graduate who has not yet established a credit history may need a car to commute to work, or may want to start building equity in a condominium instead of paying rent.
And some of the brightest business ideas have come from young entrepreneurs whose parents have enough faith in them to help them get started.


Running or Not, Cuomo Steps Up Sallies at Bush
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo may not be a candidate for President, but he has a stump speech.
In recent weeks, the Governor has honed a blistering critique of the Bush Administration's domestic policy by weaving fragments of old speeches and new thoughts into an unforgiving attack.
By focusing attention on his state's growing budget problems, Mr.
Cuomo has convinced many of his closest aides and advisers that he will choose not to run in 1992.
But by delivering speeches that blame the state's problems on the Federal Government, the Governor has also kept alive a local rationale for running: that he can do more for New York from Washington than from Albany.


Traffic Alert
Brooklyn Bridge: Manhattan-bound lanes will be closed until 6 A.M.
Monday.
Use Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, Manhattan Bridge or Williamsburg Bridge.
Amsterdam Avenue Fall Festival: Amsterdam Avenue will be closed today between 86th and 96th Streets from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.


Bush Selects An Opponent
President Bush's seemingly contradictory actions of the last 48 hours -- first assailing Congress as "a privileged class of rulers" answerable to no one, then closing a deal with Congress on a new civil rights bill -- were aimed at dampening the volatile political consequences of racial divisiveness and de-emphasizing the stalled economy.
On race, the President clearly hopes he has found a path through the mine field by putting himself in a position to assert with some credibility that he is not the implacable foe of civil rights progress that some have accused him of being, while at the same time leaving himself room to assure white middle-class voters that he has protected them from the quotas they hate.


The Twins' Relievers Go South in Atlanta
The Minnesota Twins crept back into Minneapolis in the wee hours of the morning, wondering if anyone got the number of the truck that hit them in Atlanta.
The Braves, the National League champions, left tread marks all over the Twins' pitching, scoring a total of 22 runs in three consecutive victories in the middle games of the World Series.


Lemke Breaks Through On the Biggest Stage
The ascent to notoriety, Mark Lemke insists, has been an arbitrary one, an accident of baseball odds.
For Lemke, in a game of unpredictable streaks and inexplicable slumps, it has merely been his chance to be hot.
"I waited all season for it," he said with a smile.


The Middle East Talks; Bush Sees U.S. as a Catalyst in Mideast Talks, Not as a Judge
President Bush stressed today that the United States wanted to act as a catalyst at next week's Arab-Israeli peace conference and not try to impose blueprints of its own on the parties, or to complicate their direct talks.
"Our positions are known on a lot of subjects that'll probably be discussed there," Mr.
Bush said at a White House news conference.
"But we're trying to be a catalyst to bring people together and let them talk about the differences. We're not trying to impose a settlement."


The Compromise on Civil Rights
The Bush Administration and Congress had sought a civil rights bill to overturn a series of Supreme Court decisions that made it harder to sue in job discrimination cases.
The Administration and Senator John C. Danforth, Republican of Missouri, put forth separate proposals, disagreeing on the specifics all summer.
The agreement came after consultations between Senator Danforth and C. Boyden Gray, the White House Counsel, and between Senator Danforth and Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts.
DISPARATE IMPACT
Suits involving hiring or promotion practices, such as test, that are apparently fair on their face but have a "disparate impact," resulting in the hiring, for example of proportionately more whites than blacks or more men than women are sometimes called "unintentional discrimination" cases.
Issue: Who has the burden of proof, the employer or the employee?
In a 1989 case, Ward Cove Packing v.
Antonio, the Supreme Court held that once complaints had shown that a "disparate impact" had resulted from an employment practice, the complainants still had the burden of proving that the employer had no business necessity for the practice.
Agreement: Once a "disparate impact" is shown, the burden of proof shifts to the employer, on the ground that the employer, not the complainant, is in the best position to know why a practice is necessary.
Scorecard: Bush and Danforth agreed on this all along.
Issue: What kind of "business necessity" can legitimize a practice that disproportionately screens out women and minorities?
In the Wards Cove case, the Supreme Court ruled that an employment practice with apparent discriminatory effect can be justified if it "serves, in a significant way, the legitimate employment goals of the employer." The Wards Cove definition is easier for employers to meet than the definition set in another, earlier case, Griggs v.
Duke Power Co.
Under Griggs, employers had to show that the practice had a "manifest relationship to the employment in question." Agreement: The bill would write the "disparate impact" concept into law for the first time.
It says employers must show that employment practices are "job-related for the position in question and consistent with business necessity." This would essentially eliminate the standard set by the Supreme Court in the Wards Cove case and order the courts to interpret the law as it existed before the decision.
Scorecard: A result that lets both sides claim victory, although the Danforth claim is stronger.
Each Side had tried to define the term "reguired by business necessity." The Danforth language, which was more stringent, was opposed by the Bush Administration, which said that it feared employers would have used quotas to avoid being taken to court.
The Danforth side maintains that the issue all along had been making sure the employment standards relate to the job at issue, not to other business purposes, and that this compromise accomplished that objective.
DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT Issue: In the 1989 Patterson v.
McLean Credit Union case, the Supreme Court held that the right to sue for damages for racial job discrimination under an 1866 law did not apply to on-the-job harassment, or other forms of discrimination after someone was hired.
Since then lower courts have disagreed as to whether the law applies to dismissals, promotions and other practices.
Agreement: The Patterson decision would be rejected absolutely, and the Reconstruction-era law would be clearly defined as applying to hirings, promotions, dismissals, and all other terms of employment.
Scorecard: Bush and Danforth agreed on this all along.
Issue: Victims of intentional discrimination or harassment based on sex, religion, national origin or disability are protected under the 1964 Civil Rights Act, not the 1866 law.
All a judge can order is back pay and employment or reinstatement on a job if it was lost.
Compensatory and punitive damages are not permitted, and women argue that their claims under this act therefor have less weight.
Agreement: The 1964 law would be amended to create the ability to sue for back pay, compensatory damages and punitive damages in extreme cases.
There would be no limits on awards of back pay or past out-of-pocket damages, like medical bills.
All other damages, such as for mental anguish, pain and suffering and punitive damages would be limited to $50,000 for employers of 16 to 100 people, $100,000 for employers of 101 to 200 people, $200,000 for employers of 201 to 500 people and $300,000 for employers of 501 or more.
Juries would decide facts and award damages.
Scorecard: A major Bush defeat.
Bush had wanted damages limited to $150,000, awarded only in cases of harassment and not other discriminatory employment practices, and the cases handled by a judge without a jury.
At the insistence of Democrats who objected to the damage limits altogether, the limits in the Danforth bill were raised slightly.
REOPENING OLD DISCRIMINATION CASES Issue: In the 1989 Martin v.
Wilks case, the Supreme Court ruled that since some white firefighters in Birmingham had not been parties to two earlier suits challenging discrimination in the city's fire-department, they had a right to go into court later to attack hiring and promotion policies.
Agreement: People could not sue to reopen employment cases if they had "actual notice" of the decree at the time it was entered and a "reasonable opportunity" to object or if their interests "were adequately represented" in the original case.
Challenges would also not be allowed "if reasonable efforts were made to provide notice to interested persons." Scorecard: Bush gave in completely to the Danforth position.


Two Top Officials Reported To Differ on Arms Response
Two senior Administration officials are at odds over how the United States should respond to arms control proposals that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union made this month, Administration aides said today.
The officials -- Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Brent Scowcroft, President Bush's national security adviser -- have taken opposing views on Mr.
Gorbachev's request for both countries to restrict underground nuclear testing and a plan for the United States to limit use of nuclear arms only to retaliate against a nuclear attack, the officials said, adding that Mr.
Scowcroft is willing to bargain on both issues while Mr.
Cheney has ruled out a compromise.


Patents; Hammer Extracts Nails Without Bending Them
Thomas K. Schlegel, a mechanical engineer in Chicago, won a patent this week on a claw hammer that can pull nails out of wood without bending them.
Probably the most familiar tool in any workshop, the claw hammer has survived for decades with few innovations.
Mr.
Schlegel, a project engineer at Lever Brothers, the consumer-products company, said he began work on the tool in college after he kept running out of nails while building a loft in his room.
"It wasn't that we didn't have the money for nails," he said.
"It was that we didn't have a car to get off campus to buy them."


L. S. Ayres President To Head Merged Unit
Anthony J. Torcasio, the president and chief executive of the L. S. Ayres department store chain, will extend his duties on Nov. 1 to encompass the operations of the Famous-Barr department stores.
Both chains are divisions of the May Department Stores Company, based in St.
Louis, and on Feb. 1 Famous-Barr, also based in St.
Louis, and Ayres, based in Indianapolis, will merge.
The new chain will include 28 stores with annual sales exceeding $800 million.


Ailing Girl at Center of Fight Over Life Dies
A nearly comatose 13-year-old girl who had been at the center of a court battle over her life support at a hospital here died this morning.
The girl, who by court order has not been publicly identified, died of cardiac arrest caused by liver and kidney failure, said members of her family who were at her side at the Scottish Rite Hospital for Crippled Children.
Doctors, who had been ordered by a judge to continue her life support, tried to resuscitate her but failed, the family said.


Gorbachev's a Natural for United Nations Post
To the Editor:
"The Right Choice for the U.N" (editorial, Oct. 4) is on the mark by stressing the importance of naming the new United Nations Secretary General.
The individuals mentioned as potential candidates are all qualified people who could perform the duties of this office admirably.
Given the United Nations' crucial role in the years ahead, selecting the Secretary General is too important to give consideration to whether the candidate is from the third world, or Europe, or Asia.
The only consideration should be to get the right person for the job.


BRIEFS
*
America West Airlines Inc., Phoenix, has been given an extra 120 days to file its reorganization plan, which was originally due yesterday. *
Attwoods P.L.C., Buckinghamshire, England, a waste management company, said its Florida unit was being investigated by the Defense Department because a company dump-truck driver reportedly defrauded a military contractor.


France and Iran Mend Rift Over Loan Granted by Shah
France and Iran settled a 12-year-old dispute today over a $1 billion loan to France that has been a stubborn obstacle to improved relations between the two countries.
Iran's Deputy Foreign Minister, Mahmoud Vaezi, initialed the agreement today in Paris, and France's Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas, said the accord would be signed in the next few weeks after the two Governments officially approved it.


Gorbachev's a Natural for United Nations Post; Experienced Insider
To the Editor:
"The Right Choice for the U.N." (editorial, Oct. 4) was one-sided and did not do justice to Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan's background, experience and candidacy for the post of Secretary General of the United Nations.
He should be at least considered as another right choice for the U.N., partly because of the following:


Dollar Ends Little Changed; Gold Is Down in New York
The dollar was little changed yesterday amid mixed signals about the direction of interest rates.
Gold prices fell in New York after rising overseas.
Comments by President Bush "reinforced an attitude that perhaps the Federal Reserve is going to ease policy again" and that helped push the dollar lower, said Kevin Logan, chief economist with the Swiss Bank Corporation.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.18
5.12
7.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.96
4.97
7.16
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.03
5.05
7.11
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.34
7.31
8.47
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.04
8.02
8.77
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.05
9.05
9.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.88
6.88
7.72
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Kicking the Fear Out of Your Life
On a recent evening, about 60 men, women and children, garbed in white robes and head bands punched away furiously at life's demons in a warehouse in Milpitas, Calif., a suburb of San Jose.
"Visualize fear," said Tae Yun Kim, the group leader.
"Knock the fear away." The students, lined up and in unison, punched repeatedly, left, right, left, right.
Then the class double-blocked and kicked at other obstacles such as anger and jealousy.


CUNY Student Vote Is Upheld
The disputed, narrow re-election of the chairman of the City University of New York's student government was unanimously upheld yesterday by a university election-review committee that rejected a challenge but made recommendations for reforming the election process.
A university spokeswoman, Rita Rodin, said the committee -- composed of an administrator, a faculty member and two students -- certified the re-election of Jean LeMarre for another one-year term as chairman of the Student Senate, which represents more than 200,000 students at 21 colleges and graduate schools.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Edberg Stays Hot; Becker Beats Sampras


Blaming the Victims in New York
New York City's police union, appealing for raises, complains about "lazy and shiftless" welfare recipients.
State Senate Republicans, confronting another state budget gap, blast spending on Medicaid and welfare.
It was probably bound to happen: scapegoating the poor in a time of trouble.
Too often, public figures rush to cast blame and take care of their own.
Yes, Medicaid and welfare costs are high and often wasteful.
Yes, some welfare recipients cheat and abuse the system.
The same might be said, by the way, of some elected officials.
But the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association and Senate Republicans weren't offering constructive ideas about how to right society's wrongs.


INSIDE
U.S.
Opens Debt Auctions In its latest response to the Salomon Brothers scandal, the Government said the auctions that raise money to finance the nation's debt would be open to all brokers, not just big Wall Street firms.
Page 33.
Troubled Psychiatric Chains
Private psychiatric hospitals, which exploded into a highly profitable industry in the last five years, face a storm of customer resistance and severe financial problems.
Page 33.


Bush News Conference On Civil Rights Accord
Following are excerpts from today's news conference by President Bush as transcribed by Reuters.
OPENING STATEMENT
After extraordinary debate and negotiation, we have reached an agreement with Senate Republican and Democratic leaders on a civil rights bill that will be a source of pride for all Americans.
It does not resort to quotas, and it strengthens the cause of equality in the work place.
Both the Administration and the Congress can present this legislation to the people of America as a new standard against discrimination and for equal opportunity.


Patents; Giving Tests With Fewer Questions
If the Educational Testing Service has its way, "20 questions" won't be just a game anymore.
In a move likely to heighten panic levels for people who suffer from test anxiety, the testing company, based in Princeton, N.J., has developed a computerized examination system that uses probability theory to pass or fail people after they answer as few as two dozen questions.


Plutonium Plant Accused in Civil Suit
Nearly two and a half years after Federal agents raided the Rocky Flats plutonium plant amid reports that workers were dumping poisons into drinking water and burning radioactive waste in an unsafe incinerator, there have been no indictments, and some outside experts say there are not likely to be any.
But the raid has produced a civil lawsuit that offers a rare glimpse into the plant's problems.
It describes safety problems not previously documented, and it offers an explanation of why the prosecution has not produced indictments: the plaintiffs say some of the documents seized as evidence by the Federal Bureau of Investigation were tampered with.


Classical Music in Review
'Un Ballo in Maschera'
Metropolitan Opera


M.T.A. Decides Against Proposed Fare Increases on Most Commuter Lines
There will be no fare increases next year on the Long Island Rail Road and most of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad, the board of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority decided yesterday.
The decision will not affect a possible fare increase for New York City subways and buses.
The present $1.15 fare could rise to $1.25 and perhaps even to $1.50, M.T.A. officials have said.
A decision is expected in December.


Nets Cut 3 Guards
The Nets cut 3 guards to get their roster down to 14 before last night's exhibition game in Syracuse against the Philadelphia 76ers, but still haven't completed negotiations with a fourth, No. 1 pick KENNY ANDERSON of Georgia Tech.
The guards cut by Coach BILL FITCH were VON MCDADE, a second-round pick from Wisconsin-Milwaukee; EMANUEL DAVIS from Delaware State, and SYDNEY GRIDER from Southwestern Louisiana.


Angry Polish Miners Rally Before Elections


3 Trustees Are Named For Drexel
Three trustees, including a former president of E. F. Hutton, were named yesterday to preside over the trust that will liquidate Drexel Burnham Lambert.
The names of the trustees were included in a filing providing details of the previously released plan for reorganization of Drexel, which went bankrupt after admitting to violations of securities laws in connection with the junk bond market it once dominated.


Freed Hostage Returns to U.S.
With his wife and little girl beside him, Jesse Turner, the freed American hostage, arrived back in his hometown today after his five-year ordeal in Lebanon.
The 44-year-old mathematics professor landed in Boise near midnight with his Lebanese-born wife, Badr, and their 4-year-old daughter, Joanne.
He was greeted by Mayor Dirk Kempthorne and taken by limousine to the Statehouse for a homecoming with fireworks and a marching band.


St. John's Senior In Assault Case Gets Suspension
A St.
John's University student who testified against fellow students in the sexual-assault case that rocked the school last year was suspended from the university yesterday.
In addition to the year-long suspension, the univerity said, the student, Thomas Dean, a senior, will be required "as a condition for readmission to perform 100 hours of community service in a center for abused women."


Patents; A Gyroscope Device To Steady Shaky Hands
An elderly patent attorney in Potomac, Md., who found himself unable to stop his right hand from shaking uncontrollably has invented a hand-held, battery-powered gyroscope that he said could smooth out the tremors.
"A lot of people, including older ones, get an abnormality called essential tremors," said William D. Hall, who is 77 years old.
The symptoms, similar to those of Parkinson's disease but much less severe, make many ordinary tasks nearly impossible, the inventor said.


Review/Dance; The Icarus Legend Takes On a Modern Resonance
"Icarus at Night" is not the first work that Christopher Gillis, long one of the best dancers in the Paul Taylor Dance Company, has created for the troupe or under other auspices.
But on Thursday night at the City Center (131 West 55th Street), this premiere signaled his arrival as a first-class choreographer.
The piece lends itself to myriad interpretations, but what is above dispute is the absolute control Mr.
Gillis has over his material.
The fluency of his compositional patterns and the dramatic use of energy for emotional effect all contribute to an impressive power, indefinable but strongly felt.


Back for St. John's Scores Five Times
Anthony Russo, a sophomore running back, tied a school single-game record of five touchdowns on runs of 3, 5, 5, 8 and 6 yards as St.
John's trounced C. W. Post, 54-14, last night at Redmen Stadium in Jamaica, Queens.
The victory gave St.
John's the Liberty Conference championship for the second time in three seasons.


Review/Pop; Fruit Piled on Her Head, An Icon of Joyful Excess
The Next Wave festival has a hot topic with Carmen Miranda.
Her story is timely, a cautionary parable about roots and assimilation, about the ways images are created and about mixing, exploiting and misapprehending cultures.
Born in Portugal and raised in Brazil, Maria do Carmo Miranda da Cunha became a leading samba singer and Brazilian movie star before she arrived in the United States in 1939.
Here, she reigned on Broadway and turned into a Hollywood icon of sensuality and cheerful excess.
When she returned to Brazil, she was booed for having become Americanized.
She came back to Hollywood, piled tropical fruits higher on her headdresses and played an even more successful caricature of the south-of-the-border siren.
But she died young, at 46.


Cup Play Gave Some a Kick in the Pants
In the month since the United States won the Ryder Cup from Europe by the narrowest of margins, it appears that the desperately contested matches at Kiawah Island, S.C., acted as a hothouse for excellence.
At a time when an emotional letdown would have seemed understandable, several of the players from both the United States and European teams instead emerged from their three-day ordeal at the Ocean Course tempered for exceptional performances.


Bowing to Troubles, Luxury Train Ends Service
The era of luxury rail travel in America is virtually a thing of the past again with the demise, at least temporarily, of a two-year-old passenger train that pampered customers with haute cuisine and the music of a grand piano.
Troubled by a decline in ticket sales, the train, the Greenbrier Express, last week canceled its twice-weekly service between New York and Chicago and shelved plans for New York-to-Miami service that had been scheduled to begin Nov. 19.


Treasury Auctions Opened Up
In its latest response to the scandal at Salomon Brothers Inc., the Government announced today that the auctions that raise money to finance the nation's debt would be open to all brokers rather than just Wall Street's largest banks and investment houses.
The decision is intended to encourage greater participation in the auctions and weaken the role of the 39 primary dealers who have long been given special treatment for acting as middlemen between the Government and the secondary market of institutions and customers that buy and sell Treasury instruments.


Chronicle
If all goes as planned today, political figures and movie buffs -- sometimes one and the same -- will turn up at the Biograph Theater at 225 West 57th Street to protest the closing of the theater, one of the few movie houses in Manhattan that showed old films.
Cineplex Odeon, the theater's Canadian owner, opened the Biograph in 1988 after it had transformed the Regency Theater, a revival house on Broadway at West 67th Street, into a theater for new releases.
On Sept. 21 it closed the Biograph, citing lack of business.
"We spent several years trying to develop a market, but people are not voting for it with their feet and their wallets," said Howard Lichtman, executive vice president for marketing and communication for Cineplex Odeon.


Meggett Is 'Iffy' for Big Game, So 5 Giants Are Set to Fill In
More and more, it seems unlikely that a hobbled Dave Meggett will be a major factor Sunday night when the Giants (4-3) play the Washington Redskins (7-0) at Giants Stadium.
The bruised right heel Meggett suffered 11 nights ago against the Pittsburgh Steelers has been responding slowly to treatment, and Meggett has not practiced since the injury.
Today, while the rest of the Giants went through their final major practice for the Redskins, Meggett ran a little on the sideline.


Why Poland Can't Flinch
We have listened to the West and we made too big a leap. . . .
We have to produce even expensive things and even worse things because we have to produce, we just have to produce.
President Lech Walesa's desperate words, leading up to tomorrow's parliamentary elections, reflect the harsh pressure Polish politicians are under to slow the country's rush to a free market.
The economy is reeling -- largely because of the collapse of Soviet trade, but also because of the "shock therapy" adopted in 1990 to undo nearly five decades of centralized control.


Chronicle
He does not often make it part of his public persona, but ROBERT MAXWELL, the newspaper, book and magazine publisher, is a Holocaust survivor who is determined that the world not forget what happened to the Jews at the hands of the Nazis.
For his efforts, he is to be honored tomorrow at the 10th anniversary dinner of the American and International Societies for Yad Vashem, which will present their Remembrance Award to him at the New York Hilton.
Mr.
Maxwell, whose parents, five sisters and one brother died in the Holocaust, organized a conference in Oxford, England, and London in 1988 "whose purpose was to get teachers to teach the subject and provide materials that will insure people never forget," he said.
Another conference will be held in Berlin in 1994.
Mr.
Maxwell, who was born Jan Ludwig Hoch in Czechoslovakia, said, "We lost a total of 508 in my extended family."


The Middle East Talks; Top Palestinian Adviser Is Fought by 2 Extremes
Faisal al-Husseini, the top Palestine Liberation Organization representative in the occupied territories, is a man both praised and vilified, cheered and spat upon for his political activities.
He has addressed dozens of gatherings of Israelis, of the political right as well as the left, to persuade them that Palestinians sincerely desire peace with Israel.
Sometimes he is applauded; more often, especially when speaking before rightists, he is jeered.


Classical Music in Review
Charles Rosen and Rolf Schulte
Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


Bid for U.N. Post Is Led By Zimbabwe and Egypt
An Egyptian and a Zimbabwean emerged as leading candidates to be next Secretary General of the United Nations today after an informal secret ballot among the Security Council's 15 members.
Both candidates, Deputy Prime Minister Boutros Ghali of Egypt and Finance Minister Bernard Chidzero of Zimbabwe, each received nine votes in the straw poll in which Council members could vote for as many candidates as they liked.
But diplomats said that the race still appeared wide open because it was unlikely at this stage that either Mr.
Ghali or Mr.
Chidzero had the support of all five permanent Council members, which can veto a candidate.


McDonnell to Seek Orders for a Jumbo Jet
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that it would start taking orders from airlines for a proposed jumbo jetliner to be built in a partnership that would be likely to give Asian companies a major stake in the American aerospace industry.
The new plane, to be called the MD-12, is McDonnell Douglas's attempt to grab a piece of the market for long-range wide-body aircraft that is now virtually owned by the Boeing Company and its venerable 747.


3 R's of Knicks: Riley, Roster and Rotation
The closer the regular season gets, the closer Pat Riley is getting to determining who will play for the Knicks and who will not.
With 14 players on the roster, New York must cut 2 players before the season opens Friday.
Everything indicates that Brian Quinnett has won a spot on the team, leaving Carlton McKinney, Jarvis Basnight, and Patrick Eddie in a three-way battle for the final position.


Francis to Join Penguins
Gentle center RON FRANCIS, the good-guy half of the deal that brought him and ferocious defenseman ULF SAMUELSON to the Pittsburgh Penguins from the Hartford Whalers last March, finally found a Pittsburgh offer he could live with and prepared to join the defending Stanley Cup champions for a game against the Montreal Canadiens today.
No terms were disclosed, but it's possible that the Penguins didn't recognize Francis's real value to the club until his fellow center MARIO LEMIEUX was sidelined with hip and back pain this week. (AP)


Classical Music in Review
Ensemble Project Ars Nova Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


Sports of The Times; Olson Having The Big Time Of His Life
The World Series seldom eludes the gifted players.
Ernie Banks and Rod Carew never got there, but the gifted players are usually on baseball's center stage sooner or later.
It's something they expect.
Just as they never expect to be told someday that they can't hit or pitch anymore.
But the career minor leaguer only dreams about what the World Series must be like.


Panel Tells F.D.A. to Approve Migraine Drug
A panel of experts unanimously recommended today that the Food and Drug Administration approve a new drug to treat migraine headaches.
But the F.D.A. advisory committee said more studies should be required before the drug, sumatriptan, is approved for treatment of a related condition, cluster headaches.


Difficult Task Described By Examiner of Interco
Sandra Mayerson says no one was more surprised than she last March when the court appointed her the examiner in the bankruptcy of Interco Inc., whose brands include Lane and Broyhill furniture and Converse and Florsheim shoes.
"There were a lot of big-name lawyers being considered," said Ms.
Mayerson, who heads the bankruptcy practice at the law firm of Kelley Drye &amp; Warren.
"It was an honor to be chosen."


Carter to Take On Atlanta's Urban Ills
Former President Jimmy Carter, who has been most closely identified with foreign affairs since leaving the White House, said yesterday that he was undertaking a program to attack every problem of Atlanta's poor.
He suggested that the plan could turn the city into a laboratory where solutions to urban ills might be tested.
"We want to make sure that if we try something out in Atlanta that has a potential of success or proves to be successful, that it's instantly shared with other cities," he said.


The Middle East Talks; ISRAELI DELEGATION TO TALKS IS NAMED
Israel announced its delegation to the Middle East peace talks today, but threatened to withdraw from the Madrid conference if it included a Palestinian negotiator who had said that his team would speak for the Palestine Liberation Organization.
With five days left before the talks begin, the battle over personalities has become a dominant issue for both the Israelis and Palestinians, each side charging that the other has demonstrated a lack of interest in real peace through its choice of delegates for Madrid next week.


Gorbachev's a Natural for United Nations Post; Brundtland of Norway
To the Editor:
Isn't it about time that the United Nations abandoned geographical considerations and chose the person with the most compelling qualifications for the job of Secretary General?


In New York City's Tabloid War, The Combat Is Closer and Fiercer
A year after the start of a devastating strike that nearly killed The Daily News, New York City's tabloid war is more competitive than ever, new circulation figures show.
The figures indicate that The Daily News has regained about half the circulation it lost during the strike, which ended in March.


Telemarketing Curb Sought
The New York State Consumer Protection Board on Thursday urged the Federal Government to police corporate use of special telemarketing telephone numbers, known as "900" and toll-free "800" numbers, that could allow companies to obtain sensitive consumer information, like credit histories.
Companies have long been able to use caller-identification devices to display and record a caller's telephone number, both listed and unlisted.
This automatic number identification is a built-in feature of telephone calls and allows phone companies to bill customers accurately.


Shh! Yale's Skull and Bones Admits Women
Shrouding their deliberations in a silence worthy of the nation's most famous secret society, members of Yale University's Skull and Bones -- Bonesmen all since 1832 -- voted Thursday night to allow Boneswomen into their midst.
And with that vote, a group that lists on its honor roll President Bush, Senator David L. Boren and the conservative columnist William F. Buckley Jr. can no longer rightly be considered just a "good old boy" network.


News Summary
International 2-5
Did the cold war's end kill NATO?
The question is a vital one as the alliance prepares for a summit meeting to debate how much longer the United States will continue to be the key to European security.
Page 1


Public &amp; Private; In Our Backyard
Whenever anyone comes up with a plan to house the homeless, the response is predictable: NIMBY!
NIMBY!
NIMBY!
NIMBY!
That's short for Not In My Backyard.
It's become America's ruling acronym.
And so when Mayor David Dinkins announced a plan to put smaller shelters for single adults throughout New York City, high-pitched cries of "NIMBY!" rang out from Staten Island to Queens.
The speaker of the City Council even likened homeless people to a contagious disease.
He backtracked from his ill-chosen words, but the sentiment behind them was epidemic among politicians and the people they represent.
No one actually mentioned putting homeless people on a barge and letting them float out to sea, but that kind of feeling was in the air.
Either that, or making them all go to Manhattan and then closing the borders.


Chronicle
BROOKE ASTOR is beginning to have a problem storing all the awards she has received for good works and philanthropic efforts, and yesterday was no help: she received the Hadrian Award from the World Monuments Fund at a luncheon at the Pierre.
"I don't know how many awards I have," Mrs.
Astor said in an interview.
"There are closets full, and a lot hang in my office. I get exhausted just seeing them all."


Weicker Hits Tax Foes And Apathy
Connecticut's Governor came to the seat of the nation's Government today to deliver a ringing attack on the apathy of voters -- with particularly sharp words for the "Rip Van Winkles" in his own state.
"Nowadays it's hard just to get someone to drop their bag of Doritos long enough to cross the street to vote," Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. said in a speech at Gallaudet University here.
"Ours is a democracy. If people are upset with the daily results, it is because they have become absentee owners."


Observer; How To Miss Mozart
This is about baseball, so everybody not interested can go to the next page, but before you do, let me tell you about seventh-grade music and me, and also warn you what's on the next page: "a lot of anger out there," that's what.
Every newspaper published this week said the same thing: "There's a lot of anger out there." That's political writing, of course.
Political writing goes through phases.
It's now in its "lot-of-anger-out-there" phase.


A Reminder
Standard time resumes at 2 A.M. tomorrow. Clocks are set back one hour.


Thomas Says He's Not Worried Despite His Shrinking Numbers
This is supposed to be a breakout year for Blair Thomas, the Jets' talented young running back who led the team in rushing last year as a rookie with 620 yards despite being plagued with hamstring, rib and ankle injuries.
After a brief glimmer of promise at the start of this season, the chance for a big year seems to be fading for Thomas, the Jets' first-round draft pick last year out of Penn State.
To finish the year with 1,000 yards rushing, Thomas, who has 416 yards on 109 carries, will need to average 73 yards a game over the last 8 games.
It could be an uphill struggle, considering that over the last 3 games he has averaged just 21.7 yards a game on 9 carries.
Thomas is not worried.


Seles's Wide Repertory A Little Short on Remorse
Monica Seles, last seen leaping into Donald Trump's limousine as part of her debut commercial for No Excuses jeans, kept in character and offered no excuses this week after being fined $20,000 by the Women's Tennis Association for choosing to play in an exhibition in the Canary Islands this week.
The fast-talking No. 1 female player in the world is fast becoming the W.T.A.'s No. 1 scofflaw: this was the third fine she had collected this year, but this time, she was not alone.


Islanders Start Over by Trading LaFontaine and Sutter
Backed into a corner by an impending sale that has staggered team morale, by a recalcitrant superstar who has refused to play for them and by the sort of dwindling fan support that signals a fading franchise, the New York Islanders today took a drastic step that amounted to nothing less than a teamwide overhaul.
Pat LaFontaine, the team's AWOL centerpiece and leader of its scoring and popularity polls for the last four years, and Brent Sutter, the stalwart captain and 11-year veteran who had played a man-for-all-shifts role during LaFontaine's controversial holdout, are Islanders no more.


Review/Pop; Fruit Piled on Her Head, An Icon of Joyful Excess
The Next Wave festival has a hot topic with Carmen Miranda.
Her story is timely, a cautionary parable about roots and assimilation, about the ways images are created and about mixing, exploiting and misapprehending cultures.
Born in Portugal and raised in Brazil, Maria do Carmo Miranda da Cunha became a leading samba singer and Brazilian movie star before she arrived in the United States in 1939.
Here, she reigned on Broadway and turned into a Hollywood icon of sensuality and cheerful excess.
When she returned to Brazil, she was booed for having become Americanized.
She came back to Hollywood, piled tropical fruits higher on her headdresses and played an even more successful caricature of the south-of-the-border siren.
But she died young, at 46.


The Squeeze on Psychiatric Chains
Private psychiatric hospitals, which exploded into a highly profitable $4 billion industry in the last five years and raised hopes that medical entrepreneurs could fulfill unmet needs more efficiently than traditional institutions, are running into a storm of customer resistance and severe financial problems.
At least four of the nation's largest psychiatric chains are in serious trouble.


Moscow Bends on Art Looted From Germany
The Soviet Culture Ministry, taking a decidedly grudging tone, announced today that a special commission had been created to look into arranging exchanges of looted World War II art treasures with Germany.
Culture Minister Nikolai N. Gubenko said the new commission, created at the order of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, planned to reach into the Soviet trove of art booty and exhibit more than 300 works, including drawings by Durer and Rubens, seized from the main museum in Bremen by the Red Army at the end of the war.


Tettleton Rewarded
He was signed for one year as a free agent last winter by Baltimore, then traded to Detroit, and now after a summer of success, MICKEY TETTLETON has been rewarded with a three-year contract from the Tigers.
No terms were disclosed in the announcement yesterday by BO SCHEMBECHLER, the Tigers' president.
Tettleton, a switch-hitting catcher and designated hitter, played in 154 games this season and had a career-best .263 batting average.
He also had career bests with 31 home runs, 89 runs batted in and 85 runs scored. (AP)


Odessa Journal; They Laugh Now, but Then Didn't They Always?
In all the rush to claim "sovereignty," nobody has really spelled out what that means in the Soviet context.
But whatever it is, the people of Odessa, in the Ukraine, are certain they have it.
They have the Black Sea, its beaches and ports glittering down below the grand Primorsky Boulevard.
They have a worldly history as the third major city of the Russian Empire.
They have their elegant sycamore-lined avenues, their rich literature, an abundance of local food and drink and a sharp tongue that even 70 years of homogenizing Soviet dreariness failed to dull.


Grand Jury Won't Indict Officer In a Fatal Shooting in Jersey City
A Hudson County grand jury has decided that there is no cause for criminal action against a police officer who shot a man to death in a dispute that began with a ticket for illegally repairing a car on the street.
The Acting Hudson County Prosecutor, John J. Hill Jr., said today that the grand jury did indict a man in an assault on a police officer during the melee on July 16 in which Maximo Cintron was fatally shot.


Times Asks Arbitrator to Rule On Union Work at New Plant
The New York Times said yesterday that it had asked an arbitrator to rule on terms under which the paper's drivers will work at a new printing plant in Edison, N.J., after a week of unsuccessful negotiations with leaders of the drivers' union.
Negotiators for The Times and the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers Union of New York and Vicinity had been meeting since Oct. 18 trying to achieve a settlement that could speed opening of the $450 million plant, which has been ready for operation since late last year pending resolution of labor disputes.


Corrections
A report in the "For Children" column of Weekend yesterday about a Haunted Walk in Prospect Park Brooklyn included an erroneous date provided by the park.
The event is noon to 3 P.M. today only, not to be repeated tomorrow.


SERB REJECTS PLAN POSED BY EUROPE
The Yugoslav peace conference sponsored by the European Community met in a gloomy session here today, issuing another set of condemnations of the Balkan country's continuing fighting.
Slobodan Milosevic, President of the Serbian republic, rejected a slightly revised version of the community's proposal for the reconstitution of Yugoslavia that he had also rejected last week.


Clemson, in Purple, Rolls Over N.C. State
It had been three weeks since the Clemson Tigers won a football game.
So maybe it wasn't surprising that the Clemson coach, Ken Hatfield, decided to shake things up today.
Wearing purple jerseys instead of the usual orange ones and using a more wide-open offense to shred the nation's hardest defense to score on, Hatfield's Tigers rolled over previously undefeated North Carolina State, 29-19, before a crowd of 81,500 fans at Memorial Stadium.


Q and A
Renting a Villa in Greece
Q.
I am interested in renting a villa in Greece for one or two weeks next summer.
Are there any agencies I can contact? -- Geraldine Del Bagno, Staten Island
A.
The first thing to bear in mind is that villas in Greece tend to be simpler, less luxurious than, say, villas in the south of France.
They do not routinely come with maid service or a pool, nor are most on the beach.
And some, in out-of-the-way areas of the smaller islands, might be considered very down to earth indeed.


GORBACHEV MEMOIR AFFIRMS SOCIALISM
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, capitalizing on the modern phenomenon of the "instant book," will publish a memoir this week in which he pledges abiding allegiance to "the socialist idea" and tries to explain the tactical blunders that led to the coup against him this summer.
"I'm convinced that the discrediting of socialism in the eyes of the masses is a passing phase," the 60-year-old leader writes.


Tech Notes; Newborns and Hearing
A three-year-old company in Foster City, Calif., has developed a small portable device for rapid and inexpensive testing of newborns for hearing impairment.
About one in 300 babies has some form of hearing impairment, and most of these conditions are treatable.
But fewer than 2 percent of babies are tested, so hearing impairment often goes undetected for years, which can result in severe problems in language and speech development.


Keryn Rod Wed To J. M. Schlein
Keryn Beth Rod, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward M. Rod of Clifton, N.J., was married last evening in West Orange, N.J., to Jeffrey Marc Schlein, a son of Jack Schlein of Fort Lee, N.J., and Rhoda Schlein of Hackensack, N.J.
Rabbi Martin Freedman officated at the Manor, a restaurant.
Mrs.
Schlein, 27 years old, is a merchandising manager of Kenar Enterprises, a manufacturer of women's sportswear in New York.
She graduated from Goucher College.
Her father is the president of Northern State Office Supply in Passaic, N.J.
Her mother, Fern Rod, is an elementary-school teacher with the Teaneck (N.J.) public schools.
Mr.
Schlein, 29, is a vice president of Jack Schlein Buick, an auto dealership in Hackensack of which his father is president.
He graduated from Syracuse University.


Spicing Up the Pumpkin Presentation
HALLOWEEN is jack-o'-lantern time.
It also means that there is a lot of pumpkin around for cooking.
Like most winter squashes, pumpkin has a delicate flavor (some would say not much taste at all) but when combined with other ingredients that spice it up, it can make great soups, pies and cakes.
Pumpkin soup is a particularly festive fall dish when served in small individual pumpkins or in one large one.
A strong homemade chicken stock is needed to give the soup flavor, and it is good sprinkled with croutons sauteed in butter or a julienne of fresh fried ginger just before being served.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 29 about comic books in Brussels referred incorrectly to the Gare du Misi.
In English, the rail terminal in known as the city's South Station, not Central Station


Anne H. Plumb, A Banker, Weds
Anne Hoagland Plumb, the daughter of Mrs.
John L. Kelsey of Rumson, N.J., and the late Robert J. Plumb Jr., was married yesterday to Todd Dowling Root, a son of Stuart D. Root of Bronxville, N.Y., and Jeanne D. Root of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Leslie Smith officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church in Princeton.
Mrs.
Root, 30 years old, graduated from Colby College.
She is an assistant vice president at National Westminster Bank in New York.
Her father was a treasurer of Asarco Inc., a metals and mining concern in New York.
Her stepfather, John L. Kelsey, who is retired, was a managing director in investment banking for Paine Webber in New York.


Age Is No Barrier
He is a 28-year-old college freshman and not exactly in the best of shape, but the way ZHU JIANHUA figures it, if he loses a little weight and takes care of himself he just might go out for the Cal State Los Angeles track team.
Maybe try out for the high jump.
After all, the college is a Division II school, so there is no age limit for athletics.
Even so, the notion that the Shanghai native might actually compete with younger men in such a demanding event seems laughable, except for one thing.
In 1983, Zhu raised the world record for the high jump to 7 feet 9 1/4 inches, and in June 1984, he became the first man to clear 7-10.


Suzanne Valles Has Wedding
Suzanne Jacqueline Valles, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jean-Paul Valles of Bedford, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Lon Christopher England, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
H.
England of Katonah, N.Y.
The Rev.
Thomas A. Hughart performed the ceremony at the Bedford Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
England, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
Her father is the executive vice president of Pfizer Inc. in New York.
Mr.
England, 30, is a media planner at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos Inc., a Boston advertising agency.
He graduated cum laude from the State University of New York at Albany.
His father is a retired vice president of the Pepsi-Cola Company in Rye, N.Y.


Still Sailing the Lemonade Sea
THE IDEA OF SOCIALISM HAS PASSED through many a hard moment lately, but the hardest of all was a tiny incident during the 1989 revolution in Czechoslovakia.
Vaclav Havel and the democratic dissidents were staging rallies in the city of Prague, but the Communist Government still controlled the airwaves and the newspaper delivery trucks, and information about the uprising had no way to filter out to the provinces.
So three students from Charles University loaded a car with revolutionary leaflets and posters and (as they told me a few weeks later) drove into the South Bohemian countryside.
They put up their posters in a bar -- and were instantly rounded up by the Communist police.


Civil Libertarians Go After Crime Bills
Despite winning overwhelming approval in both houses of Congress, anticrime legislation still faces an arduous battle at its next step, the negotiating table, as civil liberties groups prepare to lobby against major provisions that they say infringe on constitutional rights.
The effort by civil liberties groups, with three former attorneys general in their camp, is aimed at measures that would narrow the rights of criminal defendants, extend the death penalty and broaden the rights of the police to gather evidence.


Few Quick Starts For First-Round Picks
After dismissing the agent who worked his draft-day contract, Eric Swann, Phoenix's first-round pick, lamented that he had been shortchanged, considering what the players around him in the draft were paid by waiting to sign.
"It looks like somebody got a Rolls-Royce for the price of a Cadillac," Swann said of his deal with the Cardinals.


COLOMBIAN HEROIN MAY BE INCREASING
On a craggy hillside here in the Andean foothills of Cauca state, an Indian farmer is tending his two-acre poppy crop, a raging palette of reds, purples and pinks.
It is his first harvest, and he is pleased with the results.
The plants, he says, are much hardier than corn or potatoes and bring in about 20 percent more income.
He says the same men who first brought him the seeds and encouraged him to grow the crops are now regular customers, coming monthly to buy every drop of the milky paste he and his workers extract from the plants' ripened pods.


All About/Product Labeling; After Years of Deregulation, a New Push to Inform the Public
It all seems so simple: Label a product so consumers know what's in it or whether it has any hidden dangers.
And yet the labels on products, many involved in the labeling process agree, are so opaque or confusing that only consumers with the hermeneutic abilities of a Talmudic scholar can peel back the encoded layers of meaning.
That is because labels spring not from disinterested scientific reasoning but from lobbying, negotiation and compromise.
Advocates from the hundreds of businesses, industry and consumer groups, government agencies and scientific organizations with an interest in food, alcohol, tobacco, pesticides, or any of the other products that require labels are involved in the process.


Strict Regulations Are Imposed On Greek System
The University of Southern California has imposed 13 strict new rules on its fraternities and sororities in what university officials said was an effort to improve the Greek system on campus.
The new rules ban weeknight parties at fraternity and sorority houses, forbid members of the opposite sex to enter private rooms in fraternity and sorority houses if alcohol is being served, and force Greeks to maintain grade-point averages that are higher than the university norm of 2.7 out of a possible 4.0.


The Connecticut Tax Drama, Act 2
CONNECTICUT'S Legislature, hurrying toward a proposed special session next month to reconsider the state's two-month-old income-tax law, has come in recent days to resemble the cast of a whodunit more than a deliberative body.
With public passions fully aroused against the tax, a recession stubbornly lingering and the two main political parties mutually mistrustful, nearly everyone appears to have both a motive in mind and an intense fear of being stabbed in the back.
Underlying each suspicion is the question of repeal or repair.
Since more than 40,000 people descended on the capitol three weeks ago to rage against the tax in one the largest protest rallies in Connecticut, the sense of urgency to do something has become a force that many lawmakers predict is unstoppable.
The tactics boil down to whether to try to fix the tax -- by easing the burden on middle-class families -- or to try to kill the tax outright.


Ballyhoo on Nasal Drugs Meets Reality


U.S. Warning On Flights Via Beirut
The State Department warns Americans not to board Air France flight 140 from Paris to Amman, Jordan, and 141 from Amman to Paris because they make an intermediate stop in Beirut, and United States passports are not valid for travel to or through Lebanon.
The flights are scheduled Mondays through Thursdays.
In a travel advisory dated Oct. 12. the department says a special validation must be obtained to use a passport in Lebanon.
"This prohibition exists because the situation in Lebanon is so dangerous that no U.S. citizen can be considered safe from terrorist acts," the advisory adds.
An Air France spokesman in New York said, "We want to observe the intent of the State Department advisory and are not accepting bookings for holders of United States passports on these flights."


The Creature Below
MEDUSA'S GIFT
By Lois Gould. 199 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.


Troubled Movies? Advance Word Isn't the Last Word
The talk is all over town.
The movie's opening has been delayed.
Costs have spiraled.
The star is disgruntled.
There are rewrites.
It's a "problem picture," which is a polite way of saying disaster looms.
Perhaps.


Something New Under the Sun
COMING out of the camera shop, clutching newly developed photos of Caleb, my latest grandson, I realized that I was grinning.
But it had nothing to do with the pictures, which I hadn't yet seen.
No, it was that silver Mercedes glinting under the sun in the shopping center parking lot.
The car was sort of clunky, sort of tall, but it also was an automobile with enough neat
stuff
to make even a jaded mouth tip up at the corners.


Riley Impressed With Anthony's Agility
Greg Anthony is learning that rookies in the National Basketball Association receive no mercy.
And if he still has any doubts, he should just listen to Derek Harper, the Dallas Mavericks' veteran point guard.
"When I get a young guy on me, I start licking my chops," Harper said after the Mavericks defeated the Knicks, 99-95, Friday night in an exhibition game in Dallas.


Food Festivals
To the Editor: Readers who enjoyed Jennifer Stoffel's article, "A Bounty of Food Festivals" (Travel, June 23), and who were inspired to seek out other such gastronomic galas may want to consult "Food Festival! The Ultimate Guidebook to America's Best Regional Food Celebrations," by Alice M. Geffen and Carole Berglie (Pantheon, 1986).
Organized by season, the book not only describes festivities across the country but includes recipes collected from festival cooks and contest winners.
Also included is a geographical listing, a map and travel tips, with general direcions, dates, times and ticket information.
Unfortunately, the book is now out of print but may be obtained by mail for $12.50 from Ms.
Geffen, 10 Highland Avenue, Sea Cliff, N.Y. 11579.
PHYLLIS MARQUART Oyster Bay, L.I.


Katherine Ann Harrison Is Married
Katherine Ann Harrison, a daughter of Francis E. Harrison of Stamford, Conn., and the late Irene Harrison, was married last evening to Mark Adam Pelson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor A. Pelson of Chester, N.J.
The Rev.
Frank Hoffman, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the combined Jewish and Catholic ceremony at the Inn at Longshore in Westport, Conn.
Mrs.
Pelson, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Connecticut.
Until recently, she was an investment banker with Herbert J. Sims &amp; Company in Westport, Conn.
Her father is a district manager with Kemper National Insurance in New Haven.
The bridegroom, 29, graduated from Cornell University and received a law degree from Boston University.
He is a manager of business development for American Telephone and Telegraph in Basking Ridge, N.J.
His mother is a director of the Trenton State College Foundation Board.
His father is a group executive for A.T.&amp;T. and the chairman of the board of trustees of the New Jersey Institute of Technology.


CORRECTION
An article on Oct. 6 about auctions and housing prices misidentified a company that conducts house auctions and misstated the title of an officer, Scott King.
It is the J. P. King Auction Company of Destin, Fla., and Mr.
King is vice president.


James Abrams Jr., 81, Co-Founder of Utility
James S. Abrams Jr., a co-founder of a New Jersey natural gas utility and an investment banker, died on Thursday at Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 81 years old.
Mr.
Abrams, a resident of South Salem, N.Y., and Ocean Ridge, Fla., died of complications from surgery and a coma, his family said.


Business Diary/October 20-25
ECONOMY How the U.S.
Economy Is Handicapping Detroit  This is Detroit's worst year -- ever.
The General Motors Corporation lost $1.1 billion and the Ford Motor Company lost $574.4 million in the third quarter.
The Chrysler Corporation reports earnings this week and big losses are expected.
Sales are down for Japanese auto makers, but most are still showing profits.
"Don't blame this on Bob Stempel," said James Womack, co-author of "The Machine That Changed the World." Mr.
Stempel is G.M.'s chairman.
The problem, Mr.
Womack says, is that as companies move to newer production techniques they are more vulnerable to the economy's ups and downs.
The Japanese manage their economy better, he said, so their companies do better.
"Lean production can't function in the extreme cyclicality that is normal in this country," he said.
What will turn things around?
"I can't see a way out without the Government stepping in. It's starting to happen with mini-vans."  Bad Timing for F.D.I.C.
Chief  William Taylor took over as chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation last week.
He may wish he hadn't.
Just after his confirmation, the F.D.I.C. told Congress it was tripling its estimate of how much money it will need next year to protect the nation's bank deposits.
Instead of a "mere" $3 billion, the F.D.I.C. said it will require $9.6 billion.
In 1993, it will need $8.7 billion more.
The F.D.I.C. estimates that more than 200 banks will fail next year with assets of about $86 billion.
But the estimates assume the economy will grow at about 3.5 percent, which is unlikely.
If it continues to limp along the fund could require as much as $28.9 billion over the next two years, the F.D.I.C. said.
That casts a pall over the Administration's proposal to raise the F.D.I.C.'s credit line to $30 billion for two years.
In a slow-growth economy -- with $28.9 billion needed -- there would be just $1.1 billion left to insure about $2.3 trillion of deposits -- not much of a safety net.
It is now up to Mr.
Taylor to mend that net.
A Big-Ticket Surprise  Durable goods are big-ticket items like refrigerators and railroad cars.
They are supposed to last at least three years (some actually do).
These big items are an important engine for the economy.
But according to the Commerce Department, sales of these goods took a 3.2 percent slide in September after falling 4.1 percent in August.
Economists were surprised; the consensus was that orders for durables would increase by 1 percent.
The Economy's Political Clout  After the coalition forces defeated Iraq in March, President Bush's popularity soared.
But since then confidence in Mr.
Bush's ability to manage the economy took the mother of all tumbles.
According to the most recent New York Times/CBS News poll released last week, 57 percent of Americans disapprove of the way Mr.
Bush is handling the economy.
Sixty percent feel "things" have gotten "pretty seriously off on the wrong track." In January -- even as the gulf war loomed -- only 31 percent of all Americans thought so.
The recent poll said 44 percent of Americans feel the country is in worse shape now than it was five years ago.
With just 13 months left to the election, Mr.
Bush had better hope the slow-growth economy has a quick rebound.
The 'Beige Book' Looks Bleak  The Federal Reserve's "beige book," released last week, was hardly a confidence builder.
The book is a compilation of reports from the Fed's 12 regional banks.
The book said the recovery had lost much of its oomph in September and early October.
Retail sales were flat; factory output -- while improving -- was doing so at a laggardly pace.
How will the Fed react to its own book?
"It will cut the discount rate by Thanksgiving to about 4.5 percent," said David Hale, chief economist at Kemper Financial Services in Chicago.
Such a cut, he said, will drive money out of money-market accounts and into stocks.
A Whole New Telephone Game  The Federal Communications Commission proposed last week that local telephone companies be allowed to package and transmit video programs on their wires.
With next-generation fiber-optics lines phone companies could offer a myriad of interactive services from entertainment libraries, recipe banks and educational programs, each tailored to a customer's needs.
The $18 billion cable industry is likely to fight (unsuccessfully) against the ruling.
"Among the top two or three concerns of every cable operator has always been head-to-head competition against local telephone companies," said John Mansell, of Paul Kagan Associates, a research firm.
COMPANIES
End of an Era at Compaq  Legend has it Rod Canion wrote the business plan for the Compaq Computer Corporation on a napkin while seated in a Houston coffee shop.
Six years after he founded Compaq, it was a $2 billion company dominating the portable-computer and I.B.M.-clone market and Mr.
Canion was its chief executive.
But though Compaq got off to a quick start in the 1980's, it has languished in the 1990's, losing market share to a new generation of clone makers.
Early last week the company reported a loss of $70.3 million in the third quarter, its first ever, compared with a $123.6 million profit the year before.
To cut costs, the company announced it would slash its work force by 1,400.
Late in the week, Compaq raised the number to 1,401, when its board of directors relieved Mr.
Canion of his job.
Eckhard Pfeiffer, Compaq's executive vice president, will take over.
Chase's Impressive Showing  Chase Manhattan managed to turn in a third-quarter profit of $136 million.
For a company that was near the brink due to a huge portfolio of bad real estate and foreign loans, the turnaround reported last week was impressive.
Chase, which had $630 million in losses for the same period a year ago, embarked on a massive cost-cutting program last year.
That program -- coupled with lower interest rates, which gave the bank larger spreads between what it pays for money and what it charges -- helped make the company profitable.
"Chase is turning itself around," said Thomas Hanley, a bank analyst at Salomon Brothers.
Time Warner Inches Back  When Time Warner Inc. released its earnings reports last week, the big media company seemed to be limping its way back to health.
True, Time Warner lost money -- $62 million in the third quarter -- but that was significantly less than the $91 million it lost in the comparable period the previous year.
Revenue in the third quarter rose (somewhat) to $2.94 billion, from $2.90 billion a year ago.
And some of the big media company's units, like the records group, showed genuine strength.
Prodigy Can Do No Right  A year ago Prodigy Services Company, one of the largest electronic bulletin boards and information services, got into trouble for screening the subscribers' messages.
Rights groups, like the American Civil Liberties Union, said Prodigy had no business censoring those communications.
Last week, Prodigy got into trouble for not censoring its subscribers' messages.
The Anti-Defamation League, a division of B'nai B'rith, accused the information service of failing to prohibit anti-Semitic messages some subscribers were putting on the company's electronic bulletin boards.
The organization said that since Prodigy advertised itself as a "family service," it should keep certain messages off the screen.
The A.C.L.U. disagreed.
"The way to answer speech is with speech," said Jerry Berman, director of the A.C.L.U.'s technology information project.
The Clifford Defense  When Clark M. Clifford testified before Congress about his involvement with the Bank of Credit and Commercial International last week, he told the same story he has told twice before.
He was deceived by B.C.C.I., the bank accused of wrongdoings such as working with terrorists and laundering money for drug lords.
But a former B.C.C.I. official, Abdur Sakhai, told the committee earlier that Mr.
Clifford, a former Defense Secretary, and Robert A. Altman, his law partner, knew about B.C.C.I.'s ownership of First American Bancshares, the Washington bank for which Mr.
Clifford served as chairman.
Mr.
Clifford denied the accusations.
"We have not violated any law," he said.
"We have not committed any impropriety." Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, presented the witnesses with documents that he said seemed to tie them to B.C.C.I. and that suggested they knew who really owned First American.
"Totally untrue," Mr.
Clifford said of the charges.
Salomon Brothers Inc. estimated the profits it made from its illegal bidding in the Treasury securities market at between $17 million and $19.7 million.
INTERNATIONAL
Snatching the Soviet Purse  Mikhail S. Gorbachev borrowed an idea from Alexander Hamilton last week.
The Soviet President decreed that the Bank for Foreign Economic Affairs would be the sole agency responsible for servicing the country's foreign debts.
The decree was approved by leaders of 10 republics eager to rid themselves of debts.
But like Hamilton, Mr.
Gorbachev was not making an altruistic gesture.
By taking responsibility for foreign credits, the central Government in Moscow will also be at the center of any future borrowing.
As Hamilton knew, power rests with the purse.
A Car of One's Own, Literally  Unlike previous shows, the companies that mounted displays at the Tokyo auto show last week highlighted their smaller, sportier and -- yes -- more frugal entrants into the market.
Some, like Mazda's HR-X, were powered by hydrogen.
Others were electric.
But some attending the show said the car everyone wanted to see was not displayed: Saturn, made by G.M. in Tennessee.
The Saturn is called America's import fighter.
The General Strike That Wasn't  When strikes were common in Italy, Italians joked that only when the country's union leaders went out on strike did everything work.
No more.
Italy is a smoothly running, smoothly growing country that recently surpassed Britain in per capita income and has little labor unrest.
So last week, when the unions called a four-hour general strike to protest the budget-cutting plans of Prime Minister Giulio Adreotti, they met with meager success.
A lot of workers went out -- but not enough to stop the country.
And when they did go out, they were just as apt to grab a long lunch as to take to the streets.


NBA Season Preview; Pippen's Stunning Leap Into Jordan's League
The high school coach saw a future for his slow, frail point guard that had nothing to do with professional basketball or the United States Olympic team.
The kid reminded him of himself, years before, a 5-foot-9-inch scrapper just grateful for the chance to play, be it at a blip in the college basketball universe known as Henderson State.
Donald Wayne's coach at that tiny Arkansas college, Donald Dyer, had since moved on to Central Arkansas, a power in the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics.
Wayne had ended up in Hamburg (population 3,000) in the southeastern corner of the state.
Now he placed a call to Dyer to sell him on Scottie Pippen, his 5-11, 145-pound scholarship-less senior.


Can Indy-Car Racing Proposal Make It Around the Roadblocks?
The reorganization plan for Indy-car racing that is being offered by Tony George, the Indianapolis Motor Speedway president, at first glance has several promising elements to it.
But before his plan can be realized, some hurdles need to be cleared.
George's plan will be formally presented to the board of Championship Auto Racing Teams, the main Indy-car sanctioning group, on Nov. 6 in Houston.
Simply put, the proposal would create for the sport a board of directors one-quarter the size of the current 24-member CART board, which consists solely of car owners.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SOUL OF THE AGE  Selected Letters of Hermann Hesse, 1891-1962.
Edited by Theodore Ziolkowski.
Translated by Mark Harman.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.


Turkey Attacks Kurd Rebels In Northern Iraq for 2d Day
Turkish aircraft and troops attacked rebel Turkish Kurds in northern Iraq for a second consecutive day today.
The latest cross-border operations followed rebel attacks on Thursday in which 24 soldiers and a civilian were reported killed in southeastern Turkey.


World Markets; Hedging Bets on the Mark and Yen
The dollar seems to be holding its own, despite new gloom about the economic recovery in the United States.
With the sudden burst of talk in Washington about a tax cut and the decline in durable goods orders in September, many people are wondering where the recovery is.


Swiss Voting Results Reflect Anti-Immigrant Mood
The leader of a rightist party that scored surprisingly well in the Swiss election last Sunday says he wants "to close the country" to immigrants.
"This country needs a breathing pause," said Michael Dreher, whose Auto Party quadrupled its strength in the lower house of Paliament.


In Carter's Music, Look For the Plot
Sometimes it seems as if Elliott Carter's music is just a perverse taste of a self-important cult.
Most listeners, upon hearing a few bars of the Double Concerto for Harpsichord and Piano (1961) or the Fourth String Quartet (1986) are completely bewildered.
Instead of charm and grace and melodic lines they hear widely leaping instrumental parts, ensembles that splinter into chaotic chatter, sudden and unexpected outbursts and unexplained silences.
The program notes are generally not much help, presenting elaborate outlines that might seem made more for paper than for the ear.
Even some serious listeners give up.
Mr.
Carter is often seen as a premiere example of the 20th-century composer who has rejected a public audience for private conversations with his muse.
Who can fault the public for responding in kind?
Yet when the Juilliard Quartet played all four of Mr.
Carter's string quartets recently, the audience that filled the Juilliard Theater (thinning out only slightly during the evening) sat in rapt silence throughout the performances and was moved to ovations at their close.
This was a more academic and professional audience than most, but there was no air of cultish pretense in their response.
Something extraordinary had indeed been heard: music that was masterly in its power and subtle in its effects.


Regional Danger in the Free Trade Pact
To the Editor:
Your articles on the decision to negotiate a free trade agreement in North America -- "We Will Regret a Rush to Free Trade" (Forum, Oct. 6) and "Make the Free-Trade Vision a Reality" (Forum, June 30) -- fail to look beyond the Western Hemisphere to how to make the global free-and-fair-trade compact attainable and viable.
This is the logical next stage of the liberal-trade policy we have been trying to perfect for half a century.


And Now a Word About Pumpkins: Boo!
WHY pumpkins?
On Thursday night the costumes will be put on, the doorbells will ring, and the trick or treaters will be out in force.
The annual Halloween events will begin, and parades of youngsters will fill their roles.
The centerpiece for all these festivities will be the traditional pumpkins.
The big ones have been growing fatter and fatter in the farmers' fields, and now markets, garden centers, roadside stands and even some novelty shops have these enormous fruits for sale.


Style Makers; Jane Seibel, Ribbon Designer
Under the influence of Jane Seibel, ribbons are not what they used to be.
Her metallic wired ribbons can be sculptured into grapes, butterflies and reindeer.
Another design has a string on one side that can be pulled to create a chrysanthemum.
Some patterns are reversible and come in florals, paisleys, animals, plaids, tapestries and brocades.
A few are made of biodegradable paper or cotton.


Corrections
The Lottery Numbers chart yesterday misstated the date on which one set of New York Pick 10 numbers was chosen.
A corrected chart appears today on page 36.


Crusaders and the Scoreboard Survive
Holy Cross and Lehigh traded touchdowns and turnovers through the second half today, and when the contest between the Patriot League's unbeaten teams ended the Crusaders were on top by a single point, 43-42.
There were 10 touchdowns and 71 points scored in the last two quarters of a match that had 156 plays from scrimmage and 1,172 yards of offense.
No wonder the crowd of 14,055 spectators seemed stunned at the end.


A 'Mountain-Climbing' Canal
THE Erie Canal was born in 1825 and still lives.
The Morris Canal opened six years later but had stopped functioning by 1929, and all that remains today are a few stretches -- at Boonton, Clifton and Wharton, for example -- and the mass of memorabilia on view here, at the Macculloch Hall Historical Museum.
This Georgian pile was erected in 1810 by George Macculloch, a prosperous businessman who had arrived in this country a few years earlier.
His business had to do with banking and overseas trade and, evidently, his reason for immigrating was the economic inconvenience caused by the Napoleonic wars.


New Orleans Lets The Scary Times Roll
THEY say that the ghost of Marie Laveau, the legendary Voodoo Queen of New Orleans, will sally forth once again from her tomb on the eve of All Saints' Day and make her way down Rampart Street to the cottage on St.
Ann Street where she once dispensed her mysterious potions and presided over ritual dances in the backyard.
Well, maybe she will and maybe she won't.
But if the shade of this fabulous character does decide to saunter through the French Quarter around Halloween time, she's sure to find plenty of company.
Among other scheduled events, walking tours will bring packs of thrill seekers into the historic quarter to visit such handsome haunts as Le Pretre House, the large, austere-looking building at the corner of Dauphine and Orlean Streets, where the ghosts of a Turkish sultan and his five wives, all murdered in their beds one dark night in 1792, persist in disturbing the neighbors with their noisy parties.
Or the LaLaurie House, the three-storied residence with the overhanging latticework balcony at 1140 Royal Street, where, it is said, the tortured slaves of the monstrously cruel mistress of the house still cry out to passers-by.
Or the Georgian-featured Hermann-Grima Historic House at 820 St.
Louis Street, one of the first early American-styled residences in the quarter, where gracious resident spooks are said to light the fireplaces on chilly mornings and to scent the parlor with the floral essence of lavender and roses.
Through All Saints' Day, the house custodians are presenting a theme tour, "Sacred to the Memory," depicting mourning customs of 19th-century New Orleans.
Visitors will find the mirrors draped in black, proper mourning attire laid out in the master bedroom -- and a coffin in the parlor.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Providence, R.I.; Preservation Of Last Farm
STATE and city historical preservation societies have joined to save what is believed to be the last farm with it buildings intact in Providence.
Known as the Whitman Farm, the property consists of a 13-room farmhouse dating from 1750 and several smaller buildings on a shaded half-acre lot in a crowded residential neighborhood.
The Providence Preservation Society Revolving Fund stepped in five days before the property went to a foreclosure auction in May and negotiated a price of $117,000 with the second mortgage holder, ITT Financial Services.
The society paid an additional $5,000 for expenses like back taxes and water and sewer bills.


In the Laps of Luxury
AUDREY HEPBURN ARRIVED AT THE HOTEL PLAZA ATHENEE ON A recent Monday afternoon, greeting the doormen and concierge as though they were old friends before being whisked into an elevator by the manager.
"Our staff always recognize returning guests," says Elizabeth L. Carrere, the hotel's director of sales and marketing.
Whether Hepburn was staying in the duplex penthouse where Elizabeth Taylor and Lady Diana Spencer, Princess of Wales, always stay Carrere wouldn't say.
Instead, she stressed the reason so many guests keep coming back: "We keep extensive histories on everyone who stays here. We keep records of their favorite rooms, favorite foods and their allergies. If a guest is a celebrity, we always keep his or her alias on file."


And Now a Word About Pumpkins: Boo!
WHY pumpkins?
On Thursday night the costumes will be put on, the doorbells will ring, and the trick or treaters will be out in force.
The annual Halloween events will begin, and parades of youngsters will fill their roles.
The centerpiece for all these festivities will be the traditional pumpkins.
The big ones have been growing fatter and fatter in the farmers' fields, and now markets, garden centers, roadside stands and even some novelty shops have these enormous fruits for sale.


Former Mayor of Washington Begins Prison Sentence


Headliner; Duke of Louisiana
As he campaigns for Governor of Louisiana, State Representative David Duke insists that not only is he out of the Ku Klux Klan, but also that the Klan is out of him.
It was a message that seemed to work two ways for him last weekend, when he came in second in the primary with the help of people who supported him because they believed him as well as people who supported him because they disbelieved him.
Many people said they voted for him because his common-sense populism showed that the extremism of his youth was behind him.
But some political analysts said many of his votes came from bigots who took his change of spots with a grain of salt.
Running as a Republican, Mr.
Duke embarrassed the White House, which declared that the former Klan leader and Nazi admirer was no Republican.
The White House instead lent its backing, unavailingly, to the incumbent, Buddy Roemer, who came in third behind former Gov.
Edwin W. Edwards and will not be in the Nov. 16 runoff.


Gorbachev in Print
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is joining the ranks of "instant book" authors with a memoir describing the August coup attempt against him and reasserting his belief in a socialism stripped of Stalinism.
Article, Page 12.


Home Buyers Holding Off Despite Low Interest Rates
DESPITE a steep decline in interest rates that has brought fixed 30-year mortgage loans to below 9 percent for the first time since 1977, home buyers are holding back across most of the nation in what experts say are stubborn fears that job cuts and other recessionary pressures will persist.
One area of relative strength, according to several studies, is the Northeast, including New York and its suburbs, which were hit first and hardest by the current housing slump, beginning in 1988.
Home resales in the region increased suddenly in the spring and have continued since, although prices have continued to weaken.


The Executive Life; A Hidden Upside In All the Downsizing
Ten years ago, Robert Levering and Milton Moskowitz, two San Francisco-based business writers, set out to rate the top American corporations.
The result was a national best seller -- "The 100 Best Companies to Work for in America" -- and it spawned a rash of similar studies after its publication in 1984.
The Levering-Moskowitz's criteria didn't include sales, profits, return on equity or any standard measures.
"We looked at the companies through the eyes of people who worked there," Mr.
Levering said.
"We used a gestalt instead of numbers."


Brooklyn Bridge Repairs Snarl Local Traffic
Moderate to lengthy traffic delays were reported from Brooklyn into Manhattan and on Brooklyn expressways on the first day of the partial closing of Brooklyn Bridge, a three-day project that transportation officials predicted would worsen already severe traffic problems in the area.
Most of the Brooklyn Bridge traffic appeared to funnel onto the Manhattan Bridge, where traffic was delayed 15 minutes or more.
The Williamsburg Bridge was also more congested than usual, but there was little increase in volume at the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, the only crossing between the two boroughs that charges a toll.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Aug. 91
Aug. 90
Change
Starts
1,056
1,131
-6.6%
Completions
1,018
1,307
-22.1%
Sales
540
525
+2.8%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.04
9.04
10.46
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.73
6.72
8.31
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.92
8.93
10.25
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.59
6.62
8.04
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.90
8.91
10.36
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.62
6.78
8.23
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.05
9.11
10.66
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.20
7.28
8.54
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
5.33
5.36
7.58
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.93
9.10
9.70
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


The World; History Leaves the Talks A Bitter Tangle to Untie
IN World War I, Britain drove the Ottomans out of the Middle East with the aid of both a Jewish Legion and Arab nationalists.
The Jews were promised a homeland, the Arabs national states.
The promises collided in Palestine, where the Arabs resisted an increasingly desperate Jewish migration; finally the British, in frustration, left it to the United Nations to partition the land.
But the Arabs rejected the deal in 1948, launching the first of several wars in which they lost territory to Israel.
This week, even though Israel has ruled out new territorial concessions, the land disputes left from the Israeli military triumphs of 1967 will be at the heart of the peace talks in Madrid.
Here is an overview.


Maybe Grade Crossings Aren't All Bad
Am I alone?
The lead sentence in "At Mineola's Crossings, It's Stop, Look and Wait"  [ Sept. 29 ]  states that, "There is no disagreement over the need to remove the dangerous railroad crossings from the Island's busiest traffic corridor, in Mineola." I, for one, disagree.
First, I challenge the idea that they are dangerous.
While statistics may show many accidents, a deeper review of those figures, I believe, would show that the loss of life and property damage was the result of either an intentional disregard of the safety gates or a decision to take one's own life.
I have not heard of a situation in which the gates failed or the L.I.R.R.  was sued successfully for neglect in one of these incidents.


New Look (and Screen) at Community Cinema
ALTHOUGH a face lift has given the New Community Cinema in Huntington a new look, its aim to provide alternative cinema remains.
Where there once was one screen, there are two.
Popular independent and foreign films are shown in the original 327-seat theater, which bears little resemblance to the school auditorium it once was.


Corn, Porn and the N.E.A.
Ever since a retrospective of the late photographer Robert Mapplethorpe caught his outraged eye, Senator Jesse Helms has sought legislation regulating the content of art receiving grants from the National Endowment for the Arts.
Last November, Congress compromised with a fuzzily worded requirement that the agency take into consideration "general standards of decency and respect for the diverse beliefs and values of the American public."


Sports of The Times; The Groom Didn't Wear Earplugs
Steve Avery said there were other things to think about besides the noise in the Metrodome, noise that could make a rock concert sound as serene as a violin recital.
There was, for example, the matter of matrimony, and there was his catcher's glove to consider, too.
And, when there was a lull, the rally cap, which, fashioned by Avery and some other Braves pitchers, has brought new meaning to haute couture.
Avery discussed these elements on Friday afternoon, the day before he was scheduled to pitch the sixth and, he hoped, final game of the World Series.


Review/Dance; Simone Forti and Peter Van Riper Evoke Nature in the City
Simone Forti presented her first dance program in New York in 1960 and since then has had a steadily increasing influence on post-modernist choreographers interested in exploring "natural," or non-formalist, movement and dance.
There were briefly compelling moments in two pieces she presented on Thursday night at the Warren Street Performance Loft, in a program shared with Peter Van Riper, a composer and musician.
But this was not one of Ms.
Forti's most persuasive efforts.
In "Animations," Ms.
Forti touched upon nature in the city, taking the audience on a trip through Washington Square Park and environs.
There were vivid evocations, in the first section, of a bird buffeted suddenly by a flying leaf, of squirrels and, amusingly, of dogs and their unassuming etiquette on walks through the park.
There was an equally vivid image of observers' bodies around a chess game.


Irish Hold On to Keep Their No. 1 Dream Alive
Somewhere at the bottom of a heaving, soggy pile of blue and cardinal and gold rested a football and two contentious pairs of hands.
For a moment that felt as if it would last forever, the Notre Dame-Southern California rivalry was transported from college football's computerized, specialized era to a crammed tug-of-war.
A 14-point, fourth-quarter Notre Dame lead was down to 4.
One minute 45 seconds remained.
A high-bouncing U.S.C. onside kick inspired a pile.
Marvin Pollard, a U.S.C. senior, felt the ball underneath.
"Unless it was a big clump of grass," Pollard said.


Collectors Read the Bottom Lines of Vintage Comic Books
Comic books as collectibles went
WHOOM!!!
this month.
Two books were published surveying 50 years of the genre as pop culture, and Sotheby's in New York announced that on Dec. 18 it would hold the first sale at an international art auction house featuring only comic books.
Both survey books are selling extremely well.
The initial printing of "From Aargh! to Zap!: Harvey Kurtzman's Visual History of the Comics," Simon &amp; Schuster's $25 paperback, is already sold out.
And "Marvel: Five Fabulous Decades of the World's Greatest Comics," by Les Daniels, is, at $45, the top seller this fall for Harry N. Abrams.
About 100,000 copies are in print at this publisher, where a printing of 5,000 for art and coffee-table books is considered large.


And Now a Word About Pumpkins: Boo!
WHY pumpkins?
On Thursday night the costumes will be put on, the doorbells will ring, and the trick or treaters will be out in force.
The annual Halloween events will begin, and parades of youngsters will fill their roles.
The centerpiece for all these festivities will be the traditional pumpkins.
The big ones have been growing fatter and fatter in the farmers' fields, and now markets, garden centers, roadside stands and even some novelty shops have these enormous fruits for sale.


Spicing Up the Pumpkin Presentation
HALLOWEEN is jack-o'-lantern time.
It also means that there is a lot of pumpkin around for cooking.
Like most winter squashes, pumpkin has a delicate flavor (some would say not much taste at all) but when combined with other ingredients that spice it up, it can make great soups, pies and cakes.
Pumpkin soup is a particularly festive fall dish when served in small individual pumpkins or in one large one.
A strong homemade chicken stock is needed to give the soup flavor, and it is good sprinkled with croutons sauteed in butter or a julienne of fresh fried ginger just before being served.


South Africa
To the Editor: The article "A Look at the New South Africa" (Travel, Sept. 22) refers to the "dismantling of apartheid." But seven million black South Africans are still living in degrading squatter settlements, and tens of thousands of black children die each year from the effects of malnutrition.
Whatever happens to segregationist laws on the books does not necessarily do much to change the glaring inequality South Africa is so notorious for.
There are tour companies that show foreigners a different side of South Africa, rather than the beaches and game parks that have attracted white visitors for decades.
Our organization, Global Exchange, a nonprofit educational group at 2141 Mission Street, San Francisco, Calif.  94110 (telephone  [ 415 ]  255-7296), offers regular tours for Americans who want to acquaint themselves with the church groups, women's organizations, trade unions and citizens' groups that are remaking South Africa.
KEVIN DANAHER San Francisco


Magicians of a Thousand and One Nights
Whether or not you should drop by the Broadhurst Theater for "Andre Heller's Wonderhouse" can be determined fairly easily by your answers to the following questions:
1) Do you continue to miss "The Ed Sullivan Show" and believe that Sunday night has never been the same since it went off the air?


The Olympics Are Dead
To the Sports Editor:
The Olympic Games are dead.
The Games were a good idea, good enough to survive almost 100 years, 1896 to 1991, good enough to survive ill-conceived boycotts, drug scandals, world wars.
The Games could not survive NBC's purchase of the Olympics.


Foreign Affairs; Untruths . . .
Washington is largely indifferent to truth.
Truth has been reduced to a conflict of press releases and a contest of handlers.
Truth is judged not by evidence, but by theatrical performance.
Truth is fear, fear of opinion polls, fear of special interests, fear of judging others for fear of being judged, fear of losing power and prestige.
Truth has become acceptance of untruths.


More Mississippi Gambling
Riverboat gambling on the Mississippi River, which began in May with boats departing from river towns in Iowa, has quickly become a growth industry.
In September, the first of six boats planned in Illinois made its maiden gambling excursion, and others are being proposed in Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri and Minnesota.
The Illinois boat, the 500-passenger Alton Belle Casino, sails out of Alton, just north of St.
Louis, six times daily with each cruise lasting two and a half hours.
The triple-deck boat is filled stem to stern with slot machines, blackjack tables, craps tables and a Big 6 wheel.
Its operators are seizing upon Illinois rules, which impose no limits on gambling losses, to designate one of the decks for "high rollers." Iowa, where three riverboats now conduct daily gambling trips, sets a $300 limit on a player's daily losses, and limits the amount of gambling area on each boat to 30 percent of its deck space, with the rest devoted to other forms of entertainment.


A Most Demanding Fella
To the Editor:
What a great pleasure to have read Conrad L. Osborne's article about Frank Loesser's "Most Happy Fella"  [ " 'Happy Fella' Yields Up Its Operatic Heart," Sept. 1 ] .
And it had specific meaning for me.


Pipes, Drums And the Magic Of Toys
THURSDAY -- The Police Department's Emerald Society pipe-and-drum band paraded through the Americas Society mansion at Park Avenue and 68th Street at a party to raise money to help finish renovating the 19th Precinct police station house a block away, at 153 East 67th Street.
Upper East Side neighbors celebrated the refurbishing of the turn-of-the-century building.
WEDNESDAY -- Six hundred parents and children partied at the F. A. O. Schwarz toy store, at Fifth Avenue and 58th Street.
The evening was a benefit for Ronald McDonald House, which provides places to stay for families with children who are receiving hospital treatment away from home.


Sunday Dinner; Where the Wines Are Well Chosen
In New York City restaurants there are wine lists, and then there are good wine lists.
Volume does not necessarily make the grade.
Some encyclopedic documents encased in leather covers are more confusing to the consumer than anything else.
An intelligent wine list is one that is easy to read, well balanced in price, and most of all, fine tuned to the food.
Here are three Manhattan restaurants with exemplary lists.
Brasserie
100 East 53d Street, (212) 751-4840 -- This sizable establisment has a sweeping main dining room with a giant U-shaped eating bar in the center and a smaller room off to the side.
Jade-green felt wall coverings, dark blue banquettes, votive candles and paper-draped tables make for a casual and comfortable setting.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
ANOTHER CELEBRATED DANCING BEAR.
By Gladys Scheffrin-Falk.
Illustrated by Barbara Garrison.
Scribners. $13.95. (Ages 5 to 9) In prerevolutionary Russia there were two bears.
Max danced in the Moscow Circus; Boris worked in an animal hospital and dreamed of dancing.
With lessons from his friend and practice, Boris's dream came true.
The illustrations are subtle etchings with watercolor washes.


Let Giants Loose
To the Sports Editor:
The Giants have a tremendous amount of power and talent.
Their conservatism belittles some of the greatest players ever.
They are a power team and I wish someone (like the coach) would tell them to play like the Super Bowl champions they are: aggressively.


Rich Aren't Paying at All in Congress's Boat-Tax Fiasco
To the Editor:
In the name of making rich people bear their share of balancing the Federal budget, Congress last fall enacted a luxury tax on new boats.
The result has been a disaster for the United States boat-building industry: more than 20,000 people out of work, bankruptcies among boat yards and economic depression in communities that depend upon boat building.


'There Are Signs of Hope'
To the Editor:
Nicolai Ouroussoff correctly points out that for black architects their profession "seems to have been bypassed by the civil rights movements"  [ "After a Moment in the Sun, Eclipsed Again," Oct. 6 ] .
Predominantly due to a lack of pressure to change, the profession has remained aloof to the diversity that increasingly characterizes our nation.
Of the American Institute of Architects' 57,098 members, barely 7.5 percent are minority members.


Adding on the Costs of Emissions
To the Editor:
"Using Compressed Air to Store Up Electricity" (Sept. 29) presented an optimistic view of the economics of compressed air energy storage, given the Clean Air Act amendments of 1990 and other legislative and regulatory trends.
In general, utilities and independent power producers will find that the quantity and cost of additional air pollution emissions associated with energy storage will often be decisive in negating the benefits of new storage projects.


Red, White and Barcelona or Bust
THE National Basketball Association pledges its 1991-92 season to the Olympic flag and the United States of America, and to the network, on which it is shown, one association, under David Stern, indivisible, with high ratings and profits for all.
(Brought to you by McDonald's, proud sponsor of the U.S. of N.B.A. and developer of the new Barkley Round Mound, official burger of Barcelona, so mouth-watering that the person next to you may need an umbrella.)


Style Makers; Andrew Benepe, Monster Maker
How did Andrew Benepe get to be a maker of monsters?
It all started, he said, "because I was a really big Halloween kid." He was also a major fan of monsters and studied stage design for two years.
Even in high school his future could have been forecast.
He began working free or for minimal pay for Off Off Broadway plays, experimenting in design.
His first real paying job was when he became involved in creating the man-eating plant for some of the productions of "The Little Shop of Horrors."


U.S. HOPES SESSIONS ON MIDEAST CREATE A NEW ATMOSPHERE
Bush Administration policy makers say the core of their strategy for the Madrid peace talks is very simple: keep the Arabs and Israelis talking long enough to create a changed environment so breakthroughs that now seem impossible might become possible.
There is no "Bush peace plan" that the President will suddenly pull out of a briefcase when he arrives in Madrid, replete with maps, compromises and novel ideas to settle all outstanding issues, say American officials who have been planning for the peace conference, which opens on Wednesday.


INSIDE
A South African Accord
The African National Congress and another anti-apartheid group reached accord on talks with Pretoria.
Page 3.
Tiny Fish, Big Debate
The future of both California water policy and the Endangered Species Act hangs on the delta smelt.
Page 16.


Deborah Ball Weds
Deborah Sharon Ball, an assistant district attorney in Kings County, and Andrew Kyle Witlin, an architect in New York, were married last evening on Staten Island.
Rabbi Charles Agin officiated at the Dix Hills Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Witlin, 27 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Ball of Rego Park, Queens.
She graduated cum laude and received a master's degree in history from the State University of New York at Albany, and a J.D. from Brooklyn Law School.
Mr.
Witlin, 27, is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Witlin of Dix Hills.
He graduated cum laude from Pratt Institute and is a freelance residential and commercial architect.


Economic Troubles Bedeviling Orchestras
AS their corporate contributors struggle with the recession, most of the state's orchestras and its one remaining opera company have been forced to reduce their dependence on the business community and turn to foundations and individuals.
Some have made small increases in ticket prices.
Others have cut back on concerts.
"In this economy, you can't get blood from a stone," said the marketing director for the Hartford Symphony, Jean Spivey.
"A lot of sponsors and would-be sponsors are pulling back. Many of the corporations we used to go to went out of business."


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Oct. 12 MANHATTAN Carnegie Hill 995,000
19 East 88th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining gallery, sunken living room, fireplace, Central Park view; maintenance $1,126, 46% tax-deductible (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Chelsea 325,000
121 West 20th Street  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,242-sq.-ft. loft-condo in a prewar building; mezzanine, 16-ft.-ceilings, fireplace, marble kitchen and bath; common charge $505, taxes $1,968 (Broker: Wells &amp; Gay/Stribling &amp; Associates)  Gracie Mansion Area 155,000
530 East 90th Street  (Gracie Gardens)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, East River view; maintenance $1,382, 61% tax-deductible (Broker: Penthouse Properties)  Greenwich Village 830,000
130 West Third Street  4,000-sq.-ft. open-loft co-op; fireplace, floor-to-ceiling windows, fireplace, 3 exposures; no maintenance due to revenue produced by first-floor commercial space (Broker: Eychner Associates)  Upper East Side 995,000
530 East 76th Street  (Promenade)  3-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 2,700-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, library, pool and roof deck; common charge $2,100, taxes $9,360 (Broker: William B. May)  Upper West Side 565,000
100 Riverside Drive (82d St.)  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,750-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, entrance gallery, maid's room, dining room, sunken living room; maintenance $1,343, 53% tax-deductible (Broker: Kuzmuk Realty)  BRONX  City Island 195,000
304 William Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family semi-attached town house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, hospitality suite in finished basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  Gun Hill Road Area 170,000
2926 Morgan Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family attached brick house; dining room, finished basement, attached 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,333 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  BROOKLYN  Bay Ridge 107,000
9701 Shore Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 950-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; windowed eat-in kitchen, dining area, New York harbor view; maintenance $457, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Velsor Realty)  Park Slope 320,000
746 Carroll Street  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 5 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath in each; original moldings and details, 19- by 144-ft. lot; taxes $2,016 (Aguayo &amp; Knox)  QUEENS  Ozone Park 218,000
97-15 97th Avenue  2-family detached shingle-frame house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; finished basement, carport, 41- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $800 (Broker: Glenjay Realty)  Rego Park 218,000
63-75 Alderton Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath single-family attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage, 21- by 130-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Best Inc.)  STATEN ISLAND  New Springville 255,000
48 Rivington Avenue  2-family detached stone house; 3 bedrooms, 1 3/4 baths, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 1/2 baths, eat-in kitchen in other; finished basement, 1-car garage, 56- by 120-ft. lot; taxes $2,155 (Broker: salmon Realty)  Rosebank 148,000
31 Virginia Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath single-family detached Colonial; dining room, remodeled kitchen, full basement, 2-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)


Doctor, Doctor, Give Us the News
After four years of medical school and another three for internship and residency, a doctor chooses a subspecialty: cardiology.
Dermatology.
Ophthalmology.
But broadcast journalism, Dr.
Atkinson?
Indeed, a decade after receiving a master's degree from Columbia University's Graduate School of Journalism, Dr.
Holly Atkinson set up practice in a television studio.
Last month the 38-year-old former internist, who is a vice president at Lifetime Medical Television, joined NBC's "Today" show as its new medical correspondent, replacing Dr.
Art Ulene, who has moved to ABC's "Home" show.


Italian Menu, Amiable Surroundings
IF there is a trend in restaurant openings, it is that many of the new places feature Italian cuisine, and one of the brightest is Amadeo's in Westport.
Except for an excruciating decibel level when the place is full (which is often, even on weeknights) and the fact that the nonsmoking section consists of just three tables on a chilly porch separated from the jollity of the main dining room, the surroundings couldn't be more amiable.
Though the main room is minuscule to begin with, it is made even smaller by a room divider with cheerful white planters full of flowers that creates two very snug dining areas.


Lore B. Cagan, A Teacher, Wed
Lore Betty Cagan, a daughter of Bella Katz of Elmhurst, Queens, and the late Ferdinand Katz, was married last evening in Roslyn, L.I., to Dr.
Ralph Stein, the son of Anne Stein of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Ernest Stein.
Rabbi Jay Rosenbaum performed the ceremony at the Roslyn Country Club.
Mrs.
Stein, who is 58 years old and retired, taught high school English in the New York City public school system.
She graduated from Hunter College, where she was a member of Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in English from Hunter.She was the widow of Dr.
Seymour H. Cagan, a radiologist in Mineola, L.I.
Dr.
Stein, 64, is a pediatrician in Astoria, Queens, and an assistant clinical professor of pediatrics at Cornell Medical School.
He graduated from New York University and received his M.D. from the University of Zurich.
His late wife was Simone Pfaff of Zurich.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
Budget deficit, in billions
-$43.7
-$14
TuesdayYGross national product, percent change
-0.5
2.5
Consumer confidence index
72.7
73.0
Wednesday
Personal income, percent change
0.4
0.4
Personal consumption, percent change
0.1
0.4
New home sales, percent change
6.7
0.5
Thursday
Factory orders, percent change
-1.9
0.3
Friday
Leading indicators
flat
0.1
Construction spending
0.3
0.2
Unemployment, in percent
6.7
6.8
Monday: Group of Seven industrial leaders discuss Soviet aid  Tuesday: Employment cost index *
Agriculture prices  (Sousrce: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Out of the Past


Rubiano Wins N.Y.R.A. Mile
Rubiano, an accomplished miler who thrives in New York, made his customary late dash yesterday when he outran a strong field of 14 other horses and won the $500,000 N.Y.R.A.
Mile at Aqueduct by a head over Sultry Song.
The 4-year-old son of Fappiano, owned by the Centennial Farms, trained by Scotty Schulhofer and ridden by Jose Santos, ran 10th behind a fast pace for three-quarters of a mile and then rallied powerfully in the homestretch.
In the final yards, he caught and passed Sultry Song, who had one length on Diablo in a driving finish.


Alicia Mullaney Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Mullaney Jr. of Westfield, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alicia French Mullaney to Steven De Lay Bridge, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred N. Bridge of New York.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Mullaney and her fiance, both 25 years old, graduated from Lynchburg College.
She is a sales representative for Russell Stover Candies in Kansas City, Mo.
Her father owns Wall Chemical Corporation, a chemical manufacturer in Mountainside, N.J.
Mr.
Bridge is the director of catalogue sales for the Bridge Kitchenware Corporation, a kitchenware supply company in New York.
His father owns the company.


Questions About Thomas, the Man, Obscured Clues About Thomas, the Jurist
In its searing endgame, the process of confirming Clarence Thomas for the Supreme Court shifted its focus almost entirely to the nominee's past.
But with his swearing in last Wednesday, the question now is what future Clarence Thomas has as the nation's 106th Supreme Court Justice.
Now the question is what kind of Justice he is likely to be.
The portrait that emerged during the five days that then-Judge Thomas spent before the Senate Judiciary Committee last month had indistinct outlines and lacked many details.
It was an image easily eclipsed by the dramatic night and day Judge Thomas spent two weeks ago responding to Anita F. Hill's accusation of sexual harassment.


Trans-Pacific


Cuttings; Inviting the Birds to Dinner in the Garden
The garden is something of a chameleon.
You're planting a trumpet vine one day when you find a hummingbird poking its nose into those long orange flowers.
You turn on the sprinkler and realize, from the way the barn swallows are flapping their wings on top of the fence posts, that they think this is their shower.
And one morning there's a flash of yellow in the apple tree, and you think, but are not sure, that it's a yellow-rumped warbler looking for worms.
To me, the garden is a doorway to other worlds; one of them, of course, is the world of birds.
The garden is their dinner table, bursting with bugs and worms and succulent berries (so plant more to accommodate you both, or use netting to keep them off your prize strawberries and blueberries).


Miss Gothelf, Lawyer, Weds
Barbara Leigh Gothelf, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Gothelf of Brooklyn, was married last evening to Ralph Albert Cohn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Cohn of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Shlomo Balter officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Cohn, 31 years old, graduated from Union College and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
She is an assistant counsel to the minority leader of the New York State Senate, Manfred Ohrenstein.
Her father owns Sideny Gothelf &amp; Associates, an insurance consulting firm in New York.
Her mother, Edith Gothelf, is a vice president of the Brooklyn division of the National Council of Jewish Women.
The bridegroom, 29, attends the College of St.
Rose.
His father is a trial lawyer in New York.
His mother, Eva B. Cohn, is a partner in a travel agency, New York Impressions, in Riverdale.


As Soviet Republics Gain Power, U.S. Scrambles to Decide on a Policy
Speaking before the Ukrainian Parliament in Kiev on Aug. 1 -- 20 days before the Soviet coup attempt -- President Bush put his Administration clearly on the side of a central Soviet government strong enough to pull together republics increasingly separating from each other.
Now United States policy, especially on economic matters, is no longer so clear-cut.
"We will maintain the strongest possible relationship with the Soviet government of President Gorbachev," Mr.
Bush had declared in Kiev, and he had gone on to argue that economic prosperity in the former Soviet Union required "greater voluntary interaction" among the nation's 12 republics.


2 Black Groups Agree in South Africa
In an agreement likely to hasten the start of talks on South Africa's future, the country's two most prominent black resistance movements announced today that they had reached a consensus on negotiating with the white-minority Government.
The African National Congress and the Pan-Africanist Congress, a smaller rival, said they had agreed that a conference of all political parties should be held as soon as possible to work out methods for the transfer of power to the country's black majority.


MOMMY OLDEST
Cunningham raises salient concerns about the expanding biological borders offered women through high-tech fertility medicine.
However, her implication that adoption offers the moral high ground distresses me.
Global concerns notwithstanding, a woman has the right to decide for herself that she wants to make every possible effort to give birth to a biological child.
ELEANOR M. SKINNER
Amherst, Mass.


Fuming Over Ashtray Remark
To the Sports Editor:
Your car reviewer, Marshall Schuon, spends most of his time ogling the dashboard of the Ford Taurus ("Ford Rounds Off a Few More Edges," The Times, Oct. 20).
He writes, "it ought to be said that the ashtray is excellent."


Berlin for a Change, Not Paris or Rome
RESTAURANTS that label themselves continental are often pretentious, overpriced and Italian, with a smattering of French phrases and dishes on the menu.
But not the Parkwood Cafe in West Islip.
Here, the featured continental capital is neither Rome nor Paris, but Berlin.
The German connection at this four-year-old restaurant is no surprise to Long Islanders, who for more than 25 years knew it as Hermann's Captree House.


Too American for Its Own Good?
In Yukiyasu Togo's first overseas assignment for the Toyota Motor Corporation 20 years ago, he donned the saffron robes of a Buddhist monk and begged in the streets of Bangkok so he could understand the Thai people.
When he was transferred to Canada five years later, he sold cars door-to-door in order to learn English and understand the Canadian mindset.
Finally in 1983 Toyota decided what its American workers needed most was a cheerleader, so Mr.
Togo moved to the company's United States headquarters here, just south of Los Angeles, and began conducting pep rallies and handing out bonus checks, which have since become known as Togo bucks.
Mr.
Togo's chameleon-like management style, so unusual for a senior Japanese executive, has proved particularly adaptive in the United States, igniting the enthusiasm of Toyota's work force and dealers.


U.S. Advisories
To the Editor: After reading the letters on U.S.
Advisories (Travel, Sept. 22), I felt the need to report on my experience in Peru this summer.
My journey to Peru with members of Phi Delta Kappa, a professional education organization, included a trip down the Amazon from Iquitos, Peru, to Leticia, Colombia, as well as Cuzco and Machu Picchu.
We read the State Department advisories and decided to go anyway.
The first night out of Iquitos a group of six armed guerrillas boarded the boat and held the crew and passengers at gunpoint.
We were fortunate that this terrifying experience resulted only in our giving over all our money.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL AROUND THE NATION
Worth Noting OKLAHOMA (5-2, 2-1) beat KANSAS (4-3, 1-2), 41-3, at Norman, Okla.: Coming off a rare two-game losing streak, the Sooners rolled up 439 yards and scored on five straight possessions against the Jayhawks.
Tailback Tony Sands rushed for 89 yards to become the Kansas career rushing leader with 3,130 yards.


New &amp; Noteworthy
FRAGILE GLORY: A Portrait of France and the French, by Richard Bernstein. (Plume, $10.95.) In this plumbing of the French psyche, a former Paris bureau chief of The New York Times shows why in the minds of its people France is still in its glory days.
Writing in The Times in 1990, Herbert R. Lottman called this "the most penetrating account of contemporary France we're ever likely to own."
SPIDER, by Patrick McGrath. (Vintage, $10.) In the slums of London's East End, a deranged recluse named Spider Cleg reminisces about his childhood, which got off to a difficult start when his alcoholic father took up with a prostitute and murdered his mother -- or did he?
"The sensuous world that Mr. McGrath creates is intense in its beauty as well as its grime," Katherine Dunn said here last year, "a place where joy waits outside in the rain and there is more murder and more mystery than even Spider can admit."


County Uses New Tactic On Criminals' Unpaid Fines
AN aggressive new effort by Hudson County officials to collect millions of dollars in outstanding criminal fines and penalties is being viewed as a potential model for similar programs that could be used on a statewide basis.
The program, through which officials collect delinquent fines by placing liens on property, garnishing wages, suspending drivers' licenses and seizing state tax refunds, is seen as an effective, efficient way of collecting overdue fines from recalcitrant offenders.


Three Whiz Kid Economists of the 90's, Pragmatists All
Economists make youth a prerequisite for winning one of the profession's top honors, the John Bates Clark Medal.
"We tend to think that everything important is done early," said Paul Samuelson, who won the first Clark Medal, in 1947 at the age of 32, and like five others went on to garner a Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science.
Most economists already know who this year's Clark Medal winner is -- indeed, committee members at the American Economics Association, which makes the award, have sent him congratulatory notes -- although medal traditions preclude a formal announcement until January.


Political Memo; Having Ridden Racial Issues, Parties Try to Harness Them
Race is one of the enduring forces in American politics, but the events of the past few weeks forecast a new and far more complicated racial politics as the nation heads into the 1992 campaign.
Each party is struggling to adjust, and neither seems fully in control.


Few Choices Are Seen By Divided Palestinians
Hamid, the only name he would give, had gotten word that his uncle in Egypt wanted to talk with him, so at the prearranged hour he drove to what passes for a communications system in this blighted town: the fence.
The fence is 12 feet high, crowned with curls of barbed wire, and it separates the southernmost corner of the Gaza Strip from the Sinai and Egypt.


LAW ON THE FEMINIST FRONTIER
Women like Betty Friedan, Kate Millett and Adrienne Rich (among others) objected to MacKinnon's anti-pornography ordinance because it is neither good science nor good feminism but a quick fix.
They recognized that it could remove from circulation -- by direct lawsuit and by the subsequent "chilling effect" -- such a sweeping range of books, pictures and films that many feminist works would be scotched in the process.
MacKinnon's theory that sexually explicit material causes violence against women has little support among social scientists.
Overwhelmingly the evidence, both laboratory and clinical, suggests that violence is learned in the home and community, and that violent sexual pathologies result from childhood emotional or physical abuse and neglect.
MARCIA PALLY
New York, N.Y.


Answering The Mail
Q.
A large part of my walnut parquet floor has been covered with a rug and pad for
10 years. I decided to get rid of the rug, but when I picked it up I found that the pad
beneath was stuck to the floor and could
not be removed.
When I try to pull off the pad, it seems to fall apart.
Can you tell me how to remove the pad while at the same time preserving the parquet floor?
A.
It is not clear whether an adhesive was used to cement the pad to the floor, or whether it is simply sticking to the old finish.
Either way, the only way to remove it is to scrape it off, using a long-handled scraper like the ones used to scrape ice off a sidewalk or a wide putty knife.
After that, you will probably have to sand the wood floor to clean off all residue.
If the parquet is not solid wood and is plywood or veneer, you will have to sand carefully to avoid cutting through the top layer of wood.


Advice on Eating Your Catch
The 1991-92 New York State Fishing Regulations Guide includes the following warnings from the New York State Department of Health "to minimize potential adverse health impacts" of consuming fish caught in area waters.
Eat no more than one meal (one-half pound) per week of fish from the state's freshwaters, the Hudson River estuary or the New York City Harbor. (Certain exceptions are noted in the guide.)


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: East; Colgate Has No Problem Holding Down Fordham
Bill Sparacio ran for 104 yards and 2 touchdowns and Rick Brown kicked 3 field goals to lift Colgate to a 25-12 victory over Fordham today.
Fullback Joe Napoli rushed for 84 yards, and quarterback Jim Russell ran for 70 yards and passed for 182 as Colgate (2-5) won its Patriot League opener.
Fordham fell to 2-5 over all and 0-3 in the league.


Graham's Legacy: Consistent Change
Perhaps you too are bored with the question of whether the Martha Graham Dance Company can survive without Martha Graham.
The issue was raised repeatedly and insultingly, especially by grant-giving agencies, during the final 25 years of Graham's life, when she did not oblige expectations and continued working creatively until her death last April 1 at the age of 96.
Despite the financial aid often denied her on the spurious ground that her troupe would die without her, that same company has actually survived a successful season this month at the City Center, is scheduled to perform in Paris this week, and has bookings into 1993.


Fresh Air Fund Given Grant For Career Awareness Camp
The Kresge Foundation, a private organization that helps groups construct and renovate centers and buildings, has awarded a $500,000 grant to the Fresh Air Fund for a new Career Awareness Camp in upstate New York.
The camp will teach hundreds of mostly poor 12- to 15-year-olds about career opportunities.
It will operate year-round and consist of summer and weekend camping as well as follow-up activities in New York City.
The camp will be on a 3,000-acre reservation in Fishkill, N.Y., the site of four other fund camps.


Q and A
M.C.I.
Increase  Question: I have received a bill from my landlord for a retroactive major capital improvement increase for an 18-month period from February of 1989 until February of 1990, when I purchased my apartment after the building's conversion to a co-op.
Do I have to pay a bill for a rent increase in an apartment where I am no longer a tenant? . . .
Howard Hill, Brooklyn Answer: Yes.
According to Joseph D'Agosta, a deputy commissioner for the State Department of Housing and Community Renewal, a tenant is responsible for retroactive rent increases, even if he is no longer a tenant.
The exception, Mr.
D'Agosta said, would be if there was a provision of the offering plan in a conversion that absolved the purchaser of this debt.
"Even tenants who vacate the apartments are technically liable for the retroactive M.C.I. increase," said Mr.
D'Agosta, "but because most increases are not that large, most owners do not bother with trying to collect once a tenant has moved away." Liability for a Driveway  Question: I own a home that shares a driveway with other homes.
It needs to be repaired, but not all homeowners want to contribute to the cost.
If someone is injured because of its broken concrete, would all homeowners be liable, or would only the owner of the property in front of the section where the accident occurred be held responsible? . . .
Barry Bloch, Flushing, Queens Answer: All homeowners would be liable in case of an accident.
According to Brook Boyd, an attorney with the firm of Herrick, Feinstein who specializes in real estate matters, all owners may be liable for accidents caused by driveway defects.
"If one owner is sued," said Mr.
Boyd, "the other owners are typically required to share the cost of judgment."
Anyone entitled to use the driveway, Mr.
Boyd said, is required, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, to share in the cost of maintaining it.
Owners who use the driveway but fail to share these costs could be sued by others who do.
Liability for a Lease  Question: I live in a co-op building.
Our board of directors allows owners to take tenants under some circumstances and charges them a $100-a-month sublet fee.
We now have a situation in which one owner has moved away and has turned the apartment over to his brother.
This was done with board approval.
To help with the maintenance charge, the brother of the shareholder has taken a roommate.
Some shareholders have suggested that we charge the sublet fee.
Does the board have the authority to do this? . . .
Joseph A. Gisler, Woodside, Queens Answer Maybe.
But it would depend on the terms of the proprietary lease.
According the Marc Luxemberg, an attorney who specializes in real estate matters and who is a vice president of the Council of New York Cooperatives, most leases include language that stipulates which relatives of shareholders have occupancy rights.
Typically, Mr.
Luxemberg said, it would be spouses, children, parents, grandparents and brothers and sisters of the named tenant on the proprietary lease.
Mr.
Luxemberg said that the exact wording of this type of clause is important.
"If the lease says the shareholder
or
his or her brother or other relatives have occupancy rights," he said, "then this situation described would not be a sublet.
But if the lease granted occupancy rights to shareholder
and
his siblings, then that would mean that the named party would also have to be in residence for the arrangement not be be a violation of the lease terms."
If the lease does not allow the brother to live in the apartment without the named tenant, then the board would have the right to demand a sublet fee.
But this would be paid by the shareholder, not his brother.
The board would have the right to cancel the shareholder's proprietary lease and occupancy rights if the fee is not paid.


At Carnegie 1991, Sincerity Edges Out Irony
For one of his installations here at the 51st Carnegie International, the French Conceptual artist Christian Boltanski has created a basement storeroom of shelves, a kind of mausoleum of Carnegies past.
On the shelves are stacked hundreds of identical plain brown boxes, each bearing the name of an artist who has appeared in the Carnegie over the course of its 95-year history.
Picasso, Pissarro, Vuillard and Pollock have their boxes, as do Van Dyck and Corot, who were for some reason included posthumously in early versions of the show.
Mr.
Boltanski himself has a box, along with the 42 other artists in the present incarnation of what has become a triennial event, the country's most prestigious survey of contemporary art.
For every familiar name there are dozens of unfamiliar ones in Mr.
Boltanski's wryly devastating installation.
To the organizers of the exhibition, Lynne Cooke and Mark Francis, it must serve as a sobering reminder of the pitfalls of major art-world overviews like this one.


Maybe Grade Crossings Aren't All Bad
Elimination of these crossings has been studied for many years.
The need for this project has become more acute as rail traffic increased and the Ronkonkoma electrification went into service.
Accidents caused by thoughtless drivers continue, as they attempt to drive around lowered gates.
A separate and valuable dividend from the grade separation would be the provision of a third track, badly needed to relieve congestion on what has become the busiest L.I.R.R. route.
In the original plan for separation of rail and roadway, the railroad was to be elevated, just as it all along the South Shore.
Elsewhere in our country, the West Coast, Florida and other communities where commuter railroads are being built, elevated structures are accepted.
Depressing the railroad would be costly, something like 50 percent more than elevation.
In this depressed economic period, it is imperative that the most economical choice must be made.
Indeed, the existing route through Mineola is elevated, both east and west of Mineola.
ARTHUR HARRISON Locust Valley


Working Safari In South Africa
For an unconventional behind-the-scenes safari tour, the Sabi Sabi Private Game Reserve in South Africa is offering six-day courses in game-ranger training -- they are open to everyone -- that teach tracking skills, animal and bird identification, bush survival skills and the general role of ecotourism in Africa's game reserves.
The groups are taught by experienced training officers, game rangers and trackers, according to African Travel, a tour operator that is marketing the courses and describes them as effective in stress reduction for executives.
It says there are lectures at the tented training camp, walking safaris and game drives in the reserve, which borders on Kruger National Park in the Transvaal.
The course, available each week, costs $1,540 a person, transportation not included, and is designed to be added to a more conventional tour.
More information: African Travel, 1100 East Broadway, Glendale, Calif. 91205; (800) 421-8907.


Time for Two Changes
When did you last put a new battery in your smoke detector?
There's a good chance you have never done so.
When it chirped its warning that the battery was dead, you probably yanked it out, threw it away and made a mental note to replace it -- which you then forgot.
According to the International Association of Fire Chiefs, 85 percent of American homes have one or more detectors, but one-third have dead or missing batteries.
The chiefs recommend changing batteries annually; but how is one to remember?
Five years ago, the St.
Louis Fire Department and the Eveready Battery Company, based there, came up with a clever connection: Change your clock; change your battery.


7 Killed in Mozambique Raid
Seven people, including two Zimbabwean drivers, were killed this week when rebels ambushed a Malawi-bound truck convoy in Mozambique, the semi-official Herald reported today.


IN SHORT: FICTION
BLUE RUIN  A Novel of the 1919 World Series. By Brendan Boyd. Norton, $19.95.


Miss Donnelly Weds in Paris
Charmaine Donnelly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Donnelly of Somers, Conn., was married yesterday in Paris to Gerard Pfauwadel, a son of Mrs.
Daniele Pfauwadel of Montbeliard, France, and the late Mr.
Pfauwadel.
Jean Tiberi, Mayor of the Fifth Arrondissement, performed the ceremony in his office.
Mrs.
Pfauwadel, 37 years old, is a vice president in the Paris branch of the Bank of America.
She graduated from Colgate University.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of Donnelly Electric, a family building supply company in Suffield, Conn.
Mr.
Pfauwadel, 41, is the chairman of Marche a Terme International de France, the futures and options market in Paris.
He is a graduate of Ecole Nationale d'Administration and is a former under deputy secretary of the French Treasury.
His first marriage ended in divorce.
His father was an accountant with the Peugeot Corporation in Montbeliard.


And Now a Word About Pumpkins: Boo!
WHY pumpkins?
On Thursday night the costumes will be put on, the doorbells will ring, and the trick or treaters will be out in force.
The annual Halloween events will begin, and parades of youngsters will fill their roles.
The centerpiece for all these festivities will be the traditional pumpkins.
The big ones have been growing fatter and fatter in the farmers' fields, and now markets, garden centers, roadside stands and even some novelty shops have these enormous fruits for sale.


Commercial Property: Nonprofit Tenants; Wall Street Tower as a Site for a Service Association
MAYOR David N. Dinkins made it plain to his economic development team that this was to be a priority.
Happily for them, Larry A. Silverstein offered up to 400,000 square feet in a Wall Street building with East River views, pledging a year's free rent, among other concessions.
One might think they were focused on some huge financial institution.
Instead, they were trying to create a home for relatively small tenants, each of whom might need only 10,000 to 20,000 square feet: the nonprofit charitable organizations or trade associations that can no longer afford Manhattan.


Mutual Funds; Making Sense of Your Investments
A number of readers have written recently with questions about mutual funds that they already own or are thinking of buying.
Here are some of their queries.
Question: I have been investing in the Value Line Tax-Exempt High-Yield Fund since 1984.
I bought shares until mid-1987; after that, I reinvested the interest earned.
Even though interest rates are substantially lower today than in the mid-1980's, which means bond prices are higher than they were then, the average price of my shares is less than what I paid.
Is this fund a loser?


CAMPUS LIFE: James Madison; Libraries Share Scholarly Work, Overnight, by Fax
When Mindy Tanner, a senior at James Madison University, wrote a research paper recently on the mythologies of crime and violence, she drew on library materials at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville and at Virginia Tech, in Blacksburg -- all without leaving her own campus.
Instead, Ms.
Tanner, a senior majoring in history and Spanish, used Document Express, a new joint program in which students and faculty members obtain journal articles from one another's libraries by way of overnight facsimile.


Semi-Rabid Rock From the Pixies
There was a time when the Boston group the Pixies was the last word in rock-and-roll bacchanalia.
The group's singer and songwriter, Black Francis, had been inspired by Iggy Pop of the Stooges and by David Lynch movies like "Eraserhead" and "Blue Velvet." From Iggy Pop, he derived a "primal scream" vocal style, while Mr.
Lynch's macabre surrealism influenced Black Francis's id-infested writing.
The Pixies' lyrics seethed with febrile imagery of sleazy sex, base biological processes and mutilated bodies.
Black Francis's singing often bordered on speaking-in-tongues delirium.
The impression was of a driven, repressed individual venting his inner turmoil in what he has called a "scream of consciousness."


In Debate on Abortion, 2 Girls Make It Real
Gianna Jessen, the girl who lived when she was supposed to die, and Becky Bell, the girl who died when she was supposed to live, have become the symbols of the nation's bitter debate over abortion -- poster girls whose stories are being shrewdly marketed by their supporters to keep passions high.
To sell anything in America, even an idea, it helps to have a human face and story to make it real.


Beach, Chadwick: New World Symphonists
Amy Beach's "Gaelic" symphony, revived in an important new recording by Nee me Jarvi, evokes the too-soon-forgotten "first American school" of native symphonists -- a group that also includes George Whitefield Chadwick, whose Third Symphony has been resuscitated as part of an American music project sponsored by the Library of Congress.
In different ways, both works relate to an American milestone: the New York Philharmonic's eagerly awaited first performance of Dvorak's "New World" Symphony, at Carnegie Hall on Dec. 16, 1893.
On that great occasion, the audience burst into applause halfway through, after the Largo.
From the podium, Anton Seidl motioned repeatedly toward a box.
Finally, a swarthy, bearded man came forward.
The name Dvorak swept the hall, and the ovation increased.
"With hands trembling with emotion, Dr. Dvorak waves an acknowledgment of his indebtedness to Anton Seidl, to the orchestra, to the audience," The New York Herald reported.
Of the symphony itself, the Herald's critic wrote: "The work is a great one."


The Arrogance of Philipp Brothers
To the Editor:
In "Speculation and Salomon" (Letters, Oct. 6), my former colleague at Phibro-Salomon, William Spier, expresses the hope that new leadership at Salomon will prove beneficial to Salomon's employees and shareholders.
Although I am not any longer counted among the former (I left Philipp Brothers in 1984), I am unfortunately a shareholder.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SYMPOSIUM ON THE SOUND
"Have We Sold Long Island Sound Short?" is the topic to be explored atan environmental-science symposium in Romita Auditorium of the College of New Rochelle on Saturday from 8:30 A.M. to 2 P.M.
The keynote address, "The State of the Sound," will be delivered by Dr.
Kevin Bricke of the marine division of the Environmental Protection Agency for Region 2, which includes the county.


Syracuse's Better Half Defeats Rutgers
Syracuse, keeping alive its chances of a bid to a major bowl game, scored 14 second-half points to break a halftime tie and beat Rutgers, 21-7, at Giants Stadium today.
On its first possession in the second half, Syracuse (6-2) staged an 11-play, 37-yard drive that ended with a 40-yard field goal by John Biskup, a junior from East Islip, L.I.


Discord in the Territories
Opinion in the Gaza Strip appears about equally divided between those who think the Madrid talks are the lesser evil and those who regard them as a trap to be avoided.
Page 8.


Princeton Loses Its First Game as Harvard Holds On
Princeton's five-game winning steak came down to a game-ending pass that was batted around the end zone for what seemed like an eternity yesterday, but when it fell incomplete, Harvard had broken its four-game losing streak with a 24-21 victory at Harvard Stadium.
Coupled with Dartmouth's victory over Cornell, the Crimson triumph put Princeton (5-1) and Harvard (2-4) in second place in the Ivy League standing with 2-1 records.


Corrections
The air fare listing in the Travel Watch column on page 23 of the Travel section today misstates the lowest unrestricted fare from New York to London.
Virgin Atlantic offers a $498 round trip.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
HALLOWEEN AT YALE
The Yale Symphony Orchestra's Halloween Concert, more zany than spooky, is always held at midnight and the contents are always kept secret.
This year's extravanganza will take place as usual at the stroke of midnight on Thursday in Woolsey Hall.
Each section of the orchestra -- appearing in a fantasmagoric array of costumes, props and mise en scene, and performing odd bits of melodrama -- decides on its own what it will do to make the evening memorable.


Odds Go by the Board in a Giants-Redskins Clash
If you believe in statistics, the Washington Redskins should have an easy time against the Giants on Sunday night at Giants Stadium.
After all, the Redskins (7-0) are undefeated.
Their offense leads the National Football League in scoring (33 points a game) and rushing (155.4 yards a game).
Their defense has 23 sacks, 14 interceptions and 3 shutouts.
They have good veterans almost everywhere.


Wall Street; Fidelity Eases the Rules on Control
Typically, a shareholders meeting for a tax-exempt money market fund is about as exciting as watching ice melt.
But two such meetings at Fidelity Investments in Boston last week were exceptions.
At each session, shareholders were asked to approve a cluster of bylaw amendments that raise questions about where the Fidelity family is heading.
One of the most intriguing revisions: A rule change that would permit the funds to invest in companies "for the purpose of exercising control or management."


Worker Accused in Shooting Is Caught Near Border
An industrial engineer accused of shooting her supervisor to death and wounding three co-workers was arrested late Friday near the Canadian border.
The shootings occurred Friday afternoon at the Eveready Battery Company plant in downtown Bennington, Vt.
The suspect, Elizabeth Teague, 30 years old, was later arrested in Pittsburg, N.H., after being stopped for a speeding violation.


POLES VOTE TODAY IN ANXIOUS MOOD
More than two years after the Solidarity movement triumphantly toppled the Communist Government, Poland holds its first fully free parliamentary elections on Sunday against a backdrop of social unrest and disillusionment.
The exhilaration of June 1989, when Poland became the first Eastern European nation to push out Communism, has been supplanted by rising anger and anxiety over the rigors of the nation's pioneering economic reforms.


TAIWAN SETS PLAN TO REBUILD NATION
Like the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, Taiwan wants to modernize its concrete skylines and cracking sewers, but unlike them, Taiwan not only has the dreams but also the money -- $72 billion in official foreign exchange reserves, more than any other country.
And so it has embarked on a bold program to lift itself into the upper ranks of developed nations, planning to spend more than $300 billion for new railroads and highways, a subway system, power plants, refineries, schools, housing, medical facilities, water treatment plants and sewage systems.
The six- year construction program -- which will cost more than three times as much as rebuilding Kuwait -- has prompted a contest among American and other foreign contractors for some of the biggest plums of the 1990's.


Victoria Smith Has Wedding
Victoria Elizabeth Smith, the daughter of Geoffrey N. Smith of Princeton, N.J., and Mary Whalen Newman of New York, was married yesterday at her mother's home to Philip MacHale, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore MacHale of White Plains.
Louis I. Kaplan, a retired justice of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
MacHale, 27 years old, is an international tax consultant at Price Waterhouse in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is the editor of Financial World Magazine in New York.
Her mother is a vice president of the Corcoran Group, a New York real-estate company.
Mr.
MacHale, 47, of New York, is an actor who appears in television dramas and commercials.
He graduated from Colby College and received a master's degree in international relations from the University of Southern California.
He was a Marine captain in Vietnam.
His first marriage ended in divorce.
His father was a contract administrator for IBM in New York.


CORRECTION
An entry in the Recent Sales column on Sept. 22 misstated the address and age of a house in Chatham and the taxes on it.
The address is 94 Lisa Drive, and the house is 11 years old; the taxes are $6,829.


CAMPUS LIFE: Adelphi; Students Study Bones From Dig Site in Greece
Students at Adelphi University are coaxing old Greek bones to give up their ghosts, using what may be the only collection of ancient Greek skeletal remains to be housed at an American university.
The bones, which range in date from the seventh century B.C. to the 14th century A.D., were brought to Adelphi through the efforts of Anagnosti Agelarakis, an anthropology professor who since 1983 has been excavating a site in Abdera on the coast of Greece in Thrace.


As Cuomo Ruminates, The World Of Politics Calculates
For a homebody who rarely spends enough time away from New York to need even an overnight case, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo would embark on a year-long Presidential campaign burdened by enough political baggage to keep a typical candidate from walking, much less running.
Mr.
Cuomo isn't typical, though.
Mostly by word and sometimes by deed, the Governor has cultivated an image that distinguishes him from most candidates.
His acknowledgement this month that he is weighing a Presidential campaign has quickened the pulses of all politicians who believe he can magically transform perceived liabilities into assets and galvanize a party and a nation yearning for leadership.
To be sure, a disproportionate number of the press's stethoscopes are wielded in New York.
But few other public figures could generate so much interest in the mere possibility that they might run.


Bill Graham, Rock Impresario, Dies at 60 in Crash
Bill Graham, who escaped Nazi Germany to become America's leading promoter of rock musicians and who helped develop the mass rock concert format that drew audiences totaling in the millions, was killed Friday in a helicopter crash about 25 miles northeast of San Francisco.
He was 60 years old.
Mr.
Graham was one of three people who died when their helicopter hit a 200-foot utility tower and crashed in a fiery explosion about 10 P.M., said officials of his company, Bill Graham Presents.


Making a Difference; State Farm's Man at the Fire Scene
When William L. Newlin heard the radio broadcast of last Sunday's 49er game being interrupted for news of a fire in the Oakland hills, he knew he was in for a long week.
Mr.
Newlin is the northern California disaster coordinator for the State Farm Insurance Companies, which has the greatest percentage of the homeowners' insurance market here, and thus the greatest exposure.


Wedding Plans For Ms. Hautzig
Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Hautzig of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Deborah Margolee Hautzig to William DeVries, a son of Miriam DeVries of San Francisco and Harold DeVries of San Diego.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hautzig, 35 years old, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
She writes children's books for Random House, including the Little Witch books and many of the Sesame Street books, and has written two novels for young adults, "Hey, Dollface," and "Second Star to the Right." Her father, a concert pianist, was a professor of piano at the Peabody Conservatory of Music in Baltimore.
Her mother, Esther Hautzig, also is a children's author.
Mr.
DeVries, 31, graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
He designs software for Dragon Medical and Scientific Communications, a New York developer of computer software for pharmaceutical companies.
His mother, who is retired, was a social worker.
His father, who is retired, owned a direct-mail advertising business.


Laila M. Mehdi, A Banker, Wed
Laila Maria Mehdi, a second vice president of global securities for Chase Manhattan Bank in New York, was married yesterday to John Howard Hilfinger, the sales and marketing director for Europe for the general business systems division of American Telephone and Telegraph in Parsippany, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
William Bearden officiated at The Presbyterian Church of Madison in Madison, N.J.
Mrs.
Hilfinger, 31 years old, graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Mohammad T. Mehdi of New York and Mrs.
W.
A.
Peter Bolton of Bangkok.
Her father is the president of the American-Arab Relations Committee in New York.
Her mother, Beverlee Bolton, teaches English for the American University Alumni Association in Bangkok.
The bridegroom, 30, graduated from Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Hilfinger of Perrysburg, Ohio.
His father is the general manager of Supreme Bumpers in Toledo, Ohio.
His mother, Winifred Hilfinger, is the financial aid officer for adult education in the Toledo, Ohio, public school system.


Teen-Ager Kills Friend in Dispute Over Burglary
They had been the closest of friends, their classmates said, two boys in their mid-teens who were always in and out of each other's homes in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
Then, on Friday night, before a crowd of friends and neighbors, the younger of the two, 14 years old, shot and killed his friend after the 15-year-old had accused him of breaking into his home, the police said yesterday.
The 14-year-old suspect, John Dalton, who was known as "J. P.," had told friends shortly before the shooting that he had been looking for a gun because he was afraid that his friend, Michael Sharib, was looking to shoot him, a mutual friend said yesterday.


Headliner; Alarming in Texas
In the absence of a real Dallas woman called C.J., whose mission was to spread AIDS with a vengeance, Natasha Johnigan felt compelled to invent her.
Natasha, a 15-year-old high school sophomore, stepped forward last week to admit that she wrote the letter signed "C.J." to Ebony magazine earlier this year that caused a surge of AIDS awareness in Dallas just short of panic.
The letter was purportedly from a woman who had contracted the AIDS virus from a man and was intentionally spreading it.
After the letter was published in September, women claiming to be C.J. began calling radio talk shows, health officials set up a special information hot line, and AIDS testing increased noticeably.
Natasha went public after the police said they had learned who wrote the C.J. letter but had no plans to file charges.
"I just wanted people to be aware of the disease," she said.
A health department official likened her action to "a fire drill, something that made people aware of danger and risk."


Dr. Tina Hartert Wed
Dr.
Tina Vivienne Hartert, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Hartert of Cottekill, N.Y., was married yesterday in Hurley, N.Y., to Dr.
Ray Stokes Peebles Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peebles of Knoxville, Tenn.
The Rev.
Charles Stickley officiated at the Reformed Church.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from Brown University.
She and her husband received M.D.'s from Vanderbilt University.
She is a resident in internal medicine at the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, where her husband, 31, is a fellow in allergy and immunology.
He graduated from Davidson College.


Jets' Report Card: Good Grades Can Get Better
It's midterm-report time for the Jets, who have a bye week to ponder their 4-4 record and the what-might-have-beens that could have given them a 6-2 mark entering the second half of the season.
All in all, they're a vastly improved football team physically and emotionally from a year ago, and are in better shape than any other 4-4 team in the league, holding second place in their division.
In keeping with the good news-bad news nature of their season to date, it must be noted that the Jets trail first-place Buffalo by three games in the American Conference East.
And more bad news: Their running game has slowed to a walk in a three-week slide that has seen them drop from the National Football League's top rushing team to seventh place.
But good news: The Jets almost beat the Bills and they have another game against them.


Burrell Takes Shot At 10-Meter Dash
LEROY BURRELL, who holds the second fastest time in the 100 meters, is going to try a new event next week, one that will be over almost as soon as it begins: the 10-meter dash.
On Wednesday, Burrell and a group of other top sprinters, including MARK WITHERSPOON, FLOYD HURD and MIKE MARSH, will line up at the Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs for a 10-meter race designed to show off a new timing system developed by Seiko for next year's Olympics.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Finger Lickin' Contests
AS competitors slurped oysters in Oyster Bay, other competitors delicately nibbled chicken in Great Neck.
Food-eating contests were held last weekend at the Oyster Bay Oyster Festival and the Great Neck Plaza Street Fair.
The events were miles apart in more than geography.


Susan Callagy, Editor, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Callagy of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Elizabeth Callagy to Matthew Patrick McCloskey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mathew H. McCloskey 4th of Villanova, Pa.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Callagy, 25, graduated from Georgetown University.
She is a fashion editor at Glamour magazine.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm of Satterlee Stephens Burke &amp; Burke in New York.
Mr.
McCloskey, 25, graduated magna cum laude from Georgetown University and is studying law at Fordham University.
His father is the first vice president of Prudential Securities in their office in Bryn Mawr, Pa.


Traffic Alert
Brooklyn Bridge: Manhattan-bound lanes will be closed until 6 A.M. tomorrow.
Use Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, Manhattan Bridge or Williamsburg Bridge.
Second Avenue Fall Festival: Second Avenue will be closed today between 42d and 53d Streets from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Givenchy, Once and Forever
Two thousand people crowded into the Museum of Fashion and Costume at the Galliera Palace on Monday night to congratulate Hubert de Givenchy and view the exhibition covering his four decades as the head of his own couture house.
The first to arrive were Marie-Helene de Rothschild, a longtime supporter, and her husband, Guy.
Next was Audrey Hepburn, his muse.
He took them all on a tour of the 140 styles on exhibit, some of which they had lent.
"I love that dress," said the Baroness de Rothschild, pausing at a navy evening style lightly touched with sequins that the designer made for her in 1970.
"I could wear it tonight, except I usually wear pants now."


Daddy Dearest
Just how do you play the potbellied patriarch of the family from hell?
"Menacingly, I hope," said Roy Dotrice, who is the father in a revival of Harold Pinter's "Homecoming." "Max is a randy old man, a bully, a braggart and a devout coward. I guess what I'm saying is I can't see a single redeeming feature in this man."
A demented "Life With Father" that reeks of sinister one-upmanship, masked motives and sexual intrigue, the play opens tonight in a Roundabout Theater Company production with Lindsay Crouse, Daniel Gerroll, Jonathan Hogan, John Horton and Reed Diamond, under the direction of Gordon Edelstein.
It is the company's first presentation at its new home at the Criterion Center/Stage Right on Broadway.


Headliner; Family Ties
Weak but joyful at his release after four years in captivity in Lebanon, Jesse Turner wanted nothing more last week than to spend some absolutely private time with the wife to whom he was newly wed when he disappeared and with the daughter who was born five months after he was abducted in Beirut.
Badr Turner, his wife, described their meeting at an Air Force hospital in Germany in tender terms to reporters who were kept at bay.
"It was like the first day I met him," said Mrs.
Turner.
It was of course literally the first day Mr.
Turner met his daughter, Joanne, and the ex-hostage's mother, Estelle Ronneberg, described that.
"He was so kind and gentle," said Mrs.
Ronneberg.
"He let her lead the way so she would not be frightened." But Mr.
Turner's stepfather, Eugene, videotaped the meeting, supposedly for home use, and therein lay a rub.
After the tape wound up on national television, angry State Department officials barred the Ronnebergs from further visits.


Shaping Up by Pedaling Across the Sea
It was an odd-looking boat that made its way out of New York Harbor earlier this month.
Narrow and low to the water, the 23-foot craft appeared to be a cross between a sailboat and a submarine.
But it had no mast, and it wasn't equipped to dive.
Inside the bright orange hull sat two endurance athletes from Darien, Conn.
They propelled the boat with pedals.
Their legs, stretched out as if the men were sitting on recumbent bikes, pumped a set of tandem gears designed especially for the goal the two men have in mind: to pedal their way across the Atlantic Ocean.


North Pole
To the Editor: I read of the failure of a tourist ship to complete a trip through the Arctic Ocean (Travel Advisory, Sept. 22).
This summer another ship made the first voyage across the Arctic Ocean with a stop at the North Pole, and I was aboard this ship, the Russian ice breaker Sovetsky Soyuz.
It visited the Pole on Aug. 4, 1991.
The nuclear vessel, with 75,000 horse power, made the trip without a problem.
We sailed from Murmansk on July 27 and landed in Provideniya, Russia, 50 miles from Nome, Alaska, on Aug. 16.


Why Settle on Madrid? It's Politically Correct
One of the questions everyone is still asking about next week's Arab-Israeli peace conference is: Why Madrid?
American officials say that more than half a dozen cities were in the running, but that one by one they were vetoed by one or more participants until only Madrid remained.


Technology; Mouse! Movie! Sound! Action!
For years, Tony Bove has been collecting bootleg music videos and songs by the Beatles and other groups.
Now, by using programs based on a new Apple Computer software standard called Quicktime, which allows video and sound to be incorporated in Macintosh computers, he is developing his own presentations for friends to play back on their Macs.
These creations are like music videos, but they are also "interactive," allowing the computer user to cut among songs, movie scenes, animated graphics and excerpts from documentaries in response to whatever is on the screen at any moment.


Amy T. Rotter Married on L.I.
Amy Trish Rotter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin H. Rotter of Jericho, L.I., was married last evening to Andrew Lawrence Blumstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil Blumstein of Manhasset, L.I.
Cantor Marvin Antosofsky officiated at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Blumstein, 26 years old, graduated from the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University, as did the bridegroom.
She is a sales supervisor at Loehmann's in New Hyde Park, L.I.
Her father is president of the knitwear division of the London Fog Corporation in New York.
Her mother, Susan Rotter, is the director of the older adult program at the Samuel Field Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. of Little Neck, Queens.
Mr.
Blumstein, 27, is an accountant with the New York accounting firm of Blumstein Bond, of which his father is a senior partner.


Carr Joins Spurs
Forward ANTOINE CARR, who averaged 20.1 points and 5.5 rebounds with the Sacramento Kings last season, has signed a three-year contract with the San Antonio Spurs.
No terms were disclosed.
Carr, a seven-year veteran, was acquired by the Spurs in an off-season trade that sent DWAYNE SCHINTZIUS to Sacramento.
Another former Kings player has found another home.
Guard RICKY CALLOWAY, who played 64 games with the Kings last season but tried out with the Orlando Magic this year, was signed by the Boston Celtics in time for last night's final preseason game against the Washington Bullets in Albany. (AP)


Miss Spencer, Writer, Is Wed
Elizabeth Marie Spencer, a daughter of Diane Spencer of Westport, Conn., and the late Dr.
W.
Alden Spencer, was married yesterday in Washington to Carlos Alberto Silva Jr., the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Silva of Potomac, Md.
The Rev.
John T. Tavlarides performed the ceremony at St.
Sophia Greek Orthodox Cathedral.
Mrs.
Silva, 24 years old, is a technical writer and marketing consultant at Data Focus Inc., a software consulting concern in Fairfax, Va.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her mother is a concert pianist and music teacher.
Her father was a professor of neurology at Columbia University.
Mr.
Silva, 26, is a computer specialist at the Mitre Corporation in McLean, Va.
He graduated from Boston College and received a master's degree in computer science from George Washington University.
His father, a general surgeon, is a clinical professor of surgery at George Washington University.


Howard McClintic Love Jr. Weds Harriet Van Ingen in Pennsylvania
Harriet Pratt Van Ingen, the daughter of Mrs.
Evan D. Jennings 2d of Pittsburgh and Herbert Pratt Van Ingen of New York, was married yesterday to Howard McClintic Love Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Love of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
Arthur McNulty officiated at the Episcopal Church of St.
Michael's of the Valley in Ligonier, Pa.
Mrs.
Love, 24 years old, graduated from Lake Forest College and until recently was a publicity associate at Lynn Goldberg Communications in New York.
She was a member of the 1985 New York Junior Assembly.
Her father is a travel consultant at Continental-American Travel in New York.


Ms. Binns Wed To P. B. Brandt
Katherine Anne Binns, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack R. Binns of Tucson, Ariz., was married yesterday in New York to Peter Bartholin Brandt, a son of Xenia Brandt of New York and the late Werner Brandt.
The Rev.
Masud I. Syedullah performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel.
Ms.
Binns, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is a vice president for field operations at Louis Harris &amp; Associates,the New York polling concern.
She graduated from the San Francisco Art Institute.
Her father, a retired Foreign Service officer, was the Ambassador to Honduras in the Carter Administration.
Mr.
Brandt, 29, is a Congressional and intergovernmental liaison officer in the New York regional office of the Environmental Protection Agency.
He graduated cum laude from New York University.
His father was a professor of physics and the director of the solid state and radiation laboratory at N.Y.U.


Elements of Style: Tatters, Holes and Wrinkles
Fashion went scudding into spring with tattered sails and a somewhat bedraggled crew, its compass spinning wildly.
The European collections that were shown the last three weeks here and in Milan, to wear in spring 1992, had most of the ingredients that people have come to love and hate about fashion: hemline changes that dozens of design houses seemed to arrive at simultaneously, like some mystic, mercenary cabal; transparent dresses that made women look like demimondaines, and playful, outrageous clothes that smiled at themselves -- and the audience with them.


Review/Pop; A Quieter Song of the Siren In New Ann-Margret Show
As Ann-Margret made a slow, sinuous entrance down a rainbow-colored staircase at Radio City Music Hall on Tuesday evening, for a moment it seemed possible that her heavily trumpeted New York stage debut would deliver a kind of gaudy, sizzling showmanship that is rarely seen in Manhattan.
Gaudy her show certainly was, but it had no sizzle.
Once the star had reached the final stair and launched into "Steppin' Out With My Baby" in a pinched, kittenish voice with a wobbly vibrato whose seams were magnified by metallic amplification, it was evident that Ann-Margret is no longer the brassy siren one remembers from 1960's television shows.
Like so many other stars who have become fixtures in the Las Vegas entertainment firmament, she presents herself as a living legend that an audience is supposed to revere simply for showing up, acting chipper and looking good.


The 'Man Shortage' and Other Big Lies
HENRY CLAY
Statesman for the Union.
By Robert V. Remini.
Illustrated. 818 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $35.


NEW YORK IN THE NINETIES
The photo essay "New York in the Nineties" (photographs by Jacob Riis and Fred R. Conrad, text by Sam Roberts, Sept. 29) was well done.
The conditions of 1890 and 1990 are so similar, it's frightening.
I'm sure you could run the same essay in 2090 because things really don't change after all.
D.
PERNICE
Wilton, Conn.


Phils Laugh Last
To the Sports Editor:
Last spring your annual baseball forecast touted the Mets and derided the prospects of the Phillies, suggesting that the Phillies didn't even belong in the major leagues.
Now that the Phillies have finished ahead of the Mets, where does that leave the Mets?
In the American Association?
WILLIAM W. AMBLER Wayne, Pa.


Social Events
Halloween at 13
Oct. 27 -- Channel 13, the public television station, is holding a Halloween party for children under 10 from 11 A.M. to 2 P.M. at the station, 356 West 58th Street.
The station is the beneficiary.
Lunch, games and entertainment; $100 for a costumed child and one parent, from (212) 560-4915.


MOMMY OLDEST
Cunningham's article reminds us of the special children everywhere who desperately need mothering.
Perhaps those who are considering a technological conception should first ask themselves if they want to
have
a baby or to
be
a mother. JUDY FLANIGAN West Point, Pa.


Answering The Mail
Q.
A large part of my walnut parquet floor has been covered with a rug and pad for
10 years. I decided to get rid of the rug, but when I picked it up I found that the pad
beneath was stuck to the floor and could
not be removed.
When I try to pull off the pad, it seems to fall apart.
Can you tell me how to remove the pad while at the same time preserving the parquet floor?
A.
It is not clear whether an adhesive was used to cement the pad to the floor, or whether it is simply sticking to the old finish.
Either way, the only way to remove it is to scrape it off, using a long-handled scraper like the ones used to scrape ice off a sidewalk or a wide putty knife.
After that, you will probably have to sand the wood floor to clean off all residue.
If the parquet is not solid wood and is plywood or veneer, you will have to sand carefully to avoid cutting through the top layer of wood.


Twins Pinning Hopes On the Spirit of '87
Having lost three games in a row on the road, the Minnesota Twins nevertheless returned to the Metrodome confident they could turn a 3-2 deficit into a World Series championship.
They were right; they did.
This was in 1987, when the Twins lost three games in St.
Louis, then bashed the Cardinals in the sixth and seventh games at the Metrodome.


Seeking Respect, Pretoria Bets on Its Strong Economy
For years, South Africa took it for granted that the road to international respectability led through Africa, through winning the acceptance and cooperation of its black neighbors.
Now a contrary view gaining credence in Pretoria argues that South Africa won't have to go begging for respect after all.
Its proponents say the rest of the continent may have the more dire need for a relationship, and may start looking to South Africa for a rescue from chronic economic and political ailments.
South African officials predict that the West's preoccupation with Eastern Europe and the Middle East will leave Africa increasingly marginalized and that only South Africa will have the resources to fill the void.
Quietly, South Africa has been building bridges in Africa, cultivating trade with and assistance to black neighbors who have been the harshest critics of apartheid.


Frankfurt Prices
To the Editor: As a frequent traveler to Frankfurt, I was quite pleased to read "What's Doing in Frankfurt" by Paula Butturini (Travel, Sept. 29).
However, I must disagree the assertion that this city's hotels are "uniformly expensive."
My experience has been quite the contrary, with rates at major hotel chains (e.g., Ramada, Marriott, Sheraton and Holiday Inn) comparable with those in the United States.
I have found that Americans visiting Frankfurt do not have to spend more than $150 per night at these many other hotels.
My personal favorite is the Hotel Gravenbruch Kempinski Frankfurt.
PECCO BEAUFAYS Bedford, N.Y.


Review/Music; Mozart and Shostakovich In Philharmonic Face-Off
One can imagine no more different pieces of music than the two that stared at each other across intermission on the New York Philharmonic's program on Thursday.
Before the pause at Avery Fisher Hall came Mozart's Concerto in A, the No. 12; afterward Claus Peter Flor conducted the Shostakovich 10th Symphony.
Listeners needed the space in between to reassort their listening processes and indeed their values.
The Mozart is an unsung hero in Mozart's magnificent army of piano concertos.
It is the last of three intended to introduce a composer and pianist to the Vienna of the 1780's.
Its methodology is question-and-answer, echo and antiphon, all organized with modest grace.
Mozart's ability to make the happy sad and the sad happy is firmly developed, and the calling back and forth -- not only between piano and orchestra but within the solo part's several voices -- reinforces the poignancy.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
The Scent of Life
The naturalist David Rains Wallace argues that the subtle ability to scent aromas and odors plays an important, and overlooked, part in the human imagination.
His piece "In Bulow Hammock" is in "Roots and Branches: Contemporary Essays by West Coast Writers," edited by Howard Junker (Mercury House, paper).


This Week: Feeding Birds
Set up a feeding station for the birds near a kitchen or living-room window.
And keep these tips in mind from Dr.
Stephen W. Kress, the author of "The Audubon Society Guide to Attracting Birds" (Scribner's, 1985).
Place several different kinds of feeders at varying heights and distances from the nearest cover.
Scatter cracked corn and millet on the ground for doves, quail and sparrows; sunflower seeds, fruit and mixed grain at table-top level for finches, grosbeaks and cardinals.
Hang suet feeders on trees for woodpeckers and chickadees.


Olivia Tournay, Student, Weds
Olivia Estelle Tournay, a daughter of Henry Tournay of Cannes, France, and Elizabeth Augereau of Paris, was married in Paris yesterday to Adam R. Flatto, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Flatto of Naples, Fla.
The Rev.
Pierre Blin performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at L'Eglise St.
Honore d'Eylau.
Mrs.
Flatto, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Montpelier and is a candidate for a combined master's and doctorate in genetics from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, who is retired, was a Belgian military attache in Washington.
Mr.
Flatto, 28, graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
He is an associate with the Georgetown Company, a New York real-estate and financial services concern.
His parents are the principals of FGF Insurance Group in Naples.


Data Bank/October 27, 1991
New Orders for Durable Goods
Sept.
Aug.
July
Monthly percent change
--3.2
--4.1
11.7
Steel Production
Oct. 18
Oct. 11
Oct. 4
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,682
1,655
1,719
Auto Production
In units, weekly total
136,659
118,352
120,993
Truck Production
In units, weekly total
88,753
77,027
79,966
Real G.N.P. Growth
II Q'91
I Q'91
IV Q'90
1982 dollars in percent
--0.5
--2.8
--1.6
3-Month Treasury Bills
Oct. 25
Oct. 18
Oct. 11
Rate in percent
4.96
5.03
4.96
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
5.03
5.05
5.01
Weekly Jobless Claims
Oct.11
Oct. 4
Sept. 27
In thousands
452
423
435


Corrections
An article on Oct. 6 about black architects referred incorrectly to the designer of the Widener Library at Harvard and of the Duke University campus.
He is Julian Abele.


LAW ON THE FEMINIST FRONTIER
I am heartened by MacKinnon's efforts to label pornography for what it is and address its potential and inevitable harm.
I am also enraged at the judicial system's blindness to pornography's waste lying all around us.
Not a day goes by that I don't feel its effects in the verbal and physical intrusiveness I experience on the streets of New York City.
The courts are seeing only half of the picture when they assume that pornography is used by persons in pursuit of sexual release.
To ignore the violent quality of porn is literally to endanger every woman and child in this country.
The serial killer Ted Bundy requested a press conference days before his execution to warn the public that pornography played a vital role in his behavior.
JENNIFER MATHIEU
New York, N.Y.


Alison Rooney Is Wed at U.N.
Alison Jane Rooney, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Rooney of Sea Cliff, L.I., was married in New York yesterday to Steven Paul McSloy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul McSloy of North Massapequa, L.I.
The Rev.
Orlanda R. Brugnola, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the United Nations Chapel.
Ms.
Rooney, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, is an associate in New York in investment banking for Banque Paribas of Paris.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father sells playground equipment.
Her mother, Jill Rooney, is the executive director of Harbor Day Care Centers in Sea Cliff.
Mr.
McSloy, 27, is an assistant law professor at St.
John's University.
He graduated magna cum laude from New York University and received a law degree from Harvard University.
His mother, Emilie McSloy, teaches history at Franklin K. Lane High School in Brooklyn.
His father, who is retired, taught social studies at the school.


New Orleans
What Mark Twain said about the Mississippi is still true.
It's not "a commonplace river, but on the contrary is in all ways remarkable." It's no surprise, then, that the new entertainment in town is an old one, looking at the river.
The Lower Mississippi was the magnet for 18th-century French and Spanish developers, and its broad banks in New Orleans a favorite gathering place.
Then came warehouses blocking views and access.
River strollers and watchers lost out for decades.
That's been changing apace, as city development moves increasingly toward the historic old waterfront, opening up new vistas.


Judge Won't Drop Case Against Officer in Car-Theft Suspect's Death
A Queens judge has refused to dismiss charges against the police officer who is the sole remaining defendant in the death of a car-theft suspect, a case that stirred deep passions among police officers and the dead man's relatives and supporters.
Justice Joseph G. Golia of State Supreme Court ruled that the officer, Anthony Paparella, will have to stand trial on manslaughter and negligent-homicide charges.
Prosecutors say Officer Paparella fatally choked the suspect, Federico Pereira, as Mr.
Pereira was being arrested on Feb. 5.


LAW ON THE FEMINIST FRONTIER
A great many feminist leaders are opposed to Prof.
Catharine A. MacKinnon's proposed legislation allowing persons "harmed" by written or printed materials to sue writers, publishers and retailers of literature and art ("Defining Law on the Feminist Frontier" by Fred Strebeigh, Oct. 6).
Whether or not dominance-oriented erotica inspires negative attitudes and actions toward women (a thesis still very much at issue among professionals), pictures and words about violent acts are not the acts themselves.
Censorship has been, throughout history, the single most widely used patriarchal tool for "protecting" women -- from birth control, abortion, sexual satisfaction and nonheterosexual relationships.
Without free speech we can have no feminist movement.
And if the anti-porn censorship is enacted, it is the right-wing- packed courts, not people like Catharine MacKinnon and Andrea Dworkin, who will decide what materials are printable in the United States.
MARILYN FITTERMAN President, National Organization for Women KAREN DECROW  Former National President, National Organization for Women
Albany


Nina Gladstone, Architect, Wed
Nina Eleanor Gladstone, the daughter of Morton Gladstone and Phyllis Gladstone, both of New York, was married there last evening to Bernardo Burstein, the son of Margarita C. Burstein of Miami Beach, Fla., and the late Dr.
Salomon Burstein.
Rabbi Robert Levine officiated at the Westbury Hotel.
Mrs.
Burstein, 28 years old, is an architect with Faulding Associates in New York.
She graduated from Lafayette College and received a master's degree in architecture from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the founder and a vice president of Sales Direction, a New York distributor of building products.
Her mother is a saleswoman at Bloomingdale's in New York.
Mr.
Burstein, 29, is an associate at the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
He graduated magna cum laude from Columbia University, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and from which he also received a J.D.
His mother is a pharmacist in Hialeah, Fla.
His father was an anesthesiologist in Havana.
.


Making a Difference; Coming Back to Catalogues
Richard Bergel is the man to blame for the next big assault on America's mailboxes.
Mr.
Bergel, a 32-year veteran of Montgomery Ward &amp; Company, was hand-picked by Ward's chairman, Bernard F. Brennan, to lead the Chicago retailer's charge back into the hotly competitive catalogue business.


Drums to the Fore


Tina Flood Wed To D. A. Telesco
Christene Renee Flood, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Flood Jr. of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday in Newport, R.I., to David Anthony Telesco, the son of Dominick Telesco of Cliffside, N.J., and Mrs.
Vincent Vecciotti of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
John Rogers performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
George's Chapel.
Mrs.
Telesco, who is 26 years old and is known as Tina, graduated from Manhattanville College.
She is an advertising manager for Glamour magazine in New York.
Her father is the executive vice president of Corporate Communicators, a marketing consulting concern in Greenwich.
Her mother is a broker with Country Properties Real Estate in Rye.
Mr.
Telesco, 33, graduated from Lafayette College.
He is a vice president of Hanover &amp; Gateway Warehouses in South Kearney, N.J.
His first marriage ended in divorce.
His father is the president of Telesco &amp; Associates, a warehousing company with properties in northern New Jersey.


As Boston College Runs, Army Sputters and Falls
Few won-lost records have been as misleading this season as that of Boston College.
Coming into today's game against Army, the Eagles were 1-5.
But three of those losses were to top-20 teams -- Michigan, Georgia Tech and Penn State.
And Boston College led both Michigan and Penn State at the half as it did West Virginia, which barely beat the Eagles a week ago.


'Harlot's Ghost'
To the Editor:
I question The Book Review's judgment in choosing John Simon to review Norman Mailer's novel "Harlot's Ghost" (Sept. 29).
Mr.
Simon's snide tone, a known quantity, has seriously compromised his film and theater reviews.


Pressure Grows on Aid-Thirsty Israel to Adopt Reforms
While economies from Chile to New Zealand are shaking off the heavy hand of government and embracing freer markets, Israel seems stuck in a time warp.
"The Israeli economy is an anomaly in the world today," said Richard T. McCormack, Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs until earlier this year.
"It's statist when everybody else is becoming un-statist."


Answering The Mail
Q.
A large part of my walnut parquet floor has been covered with a rug and pad for
10 years. I decided to get rid of the rug, but when I picked it up I found that the pad
beneath was stuck to the floor and could
not be removed.
When I try to pull off the pad, it seems to fall apart.
Can you tell me how to remove the pad while at the same time preserving the parquet floor?
A.
It is not clear whether an adhesive was used to cement the pad to the floor, or whether it is simply sticking to the old finish.
Either way, the only way to remove it is to scrape it off, using a long-handled scraper like the ones used to scrape ice off a sidewalk or a wide putty knife.
After that, you will probably have to sand the wood floor to clean off all residue.
If the parquet is not solid wood and is plywood or veneer, you will have to sand carefully to avoid cutting through the top layer of wood.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE DELUGE  By Henryk Sienkiewicz.
Copernicus Society of America/ Hippocrene Books, $45 (two volumes).


Also Neglected: Eugene O'Neill
To the Editor
The article "An Exile of Sorts Finds a Welcome"  [ Oct. 13 ]  informed us that Arthur Miller's plays are more positively received in London than in New York, that Mr.
Miller, welcomed in London, feels that New York suffers from a "dark defeatism." The article mentioned in passing that Mr.
Miller, "America's finest living dramatist," would be 76 on Oct. 17.
When I saw that date, the thought struck me that the birthday of Eugene O'Neill, America's finest dramatist living or dead, was the day before Mr.
Miller's, Oct. 16, and that the day would pass without any notice; more important, that O'Neill, even more than Mr.
Miller, is being neglected by Broadway.


Into the Inkwell, as Well
To the Editor:
Along with Barbie's move from Toyland to Artville  [ "A Onetime Bimbo Becomes a Muse," Sept. 29 ]  one should also note her arrival into the literary world.
In the last year alone, I have read no fewer than three short-story collections ("Woman Hollering Creek" by Sandra Cisneros, "Baseball in April" by Gary Soto and "The Safety of Objects," by A. M. Homes) containing a work with Barbie as protagonist.
PETER FEKETY  Silver Spring, Md.


New Islanders Get a Taste of What They're in For
An unusual sound could be heard at Nassau Coliseum early tonight when the Islanders played the Los Angeles Kings.
It wasn't the usual mumble of frustrated grumbling or even the sounds of silence so frequent amid the small crowds in recent games here.
Instead, it was the happy noise of hopeful cheering for a team that introduced six new skaters after a day of major trades.
But the cheering faded as the game wore on and the home team's early lead disappeared.


Leslie Zimmerman Marries Theodore F. Breck
Leslie Beth Zimmerman, an assistant vice president at the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company in New York, was married last evening to Theodore Francis Breck, an associate at J. P. Morgan Securities in New York.
The Rev.
Howard Nash, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Harkness Chapel at Connecticut College in New London, Conn., with Rabbi Abraham Sheingold attending.
Mrs.
Zimmerman, 28 years old, graduated from Boston University.
She is the daughter of Susanne B. Zimmerman of Santa Barbara, Calif., and Herbert A. Zimmerman of Birmingham, Mich.
The bridegroom, 28, graduated cum laude from Georgetown University.
He is the son of Robert and Helen Breck of Orange, Conn.


Rangers, Just Like Everybody Else, Beat Nordiques
The Rangers defeated the Quebec Nordiques tonight, a National Hockey League ritual that ranks alongside the dropping of gloves or the slashing of stick on shin guard.
After building a three-goal lead in the second period with some nifty individual plays, the Rangers held on by their laces for a 5-3 victory.
The Rangers have now scored 12 goals in their last two games, have won four of their last five games and are sowing their offensive oats against overmatched opponents.


Response on Wetlands And Their Functions
In his letter  [ Letter to the Westchester Editor, Oct. 13 ] , George Raymond quotes me as having said in a Sept. 15 article  [ "Westchester Wetlands at Stake in Debate" ]  that "freshwater wetlands are threaded throughout Westchester, and most of the county's undeveloped land serves important wetlands functions."
I believe that Penny Bender, the author of the article, did not present that statement as a direct quote, but as a paraphrase of a very lengthy discussion regarding wetlands.
It is indeed true that wetlands are threaded throughout Westchester (although that statement was made with specific reference to the north county, due to the topography and drainage patterns that characterize that area).


A Raw Primal World Emerges From Roughly Worked Clay
THE marks of fire on roughly worked clay amplify the implications of a primal universe in Cliff Mendelson's ceramic wall reliefs on exhibit through Nov. 7 at the Westchester Art Workshop here.
Mr.
Mendelson, who teaches at Hunter College in Manhattan, as well as at the Westchester Art Workshop, handles his materials with an authority that adds power and expression to his subjects.
Whether the clay is torn, molded, gouged or used as a flat surface to receive incised lines, it lends nuances to the meaning of the work.


Style Makers; Salvatore Guida, Mask Maker
Salvatore Guida's favorite holiday is Halloween, which isn't surprising for a mask maker.
But ghouls and goblins aren't his specialty.
Mr.
Guida makes whimsical theatrical masks, often featuring stock characters from the old Italian comme dia dell'arte.
His favorites are fanciful renderings of Pagliaccio, Pulcinella and Harlequin.


New Jersey Democrats Try to Cool Tax Fever With Campaign Cash
New Jersey Republicans may have outrage working for them in state legislative races on Nov. 4, but the Democrats have the money.
Anger over the Florio administration's $2.8 billion tax program has prompted grass-roots campaigns to unseat incumbents and support Republican candidates.
But collectively, incumbents have raised $2 million more than their challengers, and Democrats, the targets of the anti-tax sentiment, have raised and spent more than Republicans.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 615,000
Eastwoods Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, multi-level living room, family room, 3 acres; taxes $12,000.
Rye, N.Y. 395,000
45 Centre Street
4-bedroom, 2 full and 2 half-baths, 27-year-old split-level; fireplace, family room, eat-in kitchen, rec room; taxes $7,228.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 395,000
51 Pilgrim Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 43-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, office, 2-car garage; taxes $10,600.
East Haven, Conn. 124,800  44 Tuttle Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 65-year-old cape cod; living room with fireplace, hardwood floors, 50- by 111-ft. lot; taxes $1,590.
Killingworth, Conn. 355,000
259 Route 81
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 210-year-old colonial; wideboard floors, fireplace, 3-car detached garage, 18.9 acres; taxes $5,270.
Westbrook, Conn. 190,000
365 Horse Hill Road  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 17-year-old colonial; 3-stall horse barn and riding ring, c/a, formal dining room, 3.6 acres; taxes $2,005.
OTHER AREAS Glen Cove, L.I. 211,000
26 Buckeye Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 26- year-old colonial; fireplace, basement, deck, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $3,000.
Kings Park, L.I. 185,000
37 Dehan Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 22- year-old ranch; fireplace, den, deck, 3-car garage, 0.5 acres; taxes $5,100.
East Brunswick, N.J. 184,000
33 University Road
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old split level; 2-car garage, fireplace, 2 family rooms; taxes $3,940.


Say the Secret Word
QUIZ CRAZE
America's Infatuation With Game Shows.
By Thomas A. DeLong.
Illustrated. 315 pp.
New York: Praeger. $22.95.


Spicing Up the Pumpkin Presentation
HALLOWEEN is jack-o'-lantern time.
It also means that there is a lot of pumpkin around for cooking.
Like most winter squashes, pumpkin has a delicate flavor (some would say not much taste at all) but when combined with other ingredients that spice it up, it can make great soups, pies and cakes.
Pumpkin soup is a particularly festive fall dish when served in small individual pumpkins or in one large one.
A strong homemade chicken stock is needed to give the soup flavor, and it is good sprinkled with croutons sauteed in butter or a julienne of fresh fried ginger just before being served.


Historic Site
To the Editor:
Though he may not know it, Secretary of State James A. Baker's choice of Spain as the site of the forthcoming Middle East peace conference was a masterstroke.
For not only were the Jews expelled from Spain in 1492, but so were the Moslems expelled, in 1502.
Thus, Spain's welcome to both peoples at this moment is a profound historical event in another dimension.
JUDITH KASS, SEYMOUR KASS Brookline, Mass., Oct. 20, 1991


Making a Closet Bigger and Better
REMODELING a closet to provide additional space or better organization usually calls for replacing the standard single shelf and clothes pole with compartments and multiple poles of varying lengths and heights.
To make a closet more convenient overall, it should have adequate lighting, an appropriate door and maybe even cedar paneling.


South Africa
To the Editor: Christopher Wren provided a good summary of what visitors can see and do in South Africa.
But even though the dismantling of apartheid has taken place, visitors should still be cautious.
In fact, first-time visitors might be well advised to go with a tour group, and only for a short stay.
First-time visitors who travel on their own might be interested to know that Jan Smuts Airport, the gateway by air, is convenient not only to Johannesburg, but also Pretoria.
There is frequent and inexpensive bus service to both cities.
Excellent motels are also available near the airport, providing an alternative to staying in downtown hotels.
THEODORE J. KLEIN Groton, Conn.


'Harlot's Ghost'
To the Editor:
Selecting as prim a classicist as John Simon to review the
magnum opus
of our leading rebel romanticist would hint of malice even if Norman Mailer had not occasionally tweaked Mr.
Simon's nose.
Yet your selection of Mr.
Simon proves surprisingly wise, generating both light and heat.


Ms. Ellis Weds Dr. K. H. Webb
Susan Clare Ellis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony T. Ellis of Hillsborough, Calif., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Kenneth Hall Webb, a son of Natalie H. Webb of Brooklyn, N.Y., and Jean F. Webb 4th of Fort Lee, N.J.
The Rev.
Joan Butler Ford performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Burlingame Country Club.
Mrs.
Webb, who is known as Clare, is an editor at Hippocrates magazine in Sausalito, Calif.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father is a principal in Pacific Venture Partners, a venture capital firm in Menlo Park, Calif.
Dr.
Webb is an assistant clinical professor of pediatrics at Stanford University.
He graduated from Amherst College and received his M.D. from Cornell University.
His mother is the training manager for the Union Data Service Center, a New York securities transfer agent.
His father is a senior vice president of the Prudential Reinsurance Company in Newark.


Term Limits Won't Revitalize Political Parties
To the Editor:
Profs.
David W. Brady and Douglas Rivers deserve credit for advancing an utterly unique argument in support of term limits ("Term Limits Make Sense," Op-Ed, Oct. 5): that they would somehow strengthen the political parties.
However, the professors overlook the fact that there is a much simpler and far less damaging way to revitalize our moribund political parties: comprehensive campaign finance reform.


The Executive Computer; The New OS/2: Impressive Rival for Windows
The International Business Machines Corporation formally introduced the second generation of its beleaguered OS/2 operating system software last week at the Comdex fall trade show here.
Company officials say it will be available in March 1992 -- even though I.B.M. had all but promised it would be ready by the end of the year.
The officials said they decided to postpone the release after receiving requests for new features from many of the 20,000 I.B.M. customers who have been testing the software.
"In the larger scheme of things, three months doesn't matter very much," said Amy Wohl, president of Wohl &amp; Associates of Bala Cynwyd, Pa., a consulting company.
"But it is going to cost I.B.M. dearly in terms of marketing momentum. The big mistake they made was in being so firm about shipping by the end of the year, and then deciding to add to the feature set."


Currency; Dollar Inches Up Against the Yen
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
131.55
129.88
128.15
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7000
1.6878
1.5146
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1263
1.1270
1.1643
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7130
1.7275
1.9580
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$360.25
$360.00
$371.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Ms. LeBlanc and Jeffrey Strong Wed
Kerry Ann LeBlanc, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard W. LeBlanc of Brookfield, Conn., was married last evening to Jeffrey Lee Strong, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger L. Strong of New York.
Rabbi Joel Goor officiated at the Sunningdale Country Club in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Mrs.
Strong, 28 years old, is an account executive at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Colgate University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the senior director of instrument engineering at the Perkin-Elmer Corporation in Norwalk, Conn.


CAMPUS LIFE: Cornell; Alleging Bias, Seniors Leave Honor Society
Two Cornell seniors have resigned from the Quill and Dagger honor society after accusing the secret organization of racial and ideological discrimination in the choosing of its members.
The two, Brian O. Porter, who is partly of Filipino heritage and is a member of the University Assembly, and John H. Davis, who is black and a leader of Cornell Students for Racial Understanding, announced their resignations last week, saying they were outraged that three activist campus minority leaders had not been chosen as members of the society's 100th class.


Wall Street; Stratton Oakmont: A Few Track Records to Forget
Stratton Oakmont, a small brokerage house in Lake Success, L.I., has managed only a handful of deals, and the paperwork for most of them has warned that Stratton's sales activities and trading practices are under investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Undeterred, the brokerage firm brought out a new issue last week for Repossession Auction, a Miami used-car dealer specializing in repossessed vehicles.
The offering price is hefty: $9 a unit, consisting of one common share and one warrant to buy an additional share at a slightly higher price later on.
The company's revenues are not hefty: less than $7 million last year, or about $1 million less than the $8.1 million the company will clear from this stock sale, after paying underwriting fees of more than $1.1 million.


Paramus Journal; 'Hanging Out' at Malls Now Has Competition
FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD Joe Foley echoes the sentiments of his contemporaries when describing the travails of being a teen-ager in this sprawling Bergen County suburb.
"There's nothing else to do in Paramus but go to the malls," he said.
And though shoppers from miles around endure endless traffic jams to do just that, teen-agers like Joe seem to prefer more stimulating entertainment than window-shopping.
"All we can do in the mall is walk around and look at stuff," he said.
"After the mall closes, we go home."


In 'Cantorial,' a Protesting Ghost
EVERY successful playwright seems to have at least one play that gets picked up, dusted off, even started over again, or at least touched up, but never quite musters the readiness to travel from the trunk to the theater.
For Ira Levin, whose theatrical ventures have ranged from record-breaking ("Deathtrap," 1,793 performances) to all but forgotten ("Break a Leg," one performance), one of those plays in search of a destination, if not a destiny, is "Cantorial."
Even though it was indeed a stage occupant in a now closed regional theater in Stamford, Conn., in 1984 and somehow resurfaced four years later in an Off Broadway staging, "Cantorial" remains an immobile affair, stuck at the idea stage.


Enhanced 911, Enhanced Safety
One public service New Yorkers still can take for granted is emergency help via the nearest phone.
A call to 911 summons police, firefighters or an ambulance, and despite the city's fiscal crisis, they still arrive in minutes.
But now police officials say the 911 system, in place for 19 years, needs upgrading.
They propose a $203 million replacement, financed by a surcharge on telephone bills.
The plan merits support.


CAMPUS LIFE: Boston College; Core Curriculum Being Revamped After 2-Year Study
A two-year examination of how undergraduate course requirements can best serve students' needs has produced Boston College's first major core curriculum revision in 20 years.
The final report, released this month, lays out expanded or revised requirements in mathematics, natural sciences, cultural diversity and writing as well as in the arts.
A faculty committee and core curriculum director will be charged with administering and continually evaluating the new requirements.


Restore the Road to Democracy
During these days of anguish and sorrow, the Haitian people find comfort in the generous support of the United States and the world community.
The unanimous condemnation of the Sept. 29 military coup has earned our gratitude.
But as news of massacres and repression slip off the front pages, there is a danger that active support will wane, and with it the hopes and dreams of the Haitian people for democracy.


Rosalie Koenig Has a Wedding
Rosalie Angela Koenig, a daughter of Angela Koenig of Oyster Bay, L.I., and the late Robert P. Koenig, was married yesterday in New York to John Menelaos Karabatos, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Menelaos Karabatos of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Christopher A. Brown performed the Episcopal ceremony at Grace Church.
Ms.
Koenig, who is 34 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Northwestern University and received a J.D. from Boston University and an L.L.M. in environmental law from Pace University.
Her father was the chief executive in New York of the Cerro Corporation, an international metals company.
Mr.
Karabatos, 35, is a senior tax accountant with Goldstein Golub Kessler &amp; Company, a New York accounting concern.
He graduated from the University of Rochester and received an M.B.A. from St.
John's University.
His father is the president of the Apollo Military Manufacturing Company, a maker of military and police insignia in Brooklyn.


Stalking Birds of Prey Through Eyes of Binoculars
LIFTING the gunstock to his shoulder and taking aim, Scott C. Rea called out: "It's a falcon! A peregrine coming right at us!"


The Night When Phantasms Take Form
IT is the height of the season at Westchester Costume Rentals, where the ghosts of history live happily alongside their fictional relations on the second floor of an old factory building at 540 Nepperhan Avenue here.
Nearly everyone is planning to be out this week.
They will take form as Jesse James, Scarlett O'Hara or Anne Boleyn and her executioner, their appearances so detailed that Scarlett will wear dainty white pantaloons beneath her heavy green velvet gown, Jesse will tote a set of antique six-guns and the Queen will wear a cloche-style tiara complete with drooping pearls.


Coins
Sometimes a king's got to do what a king's got to do.
So thought Martin Coles Harman, "king" of Lundy Island and lord of its domain, all one and a half square miles of it.
Lundy is mostly rock, 3 miles long and 12 miles off the northern coast of Devonshire, England.
Nominally, it lies within Britain.


2 Slain in Car in Brooklyn
Two men were killed while sitting in a car in the East New York section of Brooklyn early Saturday, the police said.
They called the double slaying "possibly drug related." Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokeswoman, said the victims were identified as Dennis Moore, 19 years old, who was shot in the chest and forearm, and Lawrence Coley, 19, fatally wounded in the head.
Both lived at 1258 Loring Avenue, the police said.
They were dead on arrival at Brookdale Hospital.
The shots apparently came from outside the car, Sergeant Wrensen said.


His Good Name


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the Broadway show "Andre Heller's Wonderhouse" misidentified the song performed during a dance.
It is "Change Partners."


Science Fiction
At first glance, anyone unfamiliar with the evolution of modern science fiction might wonder why Paul Park's novel THE CULT OF LOVING KINDNESS (Morrow, $20) should be included in the genre.
Mr.
Park's novel, the third in his series "The Starbridge Chronicles," is set on a planet whose seasons last for centuries and whose moon, called Paradise, occasionally looms very large in the sky.
But the narrative takes little note of these oddities.
Instead the focus is on the daily life of the inhabitants of a crumbling city-state called Charn, once the seat of an empire ruled by the multitudinous Starbridge clan (whose blood is more amber than red and who may or may not have descended, quite literally, from Paradise).
The second book in the series, "Sugar Rain," described the overthrow of the priestly, aristocratic Starbridges.
Their iconoclastic successors, having become every bit as oppressive as the corrupt regime they supplanted, face yet another turn of the wheel of history.
Cyclical history is, in fact, Mr.
Park's subject.
He uses science fiction to free himself of the constraints of conventional narrative so that he can fasten on what interests him: the ill fit between individual desires and the machinery of society, which is, after all, constructed by individuals.
The freedom that science fiction affords the ambitious novelist -- freedom to create not just characters but entire civilizations and worlds -- comes with a price.
If the writer's imagination is not up to his ambition, the result can be not just flat but flimsy: paper moons shining down from cardboard skies on stick figures mouthing stale cliches.


M.D. by Day, Floating D.J. by Night
The sound in the engine room of the old lightship Frying Pan, moored in the Hudson River, had the explosive quality of a volcanic eruption mixed with a roar that could have been the collision of a forest fire and a earthquake.
Winking colored lights highlighted couples hip-hopping or swooning like mating birds amid a clutter of rusting machinery, all to the beat of two simultaneous records whose notes were blasted through the old ship by speakers the size of coffins.


On the Street; Highs and Lows Of Hems in Paris
Women in Paris are not intimidated by the ups and downs of daytime hemlines.
They're simply enjoying fashion's multiple choices of lengths from six inches above the knee to 12 inches below.
The key to the look is not the length of the skirt, but the idea of coloring an ensemble in total slimming black, from sunglasses to footwear.
The black silhouette is seen in long skirts worn with contrasting jackets, or in the popular Chanel suit with its short ribbon skirt that flutters about the legs in slim panels.


Ms. Aurichio to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Aurichio of Hartsdale, N.Y., have announced February wedding plans for their daughter Janine Aurichio and David Scott Bovenizer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Bovenizer of Pennington, N.J.
Ms.
Aurichio, 24 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Buffalo and is a financial analyst at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York, as is her husband.
Mr.
Bovenizer, 23, graduated from Lehigh University.


RECORD BRIEFS
American Music Club: 'Everclear'
Alias 016; all three formats (available from Alias, 374 Brannan Street, San Francisco, Calif. 94107).


On Language; Get It?
A NEW BATTLE cry of the women's movement, especially concerning the issue of sexual harassment in the workplace, has emerged from the controversy that swirled around the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.
"The times they are a-changin'," said Representative Patricia Schroeder, recalling a 1964 Bob Dylan song as she marched on the Senate, "and the boys here
don't get it
on this issue."


Chess
Someone is always popping up with a tale of the preoccupied scholar, like the graduate student of history who refused a subscription to the campus newspaper by replying, "I never read anything after 1815."
That idiosyncrasy, amusing or not, probably did him no immediate harm.
But for a top chess player to exhibit the opposite vice and be unacquainted with opening theory before say, 1945, can be disastrous.
Ingenious strategies and tactics were tried out in the old days, and if your opponent knows them and you don't, you are in for a pounding.


There Is No 'Right' To Anti-Semitism
"The Holocaust in a Polish Child's Eyes"  [ Oct. 6 ]  quotes Louis Begley as saying, "I detest Polish anti-Semitism." But along with that he is quoted as saying, "I don't mind that people are anti-Semitic. . . . People have a right to dislike others if they are so inclined." Perhaps Mr.
Begley was misquoted and will want to correct what is attributed to him -- placing anti-Semitism in the category where it belongs -- unsuitable, uncivilized conduct appropriate for barbarians.
There is no "right" to such uncivilized conduct in our society.
ERNARD H. GOLDSTEIN Port Washington


Training for Bonaire Divers
In an attempt to protect undersea coral reefs, the Caribbean island of Bonaire is offering free diving workshops.
The chief aim is to educate divers in buoyancy control so that they can avoid contact with coral.
The one-day workshops, both for general diving and for underwater photographers, are offered weekly under a joint venture of the Bonaire Government and a number of diving shops on the island.
Officials say the lessons are worth about $100 a session.
They are available until the end of the year.
The Government has also appointed a marine park manager, Kalli Reubold, to oversee offshore conservation efforts.
The marine park, which was established in 1979, incorporates all waters down to 200 feet for the full circumference of the island as well as the waters around the adjacent desert island of Klein Bonaire.


One Dead, 4 Hurt in Bronx Chase
The police are trying to untangle the events in a running, three-hour street battle in the Bronx early yesterday morning that they said left one man dead and four other people injured.
Each of three separate incidents involved a van and a yellow car, said Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokeswoman.


At Moscow's Planning Agency, Many Economists Look for Work
As he climbed the career ladder at Gosplan, the Soviet ministry of central planning, Oleg Yun used to have a heady sense of power, helping the ministry's efforts to pull every economic lever from Azerbaijan to Vladivostok.
In the 1960's, he helped prepare a grandiose 20-year plan that sought to fulfill Nikita S. Khrushchev's goal of overtaking the American economy.
In the 1970's, he was part of a trailblazing team that developed computer models on maximizing production.


New Yorkers, etc.
It's already started, but what has to be realized -- though not necessarily accepted -- is that it will only get worse.
For this is the social season, pared down though it may be, and almost without exception hosts and hostesses have already, or will in the not too distant future, pick up the telephone and hear the voice of an invited guest asking permission to bring along a friend.
This scenario is, in fact, the happy, thoughtful one.
There's another script that's not nearly as nice.
In it, the host opens the door and stands, for an interminable second, transfixed.
For there, along with the expected person, is a stranger.
A stranger who will somehow have to be shoehorned into a place at dinner, at a table accommodating a specific number.


Fashion; TELLING TIME
MOST PEOPLE CONSIDER A WATCH TO BE AS essential to their daily dressing as, say, their shoes.
They can't leave home without one.
But there are those to whom a watch is not only a necessity, but also a fashionable accessory.
For them, this is a great moment.
Many of today's most "serious" watches are also beautiful bits of adornment -- technical wonders within handsomely designed exteriors.
Those made by Chanel are especially chic, with their patent-leather, gold-chain or pearl-strand straps.
Here, some stylish personalities show off their watch preferences (Cartiers seem to be favorites).
The large photos illustrate a few of the many decorative watches on the market that are fashion statements first and, incidentally, tell the time of day.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
CANARSIE 14, SHEEPSHEAD BAY 13 -- Canarsie(4-2) scored 14 unanswered points in the second half to sneak past Sheepshead Bay (4-2).
On the fifth play of the third quarter, Damon Shelton scampered 44 yards to put the Chiefs on the board.
Canarsie didn't score again until midway through the fourth quarter when Vincent Vaughn completed a 13-yard scoring pass to Jack Perry, which completed a 9-play, 66-yard drive.
Jarrett Reicher intercepted a pass with 37 seconds remaining to seal the victory.


Home Deposits
To the Editor:
Your "Talking Deposits: Making Sure They Are Safe" column on Sept. 29 cites independent escrow agents as a solution to the problem of attorney misappropriation of escrow funds.
The article fails to point out an even more important benefit -- the elimination of a major conflict of interest.


In the Mideast, Just Talking Beats the Odds
Over the last five decades Arabs and Jews have faced each other across the conference table more than once, and by some measures those earlier experiences carry lessons suggesting that no one should approach this week's meeting in Madrid with high expectations.
But the Middle East is a region where precedents quickly lose their value, and unanticipated events can make fools out of those who dare to predict.
Some students of Middle East politics are arguing that both the Arabs and the Israelis have already made so many subtle concessions just to get this far that further progress may not be so unlikely.


A Stalinist's Paradise In Korea Flounders
No country has so successfully created a Stalinist society as North Korea.
It is a nation where every home has a speaker that broadcasts Orwellian propaganda throughout waking hours, where every adult must wear a button of the "Great Leader," Kim Il Sung, where affection is banned until marriage in the mid- to late-20's, where there are no novels or light reading, where citizens must get permission even to travel to another town.
These days, the worker's paradise is in trouble.
President Kim, who is 79 years old but in apparent good health, remains in absolute control of the nation's 22 million people, but North Korea is staggering economically from the effects of the disintegration of Soviet Communism.
The Soviet Union used to supply oil and accounted for nearly half of North Korea's trade; this year Moscow put trade on a cash basis instead of barter, and imports and exports have plummeted.


The Independents See Vultures Circling Overhead
As long as there have been hungry young rockers, there have been independent record labels, or indies, as they're known.
From Sun Records in the 60's to rap labels like Def Jam in the 80's, the independents -- small-staffed, low-budget operations -- have helped steer the course of pop music.
Even the Beatles' first singles in America were released on Vee-Jay, an independent doo-wop label from Chicago.
More recently, the independents have played an important role in the development of the alternative rock music scene.
The equivalent of the small presses, independent record companies stumble upon young talent before the huge, slothful corporations step in.
"I have to believe that the majors will overlook some great bands and the indies will fill that void," says Michael Gallelli, a director of artists and repertory for Columbia.


MOMMY OLDEST
A very recent decision I've made was affirmed by Laura Cunningham's Hers column "Mommy Oldest" (Oct. 6).
After five years of trying to conceive, and diligently subjecting my body and emotions to various fertility tests, I surprised myself by suddenly deciding, at 38, to forgo the next step, hormonal therapy.
There is now no hope of conception.
What I have, however, is the realization that I can help children who are already alive.
That is as life-affirming as becoming pregnant.
JANET MAYLIE FREDRICKSEN
Ann Arbor, Mich.


A Philadelphia Show Evokes Kahn's Tough Poetry
It's fitting that to visit the new retrospective on the architecture of Louis Kahn you must ascend the steps of the magnificent Greek temple that is the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
For an aura of ancient oracles still clings to Kahn's name, nearly two decades after his death.
Kahn, legendarily, was the mystic who gave modern architecture back its soul.
He enlarged the International Style to the monumental scale of Karnak.
A major show on Kahn is long overdue, but architecture in recent years has not been notably attuned to sacred callings.
Kahn's weathered masonry walls, his eloquent spatial voids, his penchant for oracular utterance add up to a kind of reproach against our brittle sophistication -- the rasps of an Ancient Mariner tugging at a stylish post-modern sleeve.
Are we ready, even in the sober 90's, to heed that tug?
On the evidence of this show, the answer is: only partly.
We're willing to listen.
We just wish the old crank would try on a post-modern hat.


Jodi Shendell and James Kaye Wed
Jodi Beth Shendell, the daughter of Myra Shear of New York and Leonard Shendell of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening in Purchase, N.Y., to James Evan Kaye, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morley Kaye of Scarsdale.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs officiated at the Brae Burn Country Club.
Mrs.
Kaye, 27 years old, is a graduate student in theater management at Columbia University.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University.
Her father is the president of the Shendell Realty Group in the Bronx.
Her mother is a family therapist at Gracie Square Hospital.
Kr.
Kaye, 28, is an associate at the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
He graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where he also received an M.B.A.
He received a J.D. cum laude from New York University.
His mother, Mary Ellen Kaye, is a real-estate investor in New York.
His father is a developer of apartment houses in New York.


Radio Station Offers Everything But Consistency
NEARLY 22 years ago Bill Nolan was cruising down Interstate 95 in his apple-red Mustang flipping the radio knob and searching for the answer to his prayers.
Mr.
Nolan's passion was 50's rock and roll, which at the time had all but faded from the American memory, he said.
As a record collector and devotee of music from the early-rock era, he said, he knew he could help spark new interest in it if only he could find a station that would allow him to broadcast his message.
After switching to 89.5 on the FM dial, WPKN at the University of Bridgeport, Mr.
Nolan said, he knew his search had ended.
"I remember they were playing some pretty hot acid rock," he said, "real controversial, pre-Woodstock stuff that the commercial stations wouldn't touch."


Miss Palermo to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent J. Palermo of Glen Head, L.I., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter Rosann Palermo and Erik Fleischauer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Fleischauer of Sudbury, Mass.
The couple, both 22 years old, are graduates of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
They are employed by the Commodities Corporation of Princeton, a private securities trading house, she as a researcher and he as an analyst.


Scribe


Pianistic Roots


VETERANS ANGERED ON HOSPITAL PLAN
In a first step toward a significant policy change that has touched off an outcry from veterans, the Department of Veterans Affairs is opening to the general public some of its underused medical centers in rural areas.
Veterans Affairs officials say the pilot project, scheduled to begin early next year, would bring quality care to non-veterans living in remote areas while keeping open underused hospitals that might otherwise be forced to close.


A 'Ghost' Trio, Poe's 'Black Cat' and 'Pipescreams'
CHAMBER music gets the week off to an exciting start.
Chamber Music Plus opens its 12th season at 3 P.M. today in Cathedral Theater in Hartford.
The founding directors, Harry Clark and Sanda Schuldmann, will be welcoming two guest artists for this pre-Halloween occasion, the young violinist Renee Jolles, who will join the cello-piano duo in Beethoven's "Ghost" Trio, and Robert J. Lurtsema, of National Public Radio, narrating Larry Bell's setting of Edgar Allen Poe's "Black Cat." For information call 232-0085.
Speaking of scary stuff in Hartford, members of the American Guild of Organists are presenting "Pipescreams," which they describe as "a free concert of organ music with spooky sounds and creepy creatures." Boo time is 7:30 P.M. on Friday, All Hallows' Day, at Trinity Episcopal Church (236-7975).


Headliner; Child Bride for Sale
"My name is Ameena," said the sobbing young girl on the flight to New Delhi.
"I am about 10 years old. This man came to our house. He found my elder sister dark and ugly. My father, who drives an aut0-rickshaw, made me marry this man. He is taking me to Saudi Arabia. I don't want to go." The heart-rending story that first unfolded before a helpful flight attendant has kept readers of Indian newspapers riveted for weeks.
Ameena's 60-year-old husband apparently bought her for $240 on a bride-shopping trip to Hyderabad.
He is charged with forging documents and fradulent marriage.
But the case has touched India's national conscience, a reminder of how routine childhood marriages are in rural areas, where some say girls may be considered spinsters at 16.
Both Islamic and Hindu law recognize such unions, and impoverished villagers may see the sale of a daughter as a justifiable way to feed a family.
Shock, some suggest, is a luxury for the well-to-do.


Review/Pop; Michelle Shocked's Style
On Thursday night at the Lone Star Roadhouse, Michelle Shocked introduced "Woody's Rag," a Woody Guthrie song, by inviting an audience member onstage.
She put a mandolin in his hand and announced that she was going to teach him the chords so he could play along.
When the audience good-naturedly heckled his lack of expertise, Ms.
Shocked laughed too; for a moment there she had crossed a fine line and become just another spectator at the show.
A lot of rock and pop music professes a populist ethic, but few singers take the concept as seriously as Ms.
Shocked.
Her debut album, "The Texas Campfire Tapes," was literally recorded around a campfire with just an acoustic guitar and crickets chirping in the background.
Her songs dig past contemporary folk into its roots of country, blues and Western swing, and her lyric sheets name what key each song is written in, just in case listeners want to pick up a guitar and play it themselves.


POSTINGS: Ossining's County Trust; Plans for an 1873 Eyesore
After years of decline that reduced it to a crumbling eyesore, one of the more historic buildings of downtown Ossining, the former County Trust Bank at 139 Main Street, is being restored.
The triangular structure, which has been occupied since 1975 only by an occasional homeless squatter, was built in 1873 in an ornate Victorian style as a millinery store, grocery and tea emporium.
It was bought in August by Steven Jay Weisz, a 29-year-old New York City developer, who has retained two architects -- William Zeph Ginsburg of Manhattan and David Graham of Ossining -- to oversee the restoration.


Editors' Note
The Outdoors column in the Sports section on Oct. 13 described salmon fishing expeditions in the Kola Peninsula of northwestern Russia.
It reported that the area had only recently been opened to foreigners, and enthusiastically recommended the fishing there, including a phone number to call for more information.
The column was by Bill Hunter, a freelance writer.
The company that organizes fishing trips to the Kola hired Mr.
Hunter to go there last summer and evaluate the fishing.
Mr.
Hunter's status as a paid consultant to the company was mentioned in a note published with the article.
Nevertheless the publication of the column violated The Times's policy, which prohibits the acceptance of travel articles from writers who have accepted anything of value from their subjects.


Vanished Past


Joanne Marren, Lawyer, Weds
Joanne Therese Marren, a vice president and associate general counsel of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, was married yesterday to Alan Goldman, a private investment banker and business consultant in New York and New Jersey.
The Rev.
Darrell Berger, a Unitarian minister, officiated at he University Club in New York.
Miss Marren, 39 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from Le Moyne College and received a law degree from St.
John's University.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Thaddeus F. Marren of Massapequa Park, L.I., and the late Mr.
Marren.
The bridegroom, 54, graduated from Cornell University, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.
He is a son of Mrs.
Julius Goldman of New York and late Mr.
Goldman.


Some Memories Of Old Memorial
To the Sports Editor:
It was not the original Memorial Stadium in Baltimore that burned down in the middle of the 1944 season ("Season Over, Orioles Make Their Move," The Times, Oct. 7); it was the old Orioles Park on 29th Street.
As a result, the former International League Orioles moved to a new home in Memorial Stadium on 33d Street, about a mile away, during their 1944 minor league world series championship season.
The stadium became the home of the new American League franchise when the St.
Louis Browns moved to Baltimore in 1954.


Present at the Reconciliation
THE TURN
From the Cold War to a New Era: The United States and the Soviet Union, 1983-1990.
By Don Oberdorfer.
Illustrated. 514 pp.
New York.
Poseidon Press. $25.


Term Limits Won't Revitalize Political Parties; Conservative Doctrine
To the Editor:
"Term Limits Make Sense" (Op-Ed, Oct. 5) argues that we can strengthen our political parties by limiting our choices of who will represent us.
The call for "more responsible parties" is an old saw in the profession, and contains a number of fallacies and several presumptions that have no basis in fact.
It is a conservative doctrine that, among at least some of its adherents, contains a yearning for highly structured, centrally controlled mechanisms for candidate selection and discipline.


'Harlot's Ghost'
To the Editor:
Well before the end of John Simon's uninspired review of Norman Mailer's "Harlot's Ghost," it became tediously evident that Mr.
Simon, too, was lacking an editor.
Reading a synopsis, however lengthy and detailed, leaves one still hungry for a morsel of insight and inspiration.
I fail to understand why a film critic was assigned the review of a major American writer's work. (Rev.) JOHN B. GIULIANI  West Redding, Conn.
John Simon replies:
I am sorry that Barbara Probst Solomon, an author, finds my tone snide, but somewhat relieved that my "seriously compromised" reviews have somehow managed to earn George Jean Nathan and George Polk awards, as well as another from the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters.
Uneager as I am to beat my own drum, she leaves me no choice.
Far from having "no public record" of involvement with modern fiction, I have reviewed books of or about it for diverse publications, including The New York Times Book Review, The Washington Post Book World, The New Criterion, The New Republic, The New Leader and The Times Literary Supplement.
For the record, my doctorate from Harvard was in (modern) comparative literature -- not in drama or film.
Both my first and last books dealt partly with fiction, mostly contemporary.
I cannot decipher what she claims my "ill-considered review" has missed about "America's most considered novelist" (whatever that means); nor is it made clear what the burning literary questions I have "never considered" are.
But I can assure her that I do not "consider fiction . . . subsidiary," though my consideration may be less considering than hers.
To Mr.
Hicks I can reply only that my nose is not aware of having been tweaked by Norman Mailer, even if his prose style sometimes made it curl.
To Father Giuliani, my regrets that my "lengthy and detailed" synopsis left him uninspired; I tried to make it as short and lively as I could without shirking my duty to those about to invest their time and money in a 1,300-page, $30 tome.
The latter part of my review was, however, an attempt at evaluation (if not inspiration), impossible without some preceding summary.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Oct. 13 about the Bahamas referred incorrectly to the Treasure Cay Resort on Great Abaco Island.
Most of the 1,500-acre complex -- including accommodations, beach, marina, golf course and other sports facilities -- is open and operating.
The only area closed is the 12 acres occupied by the old Treasure Cay hotel, which consists of a 35-room building and restaurant site; this area was sold to Sandals, the resort chain, which plans to start renovations early in 1992.


Making a Closet Bigger and Better
REMODELING a closet to provide additional space or better organization usually calls for replacing the standard single shelf and clothes pole with compartments and multiple poles of varying lengths and heights.
To make a closet more convenient overall, it should have adequate lighting, an appropriate door and maybe even cedar paneling.


Car Rentals In Lithuania
Connex, the international car rental agency, is offering car rental service in newly independent Lithuania, which, the company says, had "the best road system in the Soviet Union." The company can provide Russian-made cars with Lithuanian drivers and English-speaking guides, and hopes in the near future to offer a variety of self-drive cars.
A Volga sedan seating three passengers in addition to the driver and guide costs $179 for eight hours.
A four-hour rental is about $110; additional time is $20 an hour.
A Volga minicoach carrying seven passengers and with driver and guide is $214 for eight hours.
Connex says that travelers wanting transfers to Lithuania from the Riga airport in Latvia can be met by the sedan or minicoach.
More information: (914) 739-0066 or (800) 333-3949.


Four Historic Houses to Be Auctioned
IMAGINE living in a forge that was used by both American and British troops to shoe horses during the Revolution.
Or sleeping in the same room Adm.
David G. Farragut slept in during the Civil War.
Consider owning a Gothic Revival cottage that belonged to one of the most intellectually eminent families of the 19th and early 20th centuries.
Where your backyard is a park where Washington Irving allegedly sponsored a yearly archery meet, with an observatory where pioneer photographs of the moon, the sun and the planets were taken.
For those for whom the lure (and lore) of history is great and the idea of replacing plumbing and heating systems is not, next month's auction of four historic properties by the village of Hastings-on-Hudson may fill such yearnings.


CAMPUS LIFE: Amherst; Admission Policy Blind to Finances Will Be Retained
The Amherst College president, Peter R. Pouncey, announced last week that the college will be able to retain its "need-blind" admission policy, despite earlier predictions by him and the trustees that the only methods of insuring the college's financial security would be either to eliminate need-blind admission or to require students to repay or work off a larger proportion of their financial aid awards.
The announcement came after two forums in the last month at which students press trustees and administrators to retain the need-blind policy, in which applicants are considered for admission regardless of their ability to pay.
Students who are accepted then receive aid packages based on financial need.
Approximately 45 percent of the student body now receives financial assistance from the college, which will spend $8.5 million on financial aid this year.


Quotation of the Day
"We're not going to stop now. We're going to continue. We're going to hit the road and go on down to Petersburg. Then we'll be back." -- Marion S. Barry Jr., former Mayor of Washington, heading to prison on drug charges.  [ 16:6. ]


In the Nation; The Big Giveaway
The oil man in the White House has agreed to throw what could be a $20 billion handout to a few oil companies -- and never mind the environment, rational energy policy, or the national interest, all of which would pay the price.
The President has even threatened to veto energy legislation that includes many useful provisions not unlike his own proposals, unless the bill includes his planned giveaway of drilling rights in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
Some senators nevertheless will make a determined effort to protect one of the nation's last great wilderness areas.


Lowell Amey Is Wed
Lowell Stewart Amey, the daughter of Nicola Amey of Southhampton, L.I., and the late Francis L. Amey, was married last evening to Jay Henry Van Vechten 2d, the son of Isabel H. Van Vechten of Boca Raton, Fla, and the late Jay H. Van Vechten.
The Rev.
Bennett Primus, a Methodist minister, officiated at Fort Duvernette on Young's Island, the British West Indies.
Mrs.
Van Vechten, 39 years old, heads her own fashion and marketing consulting concern, and Mr.
Van Vechten, 47, heads his own public relations and communications concern, both in New York.


Calling His Conviction Part of a Racist Plot, Barry Starts a Six-Month Prison Term
Former Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., once considered one of the nation's most promising black politicians, began a six-month sentence in prison today for cocaine use, saying his conviction on a single misdemeanor count was part of a racist plot to discredit him.
With his fist defiantly raised, he shouted goodbye to 100 or so cheering supporters who had come to his house in the Anacostia section, southeast of the Capitol, to see him off.
Then he packed a bag, got into a car and was driven the 130 miles to Petersburg, Va., where he slipped into a minimum-security Federal prison through a rear gate.


Horace Sutton, 72, Magazine Columnist And Travel Author
Horace Sutton, one of the pre-eminent American travel writers during the years of the greatest expansion of tourism, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 72 years old and died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Sutton was indefatigable as a traveler and prolific as a writer.
He traveled at least 100,000 miles a year at the peak of his career and wrote 11 books, including the "Footloose" series, which began with "Footloose in France" in 1948.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Growing a Greenhouse
Q.
With winter coming, I think it's time to finally add the greenhouse I've always dreamed of.
How much will it cost, and how can I find out where to get one? -- Barbara Crane, Newton, Mass.


Miss Kiernan, Executive, Wed
Kristina Kiernan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Kiernan Jr. of Summit, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert Perry Neilson Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Neilson of Wellesley, Mass.
Msgr.
William P. Devine officiated at St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church in Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Neilson, 37 years old, graduated cum laude from Columbia University.
She is a vice president of national sales with Ambac, a municipal bond insurance concern in New York.
Her father retired from Merck &amp; Company as the director of its regional headquarters in Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil.


In Rights Showdown, Both Sides Blink
Was David Duke, the one-time grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan who scored a second-place finish in Louisiana's nonpartisan gubernatorial primary, the catalyst for President Bush and Senate Democrats to break their two-year impasse and broker a compromise last week on a job discrimination bill?
Or was it the bitter debate over racial and sexual politics spurred by Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court?
Or was it simply Mr.
Bush's fear that a veto might be overridden?


Political Talk
A Spot of Fun on the Telly?
Inspired by a spot of Sunday-night television watching, not to mention centuries of British tradition, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has begun suggesting that the New York State Legislature follow Parliament's lead.
He wants to start jousting with lawmakers in public sessions in their chambers.


Suddenly, Salome Runs Amok
Richard Strauss, always a good source for pithy quotations about his own work, once wrote that the title character of "Salome" should be a "16-year-old princess with the voice of an Isolde." For the opera's premiere in 1905 he chose the maternal Wagnerian Marie Wittich, but in later years he opted for lighter voices and more alluring theatrical representations of his, and Oscar Wilde's, virgin temptress.
At first, a dancer took over the Dance of the Seven Veils.
Today, the singer routinely galumphs through the rudimentary motions required.
Yet by now, from the ascension of the beauteous Bulgarian Ljuba Welitsch in the 1940's through Teresa Stratas to Maria Ewing, who ends her dance in the nude, the trend has been toward lithe figures and the lighter voices that emerge from such figures.


Furniture With an Aura of Sculpture
A HUGE, headless ebony raven seems ready to soar through the Bristol-Myers Squibb Gallery, but its outspread wings are ensnared in two ladders.
This imposing drama evolves from the master furniture maker Wendell Castle's play on words: "Ladder Wing Back Chair." An arched seat converts the work into a functional chair, while the poetry of his sculpture persists.
In this show, "Contemporary Furniture Makers of the American Northeast," most of the 17 pieces by 9 crafts people are cabinets, tables and chairs with practical drawers, doors or flat surfaces for writing or sitting.
But the works are displayed on pedestals so they take on the aura of sculpture.
Their intriguing shapes and sensuous surfaces nearly overwhelm the practical features.


LAW ON THE FEMINIST FRONTIER
MacKinnon's view that pornography is an attack on all women is certainly accurate.
It seems to me that if what is done to women in pornographic magazines, films and videos were done to men or animals, there would be general outrage.
That it can be done to women and justified as either free speech or "normal" male-female relations is an indication of women's true status in this society.
PEGGY MCGARRAHAN
New York, N.Y.


Elizabeth Plunkett Marries Francis Mastolini 3d
Elizabeth Ellen Plunkett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Plunkett of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Francis John Mastolini 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mastoloni Jr. of Harrison, N.Y.
The Rev.
Michael Morris performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Mastolini, 28 years old, is a business development officer at the Marine Midland Bank in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Pine Manor College.
Mr.
Mastoloni, 31, graduated from St.
Michael's College.
He is a vice president of Frank Mastoloni &amp; Sons, a New York firm founded by his grandfather that imports pearls and precious stones.


Drug Dealers' Fast Withdrawals Raise Suspicion in Bank Inquiry
In 1988, days before Federal agents made a surprise arrest of five Bank of Credit and Commerce International executives after a long undercover operation, some of the world's most powerful drug dealers quietly withdrew millions of dollars from their B.C.C.I. accounts, according to internal bank records.
Some Government investigators are now suspicious that the politically connected bank or its customers were tipped off by sources inside the United States Government.
If there was a leak, the source of it is one of several mysteries surrounding the bank and the American Government's bungled efforts to investigate its activities in the United States.
But the very possibility that some of the world's most notorious drug dealers could learn of a long, highly secret investigation into money laundering -- generally defined as concealing the source of illegally obtained funds -- heightens concerns that B.C.C.I. may have used an extraordinary network of political and intelligence connections to help it evade serious scrutiny.
In addition to raising questions about whether the dangerous investigation was compromised, the bank documents examined by The New York Times, including records of hundreds of accounts and correspondence by the bank's own lawyers, underscore the enormous amounts of money that were being cleansed at B.C.C.I. branches in Panama, Miami, New York and other cities.
In turn, these activities raise still more questions as to why the bank was able to settle for a relatively modest $15 million penalty what was then the largest money-laundering charge in history.


Smith on the Move
Left wing DERRICK SMITH, a seven-year veteran who has not played this season, was waived by the Philadelphia Flyers and claimed by the Minnesota North Stars.
Smith, who has never lived up to his promise as a rookie, when he had career highs on goals (17) and assists (22) in 77 games in the 1984-85 season, has a total of 80 goals, 87 assists and 338 penalty minutes in 494 National Hockey League games. (AP)


Mary Ellen Iskenderian Is Married
Mary Ellen Iskenderian, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ara Iskenderian of Williamsburg, Va., was married there yesterday to Gregory Owen Lipscomb, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Owen Lipscomb of Houston.
The Rev.
James Walsh performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Bede's Church.
Ms.
Iskenderian, who is keeping her name, is an investment officer in Washington at the International Finance Corporation, an affiliate of the World Bank.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in management from Yale University.
Her father is a technical manager at the BASF Corporation in Williamsburg.
Mr.
Lipscomb is a lawyer in Washington with the Federal Communications Commission.
He graduated from the University of Texas, from which he also received a J.D., and received a master's degree in administration from Harvard University.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.
His father is a retired lawyer in Houston.


In Westport, 'Flora, the Red Menace'
THE first time around, "Flora, the Red Menace" was a slight, short-lived musical.
That was in 1965, when the composer, John Kander, and the lyricist, Fred Ebb, were first teaming up, and the star, Liza Minnelli, was making her Broadway debut at age 19.
For Flora's next time around, a 1987 Off Broadway revival, the producers reasoned that the renown of the original creators, who included Harold Prince as producer and George Abbott (book and direction), would spark new interest in an old flop.
Beyond that "Flora" needed a new frame of reference.
The cartoonish and cumbersome story focuses on an ingenuous high school graduate, class valedictorian and new recruit in the Young Communist League, right after the Depression.
For the 1987 staging at the Off Broadway Vineyard Theater, David Thompson reworked the book, originally adapted by Abbott and Robert Russell; Kander and Ebb deleted three, and wrote three, new songs.
Perhaps most tellingly, the new production highlighted the importance of thinking small.
A big-time Broadway musical was reduced to a single setting and piano, with 9 actors playing 25 roles -- a good idea.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 27, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
7
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
2
14
THE MUMMY, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Ramses the Great and Cleopatra return to life in Edwardian England.
3
9
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
4
2
RENDEZVOUS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $4.99.) A freethinking British woman engaged to an earl has some second thoughts.
5
5
BUFFALO GIRLS, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $5.99.) Calamity Jane and her friends seek to recapture the excitement of the old Wild West by joining Buffalo Bill's show in London.
6
4
QUESTION QUEST, by Piers Anthony. (Avon, $4.99.) A woman is sent to hell to rescue a missing sorcerer; part of the "Xanth" fantasy series.
7
1
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
8
10
THE WOMEN IN HIS LIFE, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The rise of a tycoon and his relationships with five women.
9 *
40
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their immigrant mothers.
10 *
3
SEASON OF THE SUN, by Catherine Coulter. (Onyx, $5.99.) A historical romance about an Irish belle and a Viking.
11 *
3
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Avon, $5.99.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.
12 *
1
HAWAII HERITAGE, by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam, $4.99.) The Holt family's activities in Florida, in New York and in Hawaii after the downfall of Queen Liliuokalani.
13 *
5
Q-IN-LAW, by Peter David. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" novel.
14
6
HARVEST, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $5.99.) Turmoil in a Jewish family during the turbulent 1960's.
15
3
THE SHADOW AND THE STAR, by Laura Kinsale. (Avon, $4.99.) The romance of a wealthy man and a nearly destitute woman in 19th-century London and Hawaii.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
18
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
2
23
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
3
15
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
4
5
GET TO THE HEART, by Barbara Mandrell with George Vecsey. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of the country-music singer.
5
24
WHEN RABBIT HOWLS, by the Troops for Truddi Chase. (Jove, $4.95.) A woman voices the 92 personalities that live within her.
6
416
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
7 *
101
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
8
31
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspiration.
9
16
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
10
1
SEXUAL PERSONAE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $15.) The case for regarding all art as a pagan battleground between male and female, form and chaos, civilization and demonic nature.
11 *
3
PRECIOUS VICTIMS, by Don W. Weber and Charles Bosworth Jr. (Signet, $5.99.) The case of a woman who killed two of her infant children.
12 *
3
THE MILWAUKEE MURDERS, by Don Davis. (St. Martin's, $4.99.) The story of Jeffrey L. Dahmer, who has admitted killing 17 people.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
4
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
65
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
11
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
45
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
23
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Susan Baer to Wed Benjamin Chan
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry P. Baer of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan James Baer, to Benjamin Hon Yue Chan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Chan of Greenwich, Conn.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Baer, 28 years old, graduated from Brown University, as did her fiance.
She is seeking a master's degree in public health from Columbia University.
Her father, a former partner at the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom, is now of counsel to the firm.
Her mother, Ellen D. Baer, is an associate professor at the University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing.
Mr.
Chan, 32, received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennslyvania.
He is vice president of Goldenleo Trading Inc., a family-owned clothing importing company in New York.


Making a Difference; Lloyd's 'Indentured Servant'
As Henri Wedell tells it, his friend's friend was an impressive Irishman who came to Memphis frequently from London.
The visitor worked for one of the "name," or member, agencies of Lloyd's of London, the 300-year-old insurance market.
At some point, the possibility of joining Lloyd's came up.
Mr.
Wedell did, using the money he had earned over the years as a broker to put up a five-year, noncancelable letter of credit.
"I trusted the man," Mr.
Wedell, 50, said from his office in Memphis.
"Investing in a 300-year-old organization with a fine reputation gave me a comfort level."


MOMMY OLDEST
As the parent of two children through international adoption, I greatly identified with Cunningham's article.
However, one need not have dared the fates by postponing childbearing to be concerned about the societal impact of high-technology reproduction.
All infertile women, regardless of age, who are lucky enough to afford the high financial costs of the reproductive sweepstakes must take the time to ask why we are entering the game.
Adoption is an option that changes the focus from personal loss to responsibility for others.
Isn't this what being a family is all about?
FRANCES M. PANTALEO
White Plains


The Soviet Fallback For Economic Reform: Hope for a Miracle
But economic policymakers in the Soviet Union -- or what used to be the Soviet Union -- are eager to attempt such miracles because they say if they do not embrace bold reforms the mess will grow only messier.
In this divided land it is perhaps not surprising that there are differences over how change should come.
Mindful that any scenario is likely to mean more hardship, some leaders, including the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, have shown some reticence amid the warnings of urgency.


Sisters? Only on Television
The youngest of the four siblings on "Sisters" is nicknamed Stinkerbell.
The middle sister on "Sibs" is Audie because her baby sister couldn't pronounce Audrey.
I might have thought this was just too cute, but I have a "sta" of my own.
We came to call each other sta as girls, not because we couldn't talk, but because of television.
Some long-forgotten comic did a routine about parochial schools, with students waving their hands at the Sister and yelling, "Sta! Sta! Call on me!" This was goofy enough to stick as a family joke, so Stinkerbell and Audie actually make sense.
Otherwise, television hasn't affected my idea of sisterhood, and the current flurry of sister shows isn't likely to change that.


Review/Concert; Populism and High Art in Concordia Bill
One of Marin Alsop's talents is an ability to bring together unusual, entertaining works that inhabit several worlds at once.
That was the case at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday evening, when she conducted her chamber orchestra Concordia in four scores in which populist and high-art pretensions mingled freely.
If heard on its own, Scott Bradley's "Quiet Please" might have impressed a listener as a concert work with a theater-music accent and lots of splashy percussion effects.
Actually, it was the sound track to a 1945 Tom and Jerry cartoon, which (sensibly) was shown during the performance, with David Chester providing all the voices.
Ms.
Alsop's performance was lively and bright, if not always perfectly synchronized with the film, and it made one think differently about what goes into a cartoon score.


Latvia Moves to Open an Air-Route Window on the West
In the two months since Latvia gained independence from the Soviet Union, Western airlines and investors have become keenly interested in the rights to fly to this Baltic capital at the center of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.
The Latvians also have ambitious plans to form their own national airline as a joint venture with a foreign investor.
But Latvia's concerns about how much control foreign investors might have and problems with a small, crumbling main passenger terminal threaten to stall plans to turn Riga into an air hub for the Baltics and the Soviet Union.


A Fierce Fight for a Richer Prize in Yonkers
A HIGH-STAKES political struggle for a newly strengthened and expanded Yonkers mayoralty is drawing to a close with each of three major candidates still potential winners.
The fiercely fought contest, conducted against mutinous currents in the ranks of the city's once-powerful Democratic and Republican Party organizations, features Terence M. Zaleski, a three-term Democratic State Assemblyman; Peter A. Chema, the Republican majority leader of the City Council, and former Mayor Angelo R. Martinelli.


Devils Avoid Sharks and End Up in Net
The expansion San Jose Sharks were so ineffective in their first visit to the Devils tonight that the totally unfamiliar chant of "We Want 10, We Want 10," filled the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Devils fell just one goal short of reaching double figures, dealing the Sharks a 9-0 thrashing and giving Chris Terreri the second shutout of his career before a delighted crowd of 14,814.


Managing; How Is It Done? For a Small Fee . . .
TEN years ago, the General Electric Company set up its Answer Center, a 24-hour, 800 number for customers to call for information about any G.E. product.
Almost from day one, G.E.'s phone rang off the hook -- not just with customers looking to unclog a dishwasher at 3 A.M., but with other companies looking for advice on how to set up their own answer center.
So three years ago, G.E. set up Answer Center Consulting Services, which charges $4,800 for a three-hour overview session, and an order of magnitude more for helping a company set up its own system.
G.E. won't talk revenues, but says that 300 companies have used the service.


In Southeast Asia, Reasons for Hope - and Caution
Even as the Cambodians proclaimed the end to 13 years of civil war and signed a peace treaty in Paris, there were reports of new fighting along the Thai-Cambodian border.
Even as as the United States announced it would open talks to restore diplomatic ties with Vietnam 16 years after the end of the Vietnam War, there was fear in Hanoi that memories of American soldiers still missing from the war could extend Vietnam's diplomatic and economic isolation for months, or years.


CAMPUS LIFE: Alabama; Black Students March in Protest Of Race Incident
About 1,000 students and faculty members marched silently through the streets of the University of Alabama campus Wednesday night protesting an incident in which some white sorority members appeared in blackface at a recent party.
The marchers, most of whom were black, gathered in front of the campus's main library at about 6:30 P.M. before starting on the hourlong, candlelight walk past Colonial-style white sorority houses to Foster Auditorium, where Gov.
George C. Wallace made his "stand in the schoolhouse door" in 1963 trying to prevent Vivian Malone, a black student, from enrolling at the university.


Behind Duke's Success, Campaign Without End
With little help from the hired strategists, media consultants and poll takers who usually populate political campaigns, State Representative David Duke has spent a decade on a relentless, and now successful, quest to make himself a figure of national repute.
He uses a 70-year-old former parsonage in this suburb of New Orleans as his unassuming headquarters.
Its basement is crammed with old file cabinets, packing boxes and folding tables.
But elsewhere there is a sophisticated computer system that is the backbone of his fund-raising effort.


Out Beyond Mars, Preparation for the First Asteroid Encounter
Asteroids are the rubble of the solar system, the rocky stuff that apparently never got it all together to become planets.
Over the ages a few have smashed into Earth with devastating consequences, including, presumably, the extinction of the dinosaurs.
Some have shattered and rained meteorites, the source of much of what scientists think they know about asteroids.
But excepting the Little Prince, the enchanting creation of Antoine de Saint-Exupery, no one has ever seen an asteroid up close in their usual habitat, out midway between Mars and Jupiter.


Stamford, Hoping for Growth, Chooses a Mayor
WHOEVER is elected mayor of Stamford on Nov. 5, the road ahead is clearly marked: the city will try to attract more offices, more jobs, more growth.
Stamford has followed the same road for the last 20 years, as it shook free from its fading factories along Interstate 95 and remade its economy in the image of the white-collar suburban neighborhoods that spread north for miles, in ascending lot size, to the Westchester line.
What promises to be different now is the speed of change, as Stamford competes with cities across the country to fill its empty office buildings, and the mayor's style, as the incumbent, Thom Serrani, departs after four two-year terms.


Spicing Up the Pumpkin Presentation
HALLOWEEN is jack-o'-lantern time.
It also means that there is a lot of pumpkin around for cooking.
Like most winter squashes, pumpkin has a delicate flavor (some would say not much taste at all) but when combined with other ingredients that spice it up, it can make great soups, pies and cakes.
Pumpkin soup is a particularly festive fall dish when served in small individual pumpkins or in one large one.
A strong homemade chicken stock is needed to give the soup flavor, and it is good sprinkled with croutons sauteed in butter or a julienne of fresh fried ginger just before being served.


Yugoslav Army and Croats Agree on Dubrovnik Evacuation
Yugoslav Army and Croatian officials prepared for a voluntary evacuation of the besieged resort city of Dubrovnik this afternoon, a day after fierce firefights brought army forces to within a mile of the walled Old City, local news reports said.
Serbian officers of the Yugoslav Army said today that their units, which have had Dubrovnik in a choke hold for four weeks, had halted their advance toward the Old City.
There have been reports of only scattered gunfire in the area since Friday evening.


When the Final Act Is Only a Beginning
People in the theater tend to lament the evanescence of our craft, as performances and productions come and go like bubbles on a stream.
Sometimes, however, this very transience gives us an opportunity we might not find elsewhere.
Books and films, for example, once they are published or produced, are pretty much frozen for eternity, with all their virtues and flaws permanently in place.
A play, on the other hand, can be rewritten and reworked after its initial production, in many cases to its considerable improvement.
Until recently, this process of adjustment would usually occur on the way to New York, where a Broadway opening was deemed the ultimate destination for a new play.
Yet nowadays, a very different process can take place to keep a work alive.
A play may open for a limited run at an Off Broadway theater, be reviewed and then be rewritten or amended for a new and extended life elsewhere in the country.


Affordable Homes Help Slumping California Oil City
The growth of this high-desert city has come in lurches over the last decade.
Now it is counting on affordable housing to help propel it into a new role as the latest suburban outpost of Los Angles, 100 miles to the south.
In the mid-1980's, when energy was a growth business, this city close to oil fields and refineries expanded.
The collapse of oil prices later in the decade, however, resulted in the loss of 10,000 jobs, the departure of several major employers and foreclosure for a clutch of office buildings.


POSTINGS: 5-Story Sports Center; A Pool House By the Drive
What is 170 feet long, 60 feet wide, up to 14 feet deep and capable of holding at least 250,000 people?
Its builders call it New York City's first indoor, 50-meter, Olympic-standard pool, and it is the centerpiece of the Swim, Sports Training and Rehabilitation Center at Asphalt Green, designed by Richard Dattner Architect of Manhattan.


Sunday Menu; Swordfish With a Salsa That Tempers Its Richness
Here's a swordfish dish whose richness is tempered by the cool, bright flavors of cucumber and pineapple.
And it makes for a fast meal.


Israel Arms Deal Escapes South Africa Sanctions
President Bush has decided to waive sanctions against Israel as part of an agreement under which Israel pledged to quit exporting missile technology to South Africa, Administration officials said tonight.
The agreement, worked out quietly between the two countries six weeks ago, the officials said, was designed to avoid a requirement that the President take action against countries or companies that violate a 1987 convention aimed at preventing proliferation of missiles in third-world countries.


CORRECTION
A chart headed "Interest Rates," appearing each Sunday on the first Money page, has reflected erroneous figures supplied by Salomon Brothers for the municipal bond yields since early June.
Today's chart, with the corrected yields, appears on page 16.


Peddocks Island Journal; A Citadel Of Past May Face Last Stand
For decades, descendants of Portuguese fishermen and American soldiers have lived without electricity or a clean water supply upon the rocky shores of this densely wooded patch of beach in the middle of Boston Harbor.
Transporting everyday necessities by boat, islanders have survived on what they could carry and relied on oil lanterns, wood-burning stoves and bottled water to sustain them.


Review/Film; Chuck Norris as a Spy In a Mafia Drug Operation
With his shaggy, basset-hound face and an amiably paternal manner that strongly recalls Ronald Reagan, Chuck Norris is one of the screen's least likely action-movie heroes.
When called upon to slaughter people, which he does every few minutes in his new film, "The Hitman," the star twinkles with the saintly equanimity of a divinely appointed executioner.
His killings are carried out with a minimum of motion and a maximum of gore.
Even in scenes where he turns into a one-man army and munitions factory, he barely moves, while the bodies cascade around him.
In "The Hitman," one of his victims is hung from a meat hook and then exploded.
In an early scene, the star, wounded and drenched in blood from head to toe, is examined in long, loving close-ups on a hospital operating table.


Camera
John Loengard, a writer and photographer, has challenged the definition of what a portrait is in his new book, "Life Faces." His thesis: a portrait is a picture that captures a revealing face, or part of a face.
So here it is surprising to see John Olson's 1968 photograph of wounded American troops on top of a tank during the Tet offensive in Vietnam.
Ralph Crane's 1953 photos of the cavernous Hofbrauhaus in Munich, filled with small faces of waitresses and beer-drinking customers, is a surprise, too.


Making a Difference; New Realities, New Rules
Tall, bearded and bespectacled, Robert M. Pepper has the professorial bearing of a man who spent nearly a decade as an academic.
But as the man in charge of analyzing long-range policy issues for the Federal Communications Commission, Mr.
Pepper has emerged as a key architect behind some of the commission's hottest proposals.
It was Mr.
Pepper, 43 years old, who worked out many of the details in the commission's controversial plan last week to let telephone companies carry television programming and compete with cable television operators.
But he is also a major figure in efforts to refine future policy on emerging "personal communications networks," like pocket-sized radio telephones.
And he is the person who assembled a detailed study on the future of television, which the commission used to justify proposals for relaxing rules governing the ownership of TV stations.


No Headline
International 3-15
America's strategy in the peace talks between Arabs and Israelis will be to keep the two sides talking long enough to allow a breakthrough to emerge.
There is no U.S. peace plan that will suddenly be unveiled, officials say.
Page 1


Colleen M. Orr, A Chef, Marries
The Church of St.
Michael the Archangel in Greenwich, Conn., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Colleen Mary Orr, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Orr of Riverside, Conn., to Stewart Lane Whitman 2d, a son of Bruce N. Whitman of Greenwich and Patricia M. Whitman of Stamford, Conn.
Msgr.
Thomas P. Guinan performed the ceremony.
A graduate of Le Cordon Bleu cooking school in Paris, Mrs.
Whitman, 27 years old, is a chef with the catering firm of Gardner Merchant at the corporate dining rooms of the New York accounting firm of Coopers &amp; Lybrand.
Her father is the president of U.S.
Sterling, a securities concern in New York.
Mr.
Whitman, 31, graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
He is a vice president of the Long Term Credit Bank of Japan in New York.
His mother owns the PMW art gallery in Stamford.
His father is the executive vice president of Flight Safety International, a pilot safety and training concern in New York.


In The Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
East Brunswick 184,000
33 University Road
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old split level; 2-car garage, fireplace, 2 family rooms; taxes $3,940.
Edison 175,000
19 Barlow Road
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; pool, 2 decks, professionally landscaped; taxes $3,243.
Hopatcong 142,000
12A Deane Road
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; lakefront property, dock, stone fireplace; taxes $3,000.
North Brunswick 120,000
30 Claremont Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 26-year-old ranch; fenced yard, corner lot, full basement; taxes $7,020.
Piscataway 210,000
192 Poe Place
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; stucco exterior, patio, new kitchen, new furnace; taxes $2,287.
Waldwick 180,000
11 Van Dyke Road
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 41-year-old Cape Cod; fenced yard, w/w carpeting, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,771.
OTHER AREAS Scarsdale, N.Y. 395,000
51 Pilgrim Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 43-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, office, 2-car garage; taxes $10,600.
East Haven, Conn. 124,800  44 Tuttle Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 65-year-old cape cod; living room with fireplace, walk to town, hardwood floors, 50- by 111-ft. lot; taxes $1,590.
Glen Cove, L.I. 211,000
26 Buckeye Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 26-year-old colonial; fireplace, basement, deck, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $3,000.


Talking: Sponsors; New Law On Rentals Is Faulted
A THREE-MONTH-OLD law intended to help co-op and condominum boards in New York State collect rents from a delinquent sponsor's tenants to help pay a building's expenses is being deemed virtually useless by a growing number of lawyers and managing agents.
"It has serious flaws," said Steven Goldman, a Manhattan lawyer and former chairman of the American Bar Association's subcommittee on cooperatives.


Results Plus
TENNIS Edberg to Play Becker Stefan Edberg and Boris Becker, the world's top male tennis players, advanced to the final of the Stockholm Open by beating Americans yesterday.
Edberg defeated Aaron Krickstein, 6-2, 6-2, and extended his winning streak to 21 matches.
Becker bounced back in his semifinal after losing a first-set tie breaker to beat Jim Courier, 6-7 (4-7), 6-3, 6-4.
Edberg's winning streak, dating to the United States Open, ties his personal record, set last year, and is the longest in men's tennis this year.
Edberg, a two-time Stockholm Open winner who was beaten by Becker in last year's final, was broken only once in the 55-minute match on the Globe Arena's fast Supreme Court.
Krickstein's break came with Edberg ahead 3-0 in the second set.
After losing a final to Ivan Lendl in Long Island in late August, Edberg has won three straight titles: the United States Open, the Australian Indoors and Tokyo. (AP)


Making a Closet Bigger and Better
REMODELING a closet to provide additional space or better organization usually calls for replacing the standard single shelf and clothes pole with compartments and multiple poles of varying lengths and heights.
To make a closet more convenient overall, it should have adequate lighting, an appropriate door and maybe even cedar paneling.


Perspectives: The Planner in Jamaica; Carrying the Torch for Downtown Growth
WITH a few swift pen strokes on a paper napkin at Wendy's on Jamaica Avenue in Queens last week, Carlisle Towery demonstrated how competing retailing hubs have carved up downtown Jamaica's historic trading region.
First came the Roosevelt Field and Green Acres malls in Nassau County (two big circles representing trading areas, menacingly encompassing sections of eastern Queens).
Then Kings Plaza in Brooklyn (encircling eastern Brooklyn, with a partial incursion into Queens).
Finally, Queens Center in Rego Park (another circle, lopping off much of northern Queens).


NEW YORK IN THE NINETIES
Yes, there are similarities between 1890 and 1990, but as noted in the article, certainly the level of suffering has increased.
I have lived in New York City almost all of my life and have learned to take certain things in stride.
However, what I find so disturbing is the explosion within the last decade in the number of people living on the edge.
BERT FICHMAN, M.D.
New York, N.Y.


Streetscapes: The Spiegel-Cooper Building; No Restoration in Sight for 'The Big Store'
A FEW years ago, real estate fever was sweeping through the half-dozen giant decaying department store buildings on the Avenue of the Americas between 18th and 23d Streets.
But now the area's temperature has cooled noticeably, as projected restoration projects stall.
The biggest gap between plan and reality is at the Siegel-Cooper department store on the east side of the avenue between 18th and 19th Streets, but for that building it is hardly the first disappointment.


Heidi C. Chen Plans to Wed
Dr.
Tio and Ching Chen of Metuchen, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Heidi Constance Chen to Brett Peter Lauring, a son of Dr.
Lewis and Beverly Lauring of St.
Petersburg, Fla.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Chen, 25 years old, graduated from Yale University, as did her fiance, also 25.
She is a candidate for a law degree from Cornell University.
Her father is the president of Sogo Technology Inc., an engineering consulting and real-estate development concern, in Metuchen.
Mr.
Lauring is studying for a medical degree and a doctorate in cell biology at the New York University School of Medicine.
His mother teaches biology at the Berkeley Preparatory School in Tampa, Fla.
His father is an ophthalmologist in Tampa.


Ins and Outs of 'Guaranteed' Hotel Reservations
A GUARANTEED room reservation, despite its sound of certainty, may not always mean a room in the hotel you originally reserved in.
The guarantee should, however, give you a comparable room in a place that the original hotel will drive you to, and if you have used American Express, Diners Club, Mastercard or Visa for your guarantee, the night should be totally free of cost.
This may not be an ideal arrangement, but it does beat sleeping in the airport.


LAW ON THE FEMINIST FRONTIER
I am afraid that the desire to censor pornography is actually a desire to make sexual abuse disappear like magic.
Censorship is too much like secrecy.
Censorship eroticizes that which is censored.
The prevention of sexual abuse and discrimination and the healing of their effects will come from education, discussion, therapy and laws that make abusive actions illegal, not abusive fantasies.
SARAH CHINLUND SPIELDENNER
New York, N.Y.
ILS&gt;Photo: Catherine A. MacKinnon (Photograph by Donna Terek for The New York Times)


Her Romantic Imagination
To the Editor:
The soap opera version of the breakup of Alfred Chester with his pianist boyfriend that Charles H. Miller relates (Letters, Oct. 6) in response to my essay about Chester is largely the product of the poet Jean Garrigue's overheated romantic imagination.
The breakup was hardly the victory of heterosexual lovers over homosexual imprisonment, as readers may have inferred.


Leslie Arndt and Louis Cavaliere Are Married
Leslie Michelle Arndt, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald Arndt of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday in Sudbury, Mass., to Louis Cavaliere, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Cavaliere of Pine Brook, N.J.
The Rev.
Jay Tichenor performed the Evangelical Lutheran ceremony at the Martha-Mary Chapel.
Mrs.
Cavaliere, 27 years old, is an assistant editor at Blair Press in Boston.
She graduated from Muhlenberg College and received a master's degree in literature from Northeastern University.
Mr.
Cavaliere, 27, is a dining services manager for the Canteen Corporation in Waltham, Mass.
He graduated from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.


Joanne M. Flynn and James P. Silk Are Married
Joanne Marie Flynn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Flynn of Jackson Heights, Queens, was married yesterday in Astoria, Queens, to James Patrick Silk, a son of John W. Silk of Woodstock, Vt., and the late Lois Heidenreich Silk.
The Rev.
Thomas P. Campbell performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Francis of Assisi Church.
Mrs.
Silk, 27 years old, is a production coordinator for WNYW, Channel 5 in New York.
Mr.
Silk, 26, is an editor for "Now It Can Be Told," on WPIX, Channel 11 in New York.
She graduated from Hunter College; he from Bethany College.


The Wizard Of Kansas
PRAIRYERTH
(A Deep Map).
By William Least Heat-Moon. 624 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $24.95.


Jazz Series Turns Focus to Women
ROBERT ARTHURS had several aims when he organized the Women in Jazz series that opens here Friday at the Westchester Conservatory of Music.
First, said Mr.
Arthurs, a trumpet teacher and dean of students and faculty at the school, he wanted to give the "great foremothers" of such contemporary artists as Aretha Franklin their due.


Miss Edwards, A Banker, Wed
Elizabeth Beckham Edwards, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George D. Edwards Jr. of New York, was married to William Leoning Prickett, the son of William Prickett Jr. of New Castle, Del., and Louise Truesdale Leoning of Greenville, Del.
The Rev.
David H. C. Read performed the ceremony at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York yesterday.
Mrs.
Prickett is a client service manager at the Wellington Trust Company in Boston.
She graduated from Williams College, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in management from Yale University.
Her father is the principal of George D. Edwards &amp; Company, New York management consultants.
Her mother, Gail Fletcher Edwards, is the executive director of the Investment Counsel Association of America in New York.
Mr.
Prickett is an associate in the Boston law firm of Testa, Hurwitz &amp; Thibeault.
He received a J.D. from Widener University.
His mother is a retired Delaware State magistrate.
His father is the senior partner in the Wilmington, Del., law firm of Prickett, Jones, Elliot, Kristol &amp; Schnee.


China Executes 35 Drug Traffickers
China executed more than 35 drug dealers today after sentencing rallies attended by thousands of people as part of a campaign to crack down on the nation's growing heroin problem.
The official New China News Agency reported that 35 drug dealers were sentenced to death in the city of Kunming and executed shortly afterward.
About 40,000 people attended the sentencing rally, in which the felons were paraded around and condemned to die.


Kaat Knows Something About Pitchers at the Plate
When Rick Aguilera batted for Minnesota in the 12th inning of the third game of the World Series, he was the first pitcher to serve as a pinch-hitter in the Series since Don Drysdale batted for Sandy Koufax in the second game of the 1965 Series.
Drysdale struck out, but the pitcher who struck him out didn't remember that.
"I didn't know until the other night that he struck out," Jim Kaat said.
"I knew I got him out, but I didn't remember that I struck him out."


Miss Spanierman Has a Wedding
Brooke Slote Spanierman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot Spanierman of Lawrence, L.I., was married in New York last evening to Roberto Ernesto Masolo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Giuseppe Masolo of Milan, Italy.
Cantor David Benedict officiated at the Plaza Hotel.
Mrs.
Masolo, 29 years old, is a lawyer and finance chief of Multicargo U.S.A., the New York branch of an export-import company in Milan.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a J.D. from Fordham University.
Her father owns the Cabot Button and the Brooke-Barry Button companies in New York.
Her mother, Leatrice Slote Spanierman, is the executive editor of Richner Publications, which publishes weekly newspapers on Long Island.
Mr.
Masolo, 30, graduated from the University of Milan.
He owns Giorgio Collection U.S.A., a furniture-design concern in New York.
He also is a partner in Nuova Modern Industria, which designs and makes furniture in Milan.
His father is president of the company.


Sometimes, the Disloyal Are Watched
Two years ago, Sonja Anderson, a chemist at the Hanford nuclear reservation in southwest Washington State, started speaking out about what she believed to be safety problems at the nation's largest storage site for radioactive waste.
She took her concerns to Congress last year.
Then her life turned upside down.
Her house in Kennewick, Wash., was broken into dozens of times and left in disarray, though nothing was taken.
Her phone rang day and night, though the only sound on the receiver was an odd clicking.
A note left on the dashboard of her daughter's car read, "You Are Being Watched."


Stapley Bullard, An Editor, Wed
Stapley Edwards Bullard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger C. Bullard of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Christopher John Russell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Russell of New York.
The Rev.
Richard VanWely performed the ceremony at St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Russell, 26 years old, is a copy editor at Financial Planning Magazine in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University, as did her husband.
Her father is a managing director of Russell Reynolds Associates, a New York executive recruiting firm.
Mr.
Russell, 26, is an affiliate relations coordinator for sports programming at NBC in New York.
His father is the president of FC Funding, a New York investment firm.


Tamsin Furlaud, Manager, Weds
Tamsin Elizabeth Furlaud and Robert Steven Rachofsky were married yesterday at the Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert B. Anderson performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Rachofsky is a marketing manager for American Express Travel Related Services in New York, and her husband is an associate in the law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore there.
She graduated from Brown University and has an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Mr.
Rachofsky graduated from Yale University and received a law degree from Columbia.
The bride is the daughter of Richard M. Furlaud of East Hampton, L.I., and Elspeth B. Furlaud of New York.
Her father is the chairman of Rockefeller University; formerly, he was the chairman and chief executive of the Squibb Corporation and the president of Bristol-Myers Squibb.
Her mother owns 124/Limited Art Editions in New York.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David J. Rachofsky of Berwyn, Pa.
His mother, Dr.
Faith Rachofsky, is an associate professor of radiology at the Medical College of Pennsylvania.
His father is a partner in the Philadelphia law firm of Dechert, Price &amp; Rhoads.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, an article on Oct. 13 about changes in farming on the North Fork quoted Steve Doroski, a potato farmer, incorrectly.
He said the pesticide Temik "polluted the aquifer for a period."
A review last Sunday of an art exhibition at the Fine Arts Gallery at the Southampton campus of Long Island University rendered the artist's name incorrectly.
He was Robert Munford.


Corrections
A listing of cruises on Oct. 13 omitted a condition for voyages calling at Ho Chi Minh City between Jan. 9 and Feb. 29 aboard the Caledonian Star of Salen Lindblad Cruising.
The voyages are subject to approval by the United States Treasury Department.


Term Limits Won't Revitalize Political Parties; Effective Opposition
To the Editor:
"Term Limits Make Sense" (Op-Ed, Oct. 5), in favor of term limitations for members of Congress, seems to me to be off-target.
I have actively participated in a couple of successful campaigns against incumbents.
It's hard work, against long odds.
Those who finance campaigns, especially the political action committees, are reluctant to bet on a longshot in most instances.


'Final Chance' to Leave Zaire, Foreigners Warned
Violent protests against the Government of President Mobutu Sese Seko continued today as Western countries began evacuating their citizens remaining in Zaire.
Belgium, the Central African country's ruler in colonial times, announced what authorities here said was their last series of flights for European nationals.
They listed 10 local airports where people should gather early next week and said they would be allowed to carry only a single suitcase.


Anne M. Valinoti Marries Guy Barile
Dr.
Anne Marie Valinoti and Dr.
Gaetano Raymond Barile, who are both interns in New York hospitals, were married yesterday in Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
Michael Michelson performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Theresa of Avila Church.
The bride, who is 26 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond J. Valinoti of Murray Hill, N.J.
She graduated from Haverford College, as did her husband.
She received her M.D. from Columbia University and is an intern at New York Hospital.
Her father is the credit director at the National Starch and Chemical Corporation in Bridgewater, N.J.
Her mother, Eileen Valinoti, is a nurse for the Scotch Plains (N.J.) Board of Education.
Dr.
Barile, who is 25 and known as Guy, is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Raymond G. Barile of Haworth, N.J.
He received his M.D. from Cornell University and is an intern at Presbyterian Hospital.
His mother, Margaret Barile, is a registered nurse in Haworth.
His father is an attending anesthesiologist at New York Hospital.


Answering The Mail
Q.
A large part of my walnut parquet floor has been covered with a rug and pad for
10 years. I decided to get rid of the rug, but when I picked it up I found that the pad
beneath was stuck to the floor and could
not be removed.
When I try to pull off the pad, it seems to fall apart.
Can you tell me how to remove the pad while at the same time preserving the parquet floor?
A.
It is not clear whether an adhesive was used to cement the pad to the floor, or whether it is simply sticking to the old finish.
Either way, the only way to remove it is to scrape it off, using a long-handled scraper like the ones used to scrape ice off a sidewalk or a wide putty knife.
After that, you will probably have to sand the wood floor to clean off all residue.
If the parquet is not solid wood and is plywood or veneer, you will have to sand carefully to avoid cutting through the top layer of wood.


The Banks That Built Connecticut Are Crumbling Under the Recession
The mid-sized banks that helped build Connecticut, and then basked for decades in the state's image of Yankee industry and wealth, have been smashed by the recession and are not likely to recover soon, if ever, economists and bankers say.
Two years ago, Connecticut looked smugly north toward the troubles of banks in Massachussets.
Now the state is facing some of worst banking problems in the nation: a financial landscape dominated by big money-center banks from out of state, small local banks that are left with little power and a general tightening of lending policies and jobs.


Television Becomes Basic Furniture In College Students' Ivory Towers
Brice Pender arrived at the University of North Carolina with the usual assortment of student gear: posters; dictionaries, thesaurus and a set of Shakespeare plays; microwave, tape deck, pillow embroidered by his grandmother -- and his 19-inch remote-control Magnavox with a VCR.
Students used to leave behind the world of television when they went to college.
Twenty years ago, TV sets tended to be found in dormitory lounges and fraternity and sorority houses, not so much in individual rooms.
Now televisions are nearly as common as stereos.
This generation of undergraduates grew up on "Sesame Street," now in its 23d season, and moved on to MTV.
For them, television has been ubiquitous, and it remains a big part of their lives.


Bridge
Politics, happily, has far less impact on international bridge than it used to.
Fifteen years ago, countries competing in a world championship were required to agree in advance that they would play all opponents.
Some teams that were under government order not to play South Africa, say, or Israel or Taiwan arrived anyway but found ingenious excuses for defaulting.
"Out buying rice" was the explanation of a Thai official for the absence of a player one night.
The recent decision of the International Olympic Committee to readmit South Africa led the World Bridge Federation to do the same at its meetings in Yokohama, Japan, a month ago.
The officials had previously said that they would follow the lead of the Olympic movement.
This means that South African players are almost certain to compete, for the first time since 1980, in the 1992 World Team Olympiad in Salsomaggiore, Italy.


Man Held in Killings in His Home
A Lincoln Park man was charged today with murdering his wife and daughter in their beds, the police said.
Michael Edward Shea, 52 years old, walked into the police station early this morning and told the officers to go to his home, where police found the bodies of Mr.
Shea's wife, Eileen, 48, and their daughter, Susan, 19, law-enforcement officials said.


The Flying-High Dutchmen Trounce Lafayette
Tim Lynch, a junior quarterback, threw for three touchdowns as Hofstra celebrated Homecoming Day by trouncing Lafayette, 60-17, yesterday at Hofstra Stadium in Hempstead, L.I., for its fourth straight victory.


The Death of an Ugly Slogan
Saying he had not caved in over civil rights, President Bush has caved in.
He has agreed to sign a civil rights bill containing all the essential elements of what he had recklessly branded a "quota bill." Mr.
Bush is free to argue otherwise, as with many a compromise, but he has lost, and so has his ugly slogan.
That defeat is the nation's victory.
The Civil Rights Act of 1991, which the Senate and House now expect to pass expeditiously, restores and strengthens the laws against job discrimination that were enacted after decades of struggle only to be gutted in 1989 by several misinterpretations of a hostile Supreme Court.


Corrections
A review of the North Sea Village restaurant in Livingston last week omitted the name of the reviewer.
She was Anne Semmes.


Stamping Instants With Significance
The 35-millimeter view of the world has doubtless affected our perceptions as radically as Cubism and Surrealism have.
The view existed somewhat before the cameras did, but the Leica made it official in the mid-20's, and other cameras soon followed.
The small machines with their capacity to stop movement and to picture interiors in ordinary daylight heightened the public's awareness of transient moments, deepened appreciation of the most common occurrences and objects, and raised expectations about what could and should be seen on the page.
Now that film could be advanced quickly, the moment after the moment could also be trapped, giving the photographer better odds on catching history, revelation and coincidence.
Thus the world began to anticipate that the passing scene would be distilled into its most meaningful events and resonant configurations.


Recalling the Glory Days of The Hudson Dispatch
SURROUNDING a long table at a bar here, 20 journalists were laughing, drinking and telling tales of the old days with a frenzied and sometimes somber energy.
They remembered when they were a group of young idealists working for a small morning newspaper in Hudson County -- and to them that experience seemed on a par with attending the best journalism school.


Happy Days
The long overdue marriage of actor and author that has given Samuel Beckett's language back to the nation perhaps best equipped to speak him has recently ended its ceremonies.
The result?
Irishness will prevail is the conclusion of those involved in the three-week Beckett Festival, the celebration of one of this city's many celebrated literary sons, in which every one of his 19 stage plays was performed.
According to Barry McGovern, star of the festival's "Endgame" and "Waiting for Godot," "There is a particular Irishness we feel, a Hiberno-English sense of syntax and cadence. We have a nationalistic claim on him in some way, and not a bad way." It is, said Mr.
McGovern, who presented his Beckett-inspired solo show "I'll Go On" in New York in 1988, "a good, solid pride."


A Reminder
Standard time resumed a 2 A.M. today. Clocks were set back one hour.


New Thin Spots in Earth's Sun Block
Scientists from 25 countries had a serious message last week for lovers of the summer sun in North America, Europe and the rest of the temperate zone: The sun's summertime rays are even more hazardous than had been thought.
Eighty experts convened by the United Nations said they had found, for the first time, that the earth's protective ozone shield has been significantly weakened over the mid-latitudes in summer, when harmful ultraviolet rays are strongest and therefore most dangerous.
The ozone layer blocks those rays, which can cause cancer and eye cataracts and damage some plants.
Concern about the ozone shield burst forth in the mid-1980's, when scientists detected a wintertime "hole" in it over the South Pole, and substantial weakness in the layer over the North Pole in winter.
To blame were ozone-destroying chemicals, chiefly chlorofluorocarbons, used in refrigeration and air conditioning.
And last April, the Environmental Protection Administration reported that over the previous decade, the part of the ozone layer over the temperate zones in the winter and early spring had been depleted by 4.5 to 5 percent.
The E.P.A. calculated that this would cause 12 million more Americans to develop skin cancer in the next 50 years, with 200,000 fatalities, than if there were no ozone depletion.
The previous forecast was for 500,000 new cancer cases with 93,000 fatalities over the same period.
Now, on the basis of new data from satellites and ground stations, scientists have concluded that in the 1980's, the ozone layer over the mid-latitudes in summer was depleted by about 3 percent in the Northern Hemisphere, and by about 5 percent in the Southern.
They said the higher rate -- roughly triple that of the 1970's --was expected to persist through the 1990's.
Meanwhile, previous advice on exposure to summer sun seems to go double: Cover up when outside.
Wear a hat, long sleeves, sunglasses and sunblock.
And stay in the shade when possible.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
IT wasn't raining; hardly more than an uncertain drizzle was drifting down.
Yet there they were, with their big red umbrellas accompanying each guest from the fenced-in parking lot to the double-bolted steel door.
If it hadn't been Newark, and it hadn't been night, and it hadn't been the splendid old overstuffed hall of the New Jersey Historical Society that the guests were rushing into last month, the presence of the two men would have seemed just an outpouring of graciousness.
Instead, they seemed to reinforce the odd words on the invitation that had sounded like some lonely aunt luring visitors with cookies: secure parking available.


Making a Difference; Equity, Parity And Money
These are painful times for the minority business community.
"Minority businesses almost by definition are small, so the current economy is hurting them," said Harriet R. Michel, president of the National Minority Supplier Development Council, a New York-based network of 3,500 corporate purchasers and 15,000 minority-owned suppliers, vendors and contractors.
"Their cash positions are thin and they are undercapitalized. That makes them extremely vulnerable."


Health Care Costs Are the New Crux of Contract Talks
The question of who will pay for sharply escalating medical costs -- employers or employees -- has replaced haggling over wages as the most contentious issue in labor negotiations, management and union representatives say.
Health care was once a fringe benefit, something to be considered after the critical matter of pay raises.
But as health costs have increased rapidly in the last three to five years, medical benefits have quickly taken center stage in collective bargaining and have often been the prime reason for strikes, many labor experts say.


Against the Odds


Northwestern Upsets Illinois; Vanderbilt Stuns Mississippi
Len Williams set up one touchdown with his passing and scored another on a 4-yard keeper to lead Northwestern to a 17-11 upset of Illinois in a homecoming game played in a driving rainstorm today.
The victory was the first in the Big Ten Conference this season for the Wildcats (2-5 over all, 1-3 in the Big Ten).
Illinois (4-3, 2-2) lost its second straight and was virtually eliminated from the Rose Bowl race.
Illinois was ranked 16th in The New York Times's computer ranking.


Focus: Bakersfield, Calif.; Affordable Homes Help Slumping Oil City
THE growth of this high-desert city has come in lurches over the last decade.
Now it is counting on affordable housing to help propel it into a new role as the latest suburban outpost of Los Angles, 100 miles to the south.
In the mid-1980's, when energy was a growth business, this city close to oil fields and refineries expanded.
The collapse of oil prices later in the decade, however, resulted in the loss of 10,000 jobs, the departure of several major employers and foreclosure for a clutch of office buildings.


Making a Closet Bigger and Better
REMODELING a closet to provide additional space or better organization usually calls for replacing the standard single shelf and clothes pole with compartments and multiple poles of varying lengths and heights.
To make a closet more convenient overall, it should have adequate lighting, an appropriate door and maybe even cedar paneling.


Indian Imagery in Miniatures
THE 54 miniatures from India at Nardin Fine Arts here are untitled and, apart from their dates, all approximate, and places of origin, undocumented.
Thus, they hang beautiful but dumb: art made for a purpose Westernized into art for its own sake.
Although not an uncommon fate for work from ancient or nonliterary cultures, it is especially galling here, for there is no shortage of information on India.
But it is a collection for sale and the owner, Peter Graf, offers a statement extolling only its "wealth of expression" and "diversity."


Review/Pop; Van Halen's Buddy Act Belies Image of Rebellion
Mainstream hard-rock shows get tiresome because they ceaselessly repeat the same images of rebellion.
Those images -- long hair, anti-establishment tirades from the left or the right, and excess in general -- are only vestiges, because rock-and-roll has become so glorified (and potentially lucrative) that no one is shocked any longer by the notion of Johnny leaving home to join a band instead of becoming a lawyer.
So why then would Van Halen sell out the Meadowlands, as it did tonight?
One obvious answer is that the band has made music people have liked for more than a decade, and that Eddie Van Halen, the group's guitarist, is a spectacular improviser who can make something out of the genre.
But the bigger reason might be that the band members all touch each other a lot, and smile.
Though there was plenty of rebellious talk -- the lead singer, Sammy Hagar, gabbed about how neither the past nor the future was important, only living in the present -- it was secondary to the buddy movie the band was playing out.


Reducing Risk of Contaminants
Headlines about various contaminants in the water have raised the consciousness of people about the safety of eating fish they catch from any body of water, fresh or salt.
The health advisories and warnings issued by private groups and governmental agencies regarding fish consumption have ranged between extremes; anglers have reacted similarly, some completely ignore the more alarming advisories, while others develop a paranoia about fish consumption.


Japan Wary as U.S. Science Comes Begging
A Japanese official who oversees some of the nation's high-technology initiatives recently explained the difference between an American "big science" project and an international one.
The first, he said, was a project conceived of and designed by American scientists, built in the United States, and run by Americans.
"An international project has all the same characteristics," he said.
"But it's called 'international' after Congress runs out of money."


Nets Fail to Catch 76ers in Syracuse
Jayson Williams scored 7 of his 25 points as the Philadelphia 76ers closed out the first half with a 20-6 surge en route to a 128-104 exhibition victory over the Nets tonight.
New Jersey chipped away a 22-point Philadelphia lead with a 17-2 surge early in the final quarter, but got no closer than 105-98.


CAMPUS LIFE: Miami-Ohio; Videotape Helps Students Accept Racial Diversity
Jen is the only black student in a classroom at a college that is more than 90 percent white.
She comes from an upper-middle-class family and shares the conservative values of many of her classmates.
Yet when a professor suspects that a student has stolen an extra study guide, Jen is his prime suspect.
He grabs her purse and begins tearing through its contents, accusing her of lying and stealing.
This is one of four scenes in an interactive video created by students at Miami University in Ohio and presented by the university's Cultural Awareness Program.
The video was produced to educate students about racial diversity.


Fair Trade in Mideast Is Peace for Peace
To the Editor:
I remember sitting stunned in front of the television set in 1977 as I watched Anwar Sadat step off the plane in Jerusalem.
A step had been taken that would radically change the relationship between Israel and Egypt.
Sadat, in traveling to the capital of his enemy, showed his commitment to the concept of peace between his country and Israel.
Israel, in welcoming Sadat, showed its commitment.
A commitment to peace is the essential premise on which all peace negotiations stand.


Man Seized in Dispute Is Found in Manhattan
Juan Arujo managed to stay out of trouble, the police said.
He worked two jobs, as a garment worker and as a bartender, to support himself and his mother in the Bronx.
But the 25-year-old Mr.
Arujo is also the nephew of Carlos Coriesa, a high-level New York City drug distributor, the police said.
And when Mr.
Coriesa became tangled in a $1.2 million drug dispute with a New York supplier who imported from the Cali, Colombia, cocaine ring, the supplier began looking for a bargaining chip.


Marlene Sugarman To Wed in January
Marlene Beth Sugarman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sid Sugarman of Delray Beach, Fl., is to be married in January to Robert Martin Scherk, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Scherk of Cedarhurst, L.I.
Ms.
Sugarman teaches piano in Santa Monica, Calif.
Mr.
Scherk is a senior associate at the Los Angeles law firm of Murchison &amp; Cumming.


Speaking From Above
He's not exactly looking for a job, but the way 55-year-old WILT CHAMBERLAIN sees it, if he suited up today he could hold his own on any court in the land.
Not, to be sure, that the 7-1 Chamberlain thinks he would be as good as he was in the 1960-61 season, when he averaged 50.4 points and 25 rebounds a game for the Philadelphia Warriors.
Indeed, Chamberlain, who says in his new book, "A View From Above," that he has turned down at least half a dozen offers over the last 15 years, admits he wouldn't be half as good, just as good as there is today.


BEST SELLERS: October 27, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
2
2
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
3
3
10
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
4
4
4
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
5
5
7
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate a balloon accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force.
6
1
ALL THE WEYRS OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $20.) The final volume in the fantasy series "The Dragonriders of Pern."
7
6
83
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
8
8
33
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
9
7
5
THE DECEIVER, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $22.50.) To escape forced early retirement, Sam McCready recalls his years in the British secret service. (LP)
10
10
8
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $22.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his older brother.
11
11
4
THE DRAGON REBORN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor, $22.95.) The fate of a man doomed to save and then destroy the world; part of the "Wheel of Time" fantasy series.
12
1
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $22.) A lawyer returns to her estranged family to attend a funeral and finds new understanding and love.
13
9
8
FLOWERS IN THE RAIN, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $20.) A collection of short stories, many of them set in Scotland.
14
14
2
HARLOT'S GHOST, by Norman Mailer. (Random House, $30.) World events of the past few decades as seen by three Yankee aristocrats who work for the C.I.A.
15
12
18
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
6
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
2
9
2
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
3
2
9
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies. (LP)
4
3
6
LA TOYA, by La Toya Jackson with Patricia Romanowski. (Dutton, $19.95.) Growing up in a leading show business family, as experienced by Michael Jackson's sister.
5
4
49
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures through the centuries.
6
6
24
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
7
8
19
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
8
5
5
J.
EDGAR HOOVER, by Curt Gentry. (Norton, $29.95.) The career of the longtime Director of the F.B.I.
9 *
10
17
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
10
1
MADONNA UNAUTHORIZED, by Christopher Andersen. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) A biography of the pop star.
11
11
19
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America, past, present and future.
12
12
2
CRUEL DOUBT, by Joe McGinniss. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The ordeal of a North Carolina woman whose son was accused of planning the murder of herself and her husband.
13
15
8
ANNE SEXTON, by Diane Wood Middlebrook. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) The life of a gifted poet who was hampered by mental illness.
14 *
13
14
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
15
16
4
THREE BLIND MICE, by Ken Auletta. (Random House, $25.) How ABC, CBS and NBC lost their dominance of the television world during the 1980's.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
11
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
2
2
IS THIS YOUR CHILD? by Doris J. Rapp. (Morrow, $23.) How children's troublesome allergies can be prevented and treated.
3
3
91
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a fellow named Waldo.
4 *
5
33
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
5
4
50
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
CHAIN REACTION: The Impact of Race, Rights, and Taxes on American Politics, by Thomas Byrne Edsall with Mary D. Edsall. (Norton, $22.95.) A candid, insightful account of the fortunes of the Democratic Party in the last 30 years that finds the party's powerful reform wing detached from reality and its Congressional membership lacking creativity and the will to act.
BERNARD SHAW.
Volume Three: 1918-1950.
The Lure of Fantasy, by Michael Holroyd. (Random House, $30.) Mr.
Holroyd's commanding life of Shaw concludes with the years 1918-50 -- a long, strong period in which what amounted (for him) to decline would have been more than strenuous for anyone else.
ADAM CLAYTON POWELL, JR.: The Political Biography of an American Dilemma, by Charles V. Hamilton. (Atheneum, $24.95.) Mr.
Hamilton's diligent scholarship captures the full life of an exciting man, at once a civil rights pioneer and a buccaneer.
BLUE RIVER, by Ethan Canin. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A novel in acute prose, charged with uncomfortable but inescapable family themes, confronting a good brother with a bad one.
DEADLINE: A Memoir, by James Reston. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of a reporter, editor and columnist of The New York Times who was effective, fair and much admired in each position.
MARIETTE IN ECSTASY, by Ron Hansen. (Edward Burlingame/ HarperCollins, $20.) The unusual subject of this novel -- the progress in devotion of a postulant whose experiences threaten her convent -- is sustained by its clear, polished language.
LITTLE MAN: Meyer Lansky and the Gangster Life, by Robert Lacey. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) An entertaining, credible, detailed biography of the last of America's great Jewish gangsters.


CAMPUS LIFE: Princeton; A Cosmic View From the Bottom Of the World
A Princeton University physics professor and four of his students will spend the next 10 weeks in Antarctica studying the origins of structure in the universe.
The professor, Jeffrey B. Peterson, who left for the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station on Friday with the four students and an engineer, said he would use an ultrasensitive telescope he designed to look for unevenness in radiation that was presumably given off during the Big Bang billions of years ago.


Food Distributed for the Needy in the Bronx


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Glen Cove 211,000
26 Buckeye Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 26- year-old colonial; fireplace, basement, deck, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $3,000.
Kings Park 185,000
37 Dehan Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 22- year-old ranch; fireplace, den, deck, 3-car garage, 0.5 acres; taxes $5,100.
Massapequa Park 158,000
5 4th Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, patio, 1- car garage; taxes $3,700.
St.
James 270,000
26 Great Oak Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 18-year-old ranch; family room, den, fireplace, inground pool, 1 acre; taxes $7,000.
Sayville 194,000
363 Astor Drive  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 20-year-old colonial; dining room, den with fireplace, 2-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,800.
Seaford 175,000
1686 Cherrywood Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old split level; living room with fireplace, finished basement, in-ground pool; taxes $5,700.OTHER AREAS OTHER AREAS Scarsdale, N.Y. 395,000
51 Pilgrim Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 43-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, office, 2-car garage; taxes $10,600.
East Haven, Conn. 124,800  44 Tuttle Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 65-year-old cape cod; living room with fireplace, hardwood floors, 50- by 111-ft. lot; taxes $1,590.
East Brunswick, N.J. 184,000
33 University Road
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old split level; 2-car garage, fireplace, 2 family rooms; taxes $3,940.


Mutual Funds; Taking the Double-Tax-Free Road
Money fund investors hungry for income can increase yields through double-tax-free money funds, where earnings are free of Federal and state taxes.
The chart lists the taxable-equivalent factors for seven of the 11 states where these types of funds are offered, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report in Holliston, Mass.
To compare double-tax-free funds with taxables, multiply the fund's yield by the factor for the appropriate state and tax bracket.
For example, the average New York tax-free money fund was yielding 3.77 percent as of Oct. 15.
After applying the multiplier, the yield for taxpayers in the 28 percent tax bracket works out to be 5.67 percent and for top-bracket taxpayers, 5.92 percent.
This compared with taxable yields of 5.14 percent.


The A.T.&amp; T. Stumble
To the Editor:
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company seems to be experiencing more than a normal number of catastrophic failures of its network.
"A.T.&amp; T.'s Bad Connections" (Forum, Sept. 29) stated that A.T.&amp; T. did not respond well to the most recent network failure in a public relations and corporate communications sense.


Review/Dance; Grupo Tran Chan of Brazil
Grupo Tran Chan made its New York debut on Thursday night at La Mama with a program called "Prosa Caotica." That means "Chaotic Prose," but few of the evening's seven duets and one solo made their points effectively.
This chaotic prose was often merely prosaic.
The most ingenious of the duets was "Shadow," choreographed and danced by the Brazilian group's founders, Leda Muhana and Betti Grebler, both of whom teach dance at the Federal University of Bahia.
Dancing next to each other in unison, each woman might have been the other's shadow.
But when Miss Muhana refused to ape Miss Grebler's movements, she became a rebellious shadow, and the women increasingly declared their independence of each other.


POSTINGS: Seminar on New Roles; Community Planning
Among the many changes ushered in by the recent overhaul of the New York City Charter are new rules on the role of local communities in planning matters.
To help community boards, local civic organizations, elected officials and others prepare for their expanded rights and responsibilities in the planning process, the Department of City Planning will hold an afternoon workshop on Wednesday at Hunter College's School of Social Work in Manhattan.


Sunday Outing; A Spooky Tale Gets Better With Age
The story of the headless horseman of Sleepy Hollow will be told today and on Thursday night as part of the celebration of Halloween at Sunnyside, the home of Washington Irving, and at Philipsburg Manor, its neighbor to the north.
Irving's tale of Ichabod Crane, the itinerant schoolmaster of Sleepy Hollow, and his encounter with the headless horseman will be told in film, by shadow puppets and by a storyteller as part of "Legend of Sleepy Hollow Weekend."


'92 Elections Outlook: Divide and Distract
To the Editor:
Peggy Noonan's "Bum Ride" (Op-Ed, Oct. 15), while not valuable as regards the Clarence Thomas confirmation, was very revealing as to Republican plans for division and distraction in 1992.


If the Numbers Don't Work, Find New Ones
Abraham Briloff, the caustic professor and critic of accounting practices, likes to tell the apocryphal story of a company president asking prospective auditors to add two plus two.
"What number would you like?" replies the winning candidate.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Union
UNION, the third oldest English settlement in New Jersey after Newark and Elizabeth, is returning to its Colonial roots.
Its downtown, comprising Morris Avenue, Chestnut Street and Stuyvesant Avenue, is being "colonialized" under a 15-year-old town ordinance that requiring landlords to install cedar-like shakes on store facades when leasing to new tenants.
Union was settled in 1667 by Puritans, who left Connecticut fearing religious persecution.
Then called Connecticut Farms, the community figured prominently in shipbuilding from the late 17th century, when the Headleys, one of its first European families, established a factory for wooden hoops to hold sails to masts.
The business prospered until steam replaced sail, closing in 1905.


Jeanne Moriarty Is Planning to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas B. Moriarty of East Atlantic Beach, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Joanne Marie Moriarty, to Christopher John Aventuro, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Louis Aventuro of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Both Miss Moriarty, 26 years old, and her fiance, 27, graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
She has a master's degree in reading from Columbia University and is a reading teacher at St.
David's School in New York.
Her father is the general accounting manager for the chemicals division of the Olin Corporation in Stamford, Conn.
Mr.
Aventuro attends Brooklyn Law School.
His father is an ophthalmologist in Garnerville, N.Y.


POSTINGS: 76 Units in the Bronx; Low-Income Housing
The big developers may be sitting on what is left of their money, waiting for home building to resume, but the New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal is still putting up new units for the poor and those with low incomes.
The latest example is in the Crotona Park area of the Bronx, where Eae J. Mitchell Terrace, a six-story, 76-unit brick rental project at 945 East 174th Street, between Hoe and Vyse Avenues, will have a grand opening at 3 P.M.
Wednesday, with the first families moving in soon after.
Financed by the state and sponsored by the Mid-Bronx Desperadoes, the housing advocacy group, the development has 10 studios, 45 one-bedroom and 21 two-bedroom apartments, a 13-space indoor garage -- the rent for a space is $50 a month -- indoor and outdoor recreation areas and a laundry.
The Liebman Melting Partnership was the architect.


Third-Quarter Explosion Leaves Lions in Dust
Yale broke open a close game with 29 third-quarter points this afternoon and went on to a 36-9 shellacking of Columbia at Wien Stadium in upper Manhattan.
The Bulldogs improved their record to 4-2 over all and 2-1 in the Ivy League; the Lions fell to 1-5 and 1-2.
This was the 69th football game between the schools, and Yale was victorious for the 53d time and the 8th time in a row.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CHILDHOOD  By Bill Cosby. Putnam, $14.95.


Lasorda Isn't Looking to Leave; He's Having Way Too Much Fun
Tommy Lasorda, the king of longevity among major league managers, has no immediate plans to alter his employment status.
But the Dodgers may have other ideas.
The announcement last week that Bill Russell would manage their minor league team at Albuquerque next season prompted instant speculation that the Dodgers were initiating a plan that would culminate in only their second managerial transition in nearly 40 years.


Shadow of Go for Wand's Death Hovers Over Breeders' Cup
One year later, Bill Badgett remembers it clearly and sorrowfully: his magnificent filly Go for Wand flying down the homestretch stride for stride with the great mare Bayakoa, then lunging for the Breeders' Cup championship in the final yards, but tumbling when her right front ankle snapped, and crashing to the track just short of the finish line.
"It was," the trainer said, "like a death in the family."


Labor Organizer, Who Pressed Minority Hiring, Is Slain in Queens
A labor organizer for a group that pressured construction companies to hire black and Hispanic workers was shot to death near his Queens home on Friday, and the police said yesterday that they were investigating the possibility that he was slain because of his work for minorities.
Detectives said the victim, Earl Hicks, a 36-year-old organizer for the Queens Minority Coalition, left his home at 131-10 131st Street in South Ozone Park about 7:30 A.M., walked about a block along the sidewalk of his quiet tree-lined street and was suddenly shot, apparently by someone waiting for him.


Big Blue in Retrograde, Green in Ascendance
MYRON is the most enthusiastic Giants fan I know.
He earns his living from his eclectic men's boutique in Brooklyn, but the Giants are his passion.


Casting for Trout in New Zealand
WARMING by the living room fire at the Lake Brunner Lodge on New Zealand's South Island, while children played New Zealand Monopoly, the proprietor, Dave Lefeve, was telling the grownups about the seven-and-a-quarter-pound brown trout he had taken on an Adams dry fly (only a pound bigger than my best of the day).
It seemed then, on that drizzly day last April, that the best trout fishing in the world did not stop when you left the water.
In New Zealand the fishing adventure began over a rack of lamb at Tony Hayes's Tongariro Lodge on the North Island.
On the way in to dinner we saw a monster mounted rainbow trout that had been caught by Jimmy Carter, inspiring his American detractors and admirers to vow to outdo him. (I failed.)


The Hemline Takes a Dive But Carries A Parachute
Pulled by some mysterious, irresistible force, hemlines have been falling.
Is it gravity?
Or fate?
Why now, you say, when women are just beginning to feel comfortable in the shorter lengths?


Tomorrow's Here. Where's Scarlett?
In the beginning (1936), Margaret Mitchell brought forth "Gone With the Wind." In the middle (1939), David Selznick transformed novel to film.
Now, in the fullness of time, comes Alexandra Ripley's "Scarlett," the sequel to the novel.
Can the film be far behind?
From below left, the Scarletts and Rhetts some film makers might cast.


Jaime Federman Is Married to Philip Greenberg
Jaime Federman, a development associate with the International Center of Photography in New York, was married in New York last evening to Philip Jay Greenberg, a photographer for The New York Observer.
Rabbi Marc Schneier officiated at Rockefeller Center.
Ms.
Federman, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is the daughter of Irwin Federman of Saratoga, Calif., and the late Sheila Federman.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley and received a master's degree in arts administration from Columbia University.
Mr.
Greenberg, 33, is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sydney Greenberg of New Canaan, Conn.
He graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.


A Dying Fish May Force California to Break Its Water Habits
A decade ago, Peter Moyle would trawl the sloughs of the Suisun Marsh and haul in nets thick with delta smelt, an unremarkable creature smelling of cucumber and barely three inches long that was of interest only to a few fishery biologists.
Now the delta smelt is all but gone from these brackish waters and is vanishing elsewhere in the Sacramento-San Joaquin River delta, a casualty of California's drought and the huge pumping projects that divert fresh water from the rivers and estuaries in the northern half of the state to the farms and cities of the arrid south.


Boffo Collectibles
To the Editor:
As a collector of pre-1940 movie posters, I was especially intrigued by the article "In Movie Posters, High Concept Is King"  [ Aug. 25 ] .
Perhaps we are entering a renewed era of fine graphics in movie-poster art.


85-Year-Old Prep School Builds for a Coeducational Future
THE Kent School, set on 1,000 acres on the banks of the Housatonic River, is one of the most selective preparatory schools in the nation, training future statesmen, corporate leaders, authors, lawyers and other professionals.
But these days the campus rings with the sounds of a trade school: the staccato sounds of hammering, the whine of a circular saw ripping through plywood, the chip of a mason's chisel, the roar of a cement mixer.
When the $26 million renovation project is complete, by next September, the school, in Kent, will be fully coeducational.
Founded as a school for boys in 1906, it became one of the first schools of its type to open a girls' campus, in 1959, on 650 acres 4 1/2 miles away.
The school has long arranged exchanges of students for classes between the two locations.
But the current building program will consolidate the two schools on the main campus, in the shadow of Mount Algol.


Handel as Historian


STRANGERS AT THE GATE
In response to the letter written by Rosalind Ellis (Letters, Oct. 6, regarding "Strangers at the Gate" by Judith Miller, Sept. 15), yes, the faces of the Eastern Europeans clamoring to gain access to Western Europe are mostly male.
The practice in Eastern Europe is for the males (sometimes the husband, sometimes a son) to go out and find work and lodging first for themselves, and if the prospects look good, then the men will send for their families.
Otherwise, the men return home.
The reason is to prevent uprooting the whole family and subjecting the family to a different culture and an uncertain future.
MARIANE SOKOLEV
Detroit


LAW ON THE FEMINIST FRONTIER
It might be more productive to tackle the problem of pornography not in an exception to the First Amendment, but in a refinement of tort law.
Current tort law requires proof of causation in fact ("proximate cause") and actual damage for the plaintiff to recover.
If MacKinnon could direct her considerable intellectual and analytical skills to refining these tort-law concepts -- and show that pornography causes actual harm, as she contends -- perhaps some inroad could be made on pornography.
STANLEY YAKER
New York, N.Y.


Sinbad in a White Rolls-Royce
THE TRENCH
Volume Two of the "Cities of Salt" Trilogy.
By Abdelrahman Munif.
Translated by Peter Theroux. 554 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $25.


2 in Love With Maria Callas
THE simultaneous desire for and avoidance of relationships is the heart of "The Lisbon Traviata," a bitter comedy by Terrence McNally at the Theater Three Second Stage Theater in Port Jefferson.
The title refers to a Maria Callas recording of "La Traviata" in a production in Lisbon.
The record has just been released, and Mendy, a fanatic Callas fan, is working himself into a frenzy trying to find it.


Jessica Phillips Has Wedding
Jessica Lynn Phillips, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael E. Phillips of Greenwich, Conn., was married last evening in Rye, N.Y., to James Edmunds Lawler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Lawler of Larchmont, N.Y.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel performed the ceremony at the Manursing Island Club.
Mrs.
Lawler, 25 years old, is an assistant showroom manager in New York for Manuel Canovas Inc., a French textiles company.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father is a vice president of Bankers Trust in New York.
Her mother, Susie Phillips, teaches nursery school at the Westchester Jewish Center in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Mr.
Lawler, 29, is a foreign currency options broker at Tullett and Tokyo Forex Inc. in New York.
He graduated from New York University.
His mother, Susanna Lawler, is the director and an owner of the Condeso-Lawler gallery in New York.
His father is a lawyer in New York.


North Korea Digs In Its Heels on Nuclear Inspections
Despite an elaborate international campaign of pressure on North Korea, the Communist Government in Pyongyang appears as determined as ever to become a nuclear military power, and Western diplomats and scientists say they are uncertain what to do about it.
This conclusion has become widely accepted even after the most recent round of direct talks last week in Pyongyang, where Prime Minister Chung Won Shik of South Korea made the latest direct appeal to North Korea to halt its nuclear weapons program and agree to international inspections of its nuclear installations.


Garment Makers Find New Home in Brooklyn
Beyond a sprawling storage room piled high with fabrics and filled with rack upon rack of skirts, scores of mostly Chinese workers attend to the meticulous but mind-numbingly repetitive tasks of attaching zippers and pockets with row upon row of Japanese-made Juki sewing machines.
The scene, at first glance, is familiar to anyone who has ventured into the small garment-making shops that have been a fixture for generations in crowded Chinatown and in commercial buildings in lower Manhattan.
But this garment contractor, called the Metropolitan Fashion Center, neither fits the Jacob Riis-like image of a brutalizing sweatshop nor is it in Manhattan.


The Day to Remember East Carolina
This will be remembered as the day East Carolina's football team proved it deserved to be recognized nationally.
It was also a day on which East Carolina quarterback Jeff Blake reviewed his options and came out a winner.
Blake scored a 2-yard touchdown on an option to the left with 46 seconds left in the game.
He then ran on an option to the right and dived into the end zone for a 2-point coversion to give the Pirates a dramatic 24-23 victory over Pitt here at Ficklin Stadium.


Blacks on TV: Scrambled Signals
When the name Malcolm X begins popping up, however casually, in prime-time entertainment, viewers are getting a signal that television may be gearing up to portray black Americans in their true diversity, their aspirations and their occasional rage.
Blacks can no longer be kept in their standard electronic ghettos.
A couple of weeks ago, Judge Clarence Thomas and Prof.
Anita F. Hill appeared live before the Senate Judiciary Committee hearings into sexual-harassment charges, and the ratings knocked baseball playoffs and lavish mini-series for a loop.
Purely in terms of the medium itself, here was powerfully significant television, its "stars" accomplished black professionals who were clearly an integral part of the American mainstream.


Head of Police Says He Isn't Going to L.A.
The New York City Police Commissioner, Lee P. Brown, has denied a report that he is considering a move to Los Angeles to replace Police Chief Daryl F. Gates, who is to retire next April.
"I have not been approached for any job in Los Angeles," Mr.
Brown said on Friday, speaking after a ceremony at police headquarters.
"I have not talked to anyone about a job in Los Angeles. I have no intentions of going to Los Angeles."


Miss Murphy Weds Mitchell Higgins
Elizabeth Howar Murphy, a daughter of Robert S. Murphy of Washington and Mrs.
George Preston O'Sullivan of New York, was married yesterday in Washington to Mitchell Keith Higgins, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Kenneth E. Higgins of Fairfield, Conn.
The Rev.
William Billow performed the Episcopal ceremony at the National Cathedral.
Mrs.
Higgins, 27 years old, graduated from Hamilton College, as did her husband.
She is a freelance television producer.
Her father is an architect in Washington.
Mr.
Higgins, 27, is a private banking officer at Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York.
His father is a cardiologist in Fairfield.


Teaching Kids How to Ski
Parents often feel uncomfortable trying to teach their children how to ski, according to Peter Ingvoldstad, ski school director at Smugglers' Notch in northern Vermont.
It's easier to leave this task to professionals at ski areas, who teach skiing with games, demonstrations and in play situations that give youngsters confidence on skis.
Mom &amp; Me and Dad &amp; Me is a new program being introduced at Smugglers' Notch to aid parents in understanding what to expect of their children on skis as well as learn how to play the games the kids learn in ski school.
Designed to help 3- to 6-year-olds, the program combines two ski instructors with groups of as many as eight parents and eight children.
One instructor works with the children demonstrating techniques and play situations while the other instructor explains the procedures and skills to the parents.
At the end of the hour-and-forty-five minute session, parents are provided with written reminders and information about teaching and skiing with young children.


Quartet in Dobbs Ferry
CONCERT attractions abound this week, starting tomorrow at 2 P.M. when the Hudson Valley Music Club begins its concert series by presenting the Ridge String Quartet.
This ensemble, winner of both the Fischoff and Coleman Chamber Music Competitions, has chosen an ambitious program, including the Shostakovich F minor and Ravel F major Quartets, plus Terry Riley's intriguingly titled "Sunrise of the Planetary Dream Collection."
"This is our 67th anniversary season," said Claire Untracht, the program chairwoman, "and once again the recitals will be presented in an acoustically ideal chamber music room at 54 Clinton Avenue in Dobbs Ferry."


Now Mandate Testing Babies for Lead
To the Editor:
It is with wary anticipation that I look forward to the Federal Government's lowering of the level of lead considered dangerous for children.
For this to become a commitment to rid ourselves of the silent threat of lead poisoning, this action must be accompanied by financing.


Dance in Review
Lorn Mac Dougal and Alain Le Razer
Merce Cunningham Studio
"Dance and Film" was the name of the program presented by Lorn Mac Dougal and Alain Le Razer on Saturday night.
The two performers, who first danced together in 1973 with Daniel Nagrin's ensemble, offered an evening of dance, film and pieces in which dance and film interacted.


John G. Burnett, 67, an Ex-Head Of Rockefeller Development, Dies
John G. Burnett, former head of the Rockefeller Center Development Corporation and the New York State Urban Development Corporation, died on Thursday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 67 years old and lived in New Canaan, Conn.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Lower Pollution Tied to Prosperity
A study correlating economic development and air pollution by two Princeton University professors has concluded that pollution tends to diminish as a country's economy grows beyond a certain level of prosperity.
The study, which taps international pollution data not readily known to economists, also finds that patterns of United States investment in Mexico do not indicate an effort by companies to avoid American pollution controls.


Reviews/Pop; George Michael's Tour, From Motown to Disco
George Michael may never again reach the pinnacle of popularity he hit three years ago with his multi-million selling album, "Faith." But as a concert performer, he has certainly gained in poise and stamina since his last appearance in New York City.
At Madison Square Garden, where his "Cover to Cover" tour opened a two-night stand on Friday evening, the 28-year-old English singer made a frisky master of revelries, singing and dancing his way through an ambitious program that interwove original songs with his interpretations of mostly well-known contemporary soul and funk hits by others.


A-Plant Halts in Storm
Units 1 and 3 at the Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station automatically turned off today in a storm and officials said lightning could have caused the event.
A plant spokesman said no one was injured and there was no threat to the public.
Officials were investigating the possibility of a lightning strike or other electrical malfunction at the plant's switch yard, 55 miles west of Phoenix.


Councilman Used Fund For Intended Purpose
To the Editor:
I refer to "Primary in Queens Ordered for Tuesday; 2 Elections Are Canceled" (news article, Oct. 17) as once again regarding Noach Dear you editorialize and ignore the facts.


ISRAEL TO REVISE RULES ON SCROLLS
After decades of secrecy and tight research control, the Israeli authorities announced today that they would give scholars free access to photographs of the Dead Sea Scrolls, the ancient Jewish writings considered one of the century's great archeological finds.
But the decision also imposes important restrictions on the use of the scrolls' content and therefore seems unlikely to end a long, bitter dispute among academics over who should have final say over the 2,000-year-old manuscripts.
One American critic of the Israeli authorities quickly labeled the Israeli announcement "a subterfuge" that keeps effective control in a few hands.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Finland's $17 billion of long-term foreign debt has been placed under review by Moody's Investors Service, which might lower the AA1 rating because "the current economic crisis" is "proving deeper than anticipated." Finland's exports to the Soviet Union have collapsed, it said.


Pendleton Unable To Shake Dome Hex
Terry Pendleton ripped a shot to left-center field in the eighth inning tonight, and he thought four years of frustration were about to end.
Lonnie Smith would score from first, the Braves would beat the Twins, and Pendleton would not have to answer any more questions about the Metrodome hex.
He would be part of a team that won a World Series game here.
But something funny happened on the way to Atlanta's first World Series title since 1957.
Smith lost the ball in the lights.
He was trying to steal second base on the pitch and would have coasted home on Pendleton's double, if only he had seen the liner.


Town Builds, but Keeps Its Character
A few years ago, preservationists in this tiny 250-year-old village in the gentle hills of Loudoun County were bitterly at odds with developers who wanted to build houses on the surrounding farmland.
But today, peace appears to have settled upon this picturesque place, thanks to an agreement that has former rivals working together to insure that the village retains its historic character.
"It was a real intense period of time for us," said Richard Clement, a developer who locked horns with preservationists in the late 1980's and who now strongly supports their efforts.
"We were really pleased that after all the wrath and animosity, we were welcomed back into Waterford."


Review/Theater; A Latter-Day Look at Pinter's 'Homecoming'
When Harold Pinter's cryptic family play "The Homecoming" reached Broadway in early 1967, American audiences had fun poring over every line, arguing about what, if anything, its terse lines, elliptical pauses and curious, possibly amoral, sexual gestures could possibly mean.
Such orgiastic textual debate was the fashion of the day, especially in regard to cultural imports with a British accent.
"Blow Up," the Italian director Michelangelo Antonioni's enigmatic film reverie about mod London, had caused similar arguments in the months before the Pinter play arrived, and the Beatles' "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band" would follow a few months later, sending young and old alike into brooding contemplation of how many holes it takes to fill the Albert Hall.


The Name Is Howard, The Game Is Magic
There are few events that could take Minnesotans' minds off the World Series.
Maybe an appearance by Prince would do it, or some magical words from Garrison Keillor.
A 21-year-old whippet from Cleveland with no baseball background and no connection to the state is not supposed to dominate discussions on a chilly October evening.
Not when the World Series is in town.
But last Friday night at the Metrodome, the whippet was Desmond Howard and the event was watching him with a football.
The Michigan receiver and kick returner can seemingly do anything he wants.
Teammates call him Magic.


Ms. Ptachewich, Student, Is Wed
Naomi Ptachewich, a daughter of Isidoro Ptachewich of Miami Beach, and Dr.
Juana Toporovsky-Hoffer of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Benjamin Shapiro, the son of Prof.
Gary Shapiro of Richmond and Lynne Margolies of Lawrence, Kan.
Rabbi Ephraim Kanarfogel officiated at Beth El Synagogue in New Rochelle.


Bridge
Almost all bidding systems deal in high-card points, with an occasional tip of the hat to "body" cards like 10's and 9's.
No system can take account of smaller spot cards, but the play will sometimes hinge on such a card.
Consider the diagramed deal from a Regional Swiss Teams in South Fallsburg, N.Y., a week ago.
South was Maurice Wong of Larchmont, N.Y., playing with Joe Celebucki of Hackensack, N.J.
Mr.
Wong opened a shaky hand as South without the slightest idea that one of his spot cards would prove crucial.
He landed in four hearts, and won the opening diamond lead with the king in the closed hand.


Greek Aide Ousted in Foreign Office Dispute
Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis dismissed his second in command and heir apparent today in a dispute with the Foreign Ministry.
The Cabinet member, Miltiades Evert, served as the Minister to the Prime Minister's Office and was regarded as the unchallenged successor to the Prime Minister.
Mr.
Evert was responsible for coordinating the operations of all Government departments and for supervising areas like intelligence and the media.
He was dismissed Saturday night after implying that the Foreign Ministry had leaked secret information to the opposition Socialists and to the press.


Mary Fernandez, a Student, Is Wed
Maria Francesca Fernandez and Adam Louis Buchsbaum, both doctoral candidates in computer science at Princeton University, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Joseph Goldman officiated at Fiddler's Elbow Country Club in Bedminster, N.J.
Miss Fernandez, 27 years old, is known as Mary; she is keeping her name.
She graduated from Brown University, as did the bridegroom, and received a master's degree in computer science from Brown.
She is the daughter of Francisco Fernandez of Logrono, Spain, and Evangeline Fernandez of Tatum, Cameroon.
Her father is a private English teacher in Logrono.
Her mother is a volunteer in the Peace Corps in Tatum.


At Crossroads, U.S. Ponders Ethics of Helping Others Die
For years, in hospitals, courtrooms and the privacy of family discussions, Americans have been grappling with a painful question: What should be the limits, if any, on medical efforts to keep people alive?
Now with two medically arranged suicides in Michigan and a coming statewide ballot on euthanasia in Washington State, that question seems suddenly to have taken another form: What should be the limits, if any, on medical efforts to help people die?


49ers Beat Eagles, Who Again Are Beaten Up
49ers 23, Eagles 7
PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 27 (AP) -- The San Francisco 49ers are coming back, while the Philadelphia Eagles are going down for the count.


In Excess Keeps Them Guessing
Is he the Horse of the Year?
Or, as D. Wayne Lukas puts it, is he "the darling of New York racing" who has skipped the big ones?
Whatever he is, the 4-year-old Irish-bred colt In Excess is the only one of the 116 horses booked in the Breeders' Cup championships Saturday who has a choice of three races at various distances against the most accomplished specialists in the world: the Sprint at six furlongs, the Mile on the grass and the Classic at a mile and a quarter.
Not only a choice, but a good chance of winning any of the three.


Travel Coalition Turns To Foreign Visitors
More than 60 travel-related companies plan to follow up their efforts to encourage domestic travel in the United States with an advertising campaign to encourage overseas travel to the United States.
At a news conference today in Washington, members of Go USA!
The Travel Coalition, including hotels, airlines and car-rental companies, are expected to discuss details of the campaign, which could begin running in February if sufficient money is forthcoming.
Also participating is the Commerce Department's United States Travel and Tourism Administration.


Islanders Seem to Pick Up New Skills for Big Attack
The hard slap shot from the blue line in hockey is like the lively fastball from the pitchers' mound in baseball.
Although it is not an unstoppable weapon, it is a singular skill that creates an advantage for one team and problems for the opposition.
If you try to stop it and it eludes you, it hurts on the scoreboard.
If you block it, it just plain hurts.
The Islanders have been lacking this important element in recent seasons, but they may have solved part of the problem last week on the Day of Trades that brought defenseman Uwe Krupp from Buffalo.


In Studio Show, Bradshaw Puts Accent on Fun
Terry Bradshaw has always been a character.
Bradshaw's image in the 1970's was the good old boy from Shreveport, La., the long-bombing quarterback of the dominant Pittsburgh Steelers once married to figure skater Jo Jo Starbuck.
That persona has been redefined as the zany-but-cagey analyst for CBS's pre-game studio show, "The NFL Today." He created "Bradshaw Ball" as a whimsical tonic to smash-mouth football.
He giddily holds up cards with the correct pronunciation of names misspoken by host Greg Gumbel.
He explains the X's and O's of a Barry Sanders running play with wild-and-crazy erudition.


Quotation of the Day
"California is not a nice place. It is very dangerous." -- Kevin Starr, a historian at the University of Southern California.  [ B8:5. ]


Warner-Lambert Is Said to Plan Cutbacks
The Warner-Lambert Company, a leading producer of pharmaceuticals and consumer products, is expected to announce a corporate overhaul this week that would be likely to result in a charge against third-quarter earnings.
A report in The Star-Ledger newspaper of Newark on Saturday said that the changes would include layoffs and plant closings.
A Warner-Lambert spokesman, Peter Wolf, declined to comment yesterday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Negotiators from the U.S., Mexico and Canada said they were ready to begin drafting language for a North American Free Trade Agreement.
But even as they swapped smiles and handshakes, they declined to specify any areas in which they had moved closer to agreement.
A senior American trade official acknowledged they had run into roadblocks in some areas.  [ Page D1. ]


Time to Clean the Hospital Mess
J.
Emilio Carrillo, who resigned as head of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation last week, now complains publicly that he was forced from his job, the victim of a "targeted assassination" by City Hall officials.
Mayor Dinkins says he is "exceedingly distressed" by Dr.
Carrillo's remarks and suggests that the corporation's board might hasten Dr.
Carrillo's official departure, now scheduled for March.
He is right to push for a resolution.


Sara Frankel and Craig Marine Are Married
Sara Frankel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Frankel of San Francisco, was married there yesterday to Craig Marine, a son of Elizabeth Marine of San Francisco and Gene Marine of Berkeley, Calif.
Judge Betty B. Fletcher of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit performed the ceremony at the Hamlin School in San Francisco.


Higher U.S. Cost Is Seen In New Auction Rules
Changes announced last week to broaden participation in Treasury auctions will probably not have a noticeable impact on the quarterly refunding auctions next month, some analysts and Wall Street executives say.
But they add that the changes in the auction rules, in conjunction with other shifts under consideration, could drive up the Government's borrowing costs in the future.


In Harlem Race, Big Name vs. Political Clan
A hastily scheduled special primary today to pick a Democratic candidate for a City Council seat could be the last act of a political drama that has been fought in eastern Harlem over the last few months with all the convolutions of a dynastic saga and the nastiness of a street fight.
The two-candidate runoff pits an old-fashioned political machine, battered in recent days by corruption allegations, against a handsome young outsider with a name so famous in Harlem that a major avenue bears it.
An Appellate Division panel last week ordered the special election because the Sept. 12 primary was too close to call after a court-appointed referee found more than 700 irregularities in ballots cast.


Poland Elects a Fragmented Legislature
Poland held its first fully free parliamentary vote since World War II today and elected a fragmented legislature, exit polls showed, with the balance of power held by parties that campaigned for easing the country's economic reforms.
The vote appeared to reflect a restless dissatisfaction, with seats divided evenly among peasant, religious, nationalist, Communist, center-right and center-left parties.
Voter turnout was estimated at only 40 percent.


INSIDE
Mobutu Vows to Keep Power
President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire vowed to stay in power despite growing opposition.
Burning and looting have brought chaos to the country's mining region.
Articles, page A10.
Looser Grip on Scrolls
The Israeli organization controlling access to the Dead Sea Scrolls issued new guidelines that will expand their availability for scholars.
Page A3.
Giants Fall to Redskins
After rolling to a 13-0 halftime lead, New York couldn't score again and lost to undefeated Washington, 17-13, SportsMonday, page C1.


Brady Sees Sign of Growth
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said today that the nation's economy was not recovering "as strongly as it should," but that economic data to be released this week would indicate that the recession was technically over.
In a television interview on the CBS News program "Face the Nation," Mr.
Brady acknowledged that the White House viewed President Bush's recent decline in public opinion polls as a serious problem.


THE MIDDLE EAST TALKS: Israel's Anxiety; One Goal Seems to Be to Avoid Blame For a Failure of Madrid Conference
The most cynical assessment is that Israel's primary goal at the Madrid peace talks this week is to avoid having to absorb the blame should the conference fall apart.
Across the political spectrum, many Israelis suspect that that is probably the most realistic view as well .


A Coast-to-Coast Betting Pool
There are fans who thought this day would never come: a nationwide co-mingling of the betting pools.
But starting Thursday, fans at tracks and off-track betting operations in 29 states can start putting down bets on the Breeders' Cup National Pick 7.
The seven races are next Saturday at Churchill Downs in Louisville, Ken.


Cosby Sidesteps Networks in Big TV Deal
The biggest network television star of the last decade will soon walk away from network television.
Bill Cosby -- whose weekly comedy series on NBC, "The Cosby Show," was the highest-rated television series of the 1980's -- will be seen starting next fall in a new series, "You Bet Your Life," a revival of the classic Groucho Marx game show.


Police Suicide Is Delicate Topic of Film
Jim McKenny was a New York City Emergency Services officer who was able to save other people's lives but could not save his own.
The normally ebullient officer had always been in love with his job and life, but he seemed to be wearing down.
One evening, he momentarily seemed to come out of his depression.
As he and his wife, Carol, were putting on their coats to go out, their favorite song came on the radio and he took her in his arms to dance.
They danced in the living room, with their coats on, until the song was over.


Essay; B.C.C.I. and Sununu
On July 23, acting on a tip from an informant familiar with the political reach of B.C.C.I., I posed this question to White House counsel Boyden Gray: Did John Sununu have any dealings with B.C.C.I. or its subsidiaries?
Mr.
Gray checked and called back promptly: "No. A flat denial." Accordingly, I wrote nothing; an unequivocal denial relayed through the President's attorney squelches a rumor.


Breaking Ranks for Redskins
The Washington audience for the Giants-Redskins game was expected to be so big last night that the CBS affiliate in Washington gave up its rights to televise the last game of the World Series in order to carry the football game.
Of course, the station, WUSA-TV, did not know when it opted for the Redskins game that there would definitely be a seventh Series game.


Marjorie Joy Tananbaum Is Married
Marjorie Joy Tananbaum, the New York marketing research associate for The Los Angeles Times, and Howard Mark Gitten, an associate at the New York law firm of Blum Kaplan, were married yesterday at the Woodbury (L.I) Country Club by Rabbi Jacob Friedman.
Mrs.
Gitten, 32 years old, graduated from American University and received an M.B.A. degree from Pace University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliott Tananbaum of Commack, L.I., Her father is a senior partner in the Commack law firm of Tananbaum &amp; Sibener, where her mother, Marilyn Tananbaum, is the office manager.


Twins Win Win World Series With 1-0 Victory in Game 7


Recognizing the Minority Market
Major league baseball, fighting the perception that it is an exclusionary sport, has turned its attention to marketing the game in a way to attract more minority-group members.
Citing an internal study, Commissioner Fay Vincent said, "There's still a perception that baseball is a white person's game and one reason is because there aren't that many blacks or Hispanics in high positions and the game isn't marketed in certain areas."


Joan R. Barfield Married on L.I.
Joan Roberts Barfield, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gene T. Barfield of Bethel, Conn., was married yesterday to Robert Blair Grune, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George V. Grune of Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
Annette H. Nielsen, a Congregational minister, officiated at the United States Merchant Marine Memorial Chapel in Kings Point, L.I.
The bride, 33 years old, is the executive vice president of Creative Travel, a tour operator in Westport.
She attended the University of Connecticut.
Her father is a program analyst for the International Business Machines Corporation in Milford, Conn.


Upper West Side Journal; Subterranean Throne: A Seat Worth Tussling For
It is severe and wacky, a thing of bars and pipes, with feet bolted to the downtown platform and a high straight back topped by a chain of squares in disarray.
A throne has taken up residence in the subway station at 116th Street and Broadway, prompting double takes from New Yorkers who thought they had seen everything.
People often look at it, touch it and sit in it, whatever it is, while they wait for a train.


Violence Kills Dozens in Zaire Mining Town
Burning and looting have claimed dozens of lives and shut down mining operations in this mineral-rich part of southern Zaire, dealing a severe blow to the nation's economy, diplomats and others here said today.
Diplomats estimated that 31 people in the area have been killed since the violence that has troubled the capital, Kinshasa, spread last Monday to mines in Shaba Province and to Lubumbashi, a city just north of the border with Zambia that is the headquarters of the state-run mining company Gecamines.


Capitalizing on the Thomas Fallout
Interest groups, officeholders and others in Washington are searching for ways to take advantage of the continuing fallout from Justice Clarence Thomas's rancorous Supreme Court confirmation hearings.
Fund-raisers and strategists have begun advertising campaigns, sending out solicitation letters to regular contributors and philosophizing aloud to women, black voters and anyone who writes checks to political campaigns about the likely impact of the Thomas hearings on the issue sexual harassment.


Redskins Overcome Poor Field Position
For a while tonight, it appeared the Giants had been spying on the Washington Redskins' workouts.
The Giants were able to minimize everything Washington had been doing this season -- everything, that is, except winning.


Northwestern Harvests Its Vintage '91 'Grapes'
The Northwestern players and coaches were sullen and muted during the week leading up to their homecoming game against Illinois last Saturday.
Football was not much fun.
They had been forced by the university's athletic administration to play a home game the previous Saturday in Cleveland Stadium against Ohio State for the greater gate receipts.
Most in that crowd of 73,830 spectators rooted for the Buckeyes, who won, 34-3.


Behind Its Mountain Walls, Kashmir Wages Vicious War
Every morning, as the wail of the muezzin echoes through the narrow streets of this city, Gulam Nabi Khayal polishes his eyeglasses, collects his notebook and opens his newspaper.
And each morning, over sweet, milky tea, he records the day's death toll: 19 one day, 31 the next, 7 the day after.
Mr.
Khayal is one of the few journalists remaining here and his notebook charts the ebb and flow of a war hidden by mountains, by remoteness, by what the people here believe is an indifference on the part of the world beyond.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Clients See Better Service From Agencies and Media
THE relationships of American advertisers with their advertising agencies and the media are improving, the departing chairman of the Association of National Advertisers says, as agencies and the media rediscover that "their focus has to be on one thing -- how to build business for their clients."
"If the clients' business prospers, all prosper," Philip Guarascio, the executive in charge of corporate marketing and advertising for the General Motors Corporation and the association's departing chairman, said in a telephone interview before the group's 82d annual meeting and business conference.
The conference, at the Arizona Biltmore Hotel in Phoenix, began yesterday and will continue through tomorrow.


Review/Music; 'Pique Dame,' Concert or Opera?
Operas in concert form have traditionally been acts of necessity and leaps of faith.
Stage pieces difficult to produce or cast for extended runs -- or else arbitrarily avoided -- enjoy an isolated chance to testify to their musical worth.
Listeners become watchers in their minds, their imaginations working from a dramatic shorthand of orchestra and singers dressed in workaday concert clothes.
The Boston Symphony brought Tchaikovsky's little-produced but eminently worthy "Pique Dame" to Carnegie Hall on Saturday night.
"Concert version" seemed an inappropriate description for what went on, "semistaged" an understatement.
The Boston method began with a small slightly raked stage space elevated above, and situated behind, the body of musicians.
The arrangement served both sight and sound: first presenting a visual metaphor for raised stage and lowered pit and second allowing voices to project over the orchestra instead of competing with it on an equal level.


Hunter Debates What to Teach About Diversity
The tortured national debate over the cultural biases of the American college curriculum has swept east to New York City, where professors at Hunter College are battling over a far-reaching proposal to require three courses -- on women, American minorities and non-Western civilizations.
Both in its scope and content, the Hunter plan may be among the most ambitious in the nation, stretching beyond curricular requirements that have shaken two California campuses.
At Stanford University, the turmoil led to an expansion of the great authors included in what was once the freshman Western culture course, and at the University of California at Berkeley, a single course in "American cultures" was ordered.


Melissa Gold, 47, Aide For California Causes
Melissa Gold, who was active in various civic causes, including help for earthquake victims in San Francisco and was a companion of Bill Graham, the rock music impressario, died Friday in the helicopter crash near San Francisco that killed Mr.
Graham and his pilot.
She was 47 years old and lived in San Francisco.
Mrs.
Gold was also a member of a prominent East Coast family.
Her father, Joseph Richardson Dilworth, is a former chairman and chief executive officer of the Rockefeller Group in New York City.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Magazine Notes; Despite Gloom, Start-Ups Are Booming
IS anyone starting up a magazine these days?
Keep reading.
What are the chances of survival?
Ask Samir Husni.
Mr.
Husni, the head of the Magazine Service Journalism Program at the University of Mississippi whose annual Guide to New Magazines has become an industry bible, has just completed an analysis of all magazines started from 1985 through 1989.


Dance in Review
Alpha Omega Theatrical Dance Company
Marymount Manhattan Theater
The Alpha Omega Theatrical Dance Company painted portraits in movement on Saturday night.


CHRONICLE
Ten years ago, MIKHAIL BARYSHNIKOV dismissed GELSEY KIRKLAND, the prima ballerina, from the American Ballet Theatre for missing too many rehearsals.
Now he is gone from the company and she is back, keeping the next generation of dancers in line with teaching and coaching.
JANE HERMANN, co-director of the American Ballet Theatre, decided recently that it was time for Ms.
Kirkland, now 38 years old, to take up teaching.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Amphenol Corp., 16 million Class A shares. Lehman Brothers.
Autocam Corp., 750,000 shares. First of Michigan.
Bet Holdings Inc., 4.25 million Class A shares in initial public offering.
First Boston.
California Biotechnology Inc., two million shares. Hambrecht &amp; Quist Group.
Collective Bancorp, 1.3 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Custom Chrome Inc., 2.5 million shares. Prudential Securities.
Damon Corp., 6.2 million shares. Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Dateq Information Network Inc., 800,000 shares. Chicago Corp.
Elscint Ltd., six million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Gendex Corp., one million shares. Robert W. Baird &amp; Company.
Glycomed Inc., two million shares. Montgomery Securities.
Grancare Inc., 2.7 million shares. Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
Grupo Video Visa S.A., up to 2.3 million American depositary receipts, each representing 20 series B shares.
Inverlat International.
Guaranty National Corporation, 6.25 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Hoenig Group Inc., 1.5 million units (each containing 2 shares, 2 warrants).
J.
E.
Sheehan &amp; Company.
Immune Response Inc., 1.3 million shares. Montgomery Securities.
JCI Inc. (Jenny Craig), five million shares. Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Marquette Electronics Inc., 1.96 million shares. Robert W. Baird.
National Rehabilitation Centers, 1.2 million shares. Kidder, Peabody.
Sovereign Bancorp, 2.5 million shares. Salomon Brothers.
Supercuts Inc. 1.75 million shares. Dean Witter Reynolds.
TNC Media Inc., 800,000 shares. R. G. Dickinson.
Utilicorp United Inc., five million shares. Smith Barney, Harris Upham.
Vencor Inc., 1.3 million shares. Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.  (Source: MCM CorporateWatch)


No Debt, No Money
To the Editor:
"Money Supply Doesn't Tell All" (Economic Scene, Oct. 9) breathes new life into a favorite cliche of financial writers, a cliche that should have been given a decent burial long ago.


Abroad at Home; Winners And Losers
The agreement on a new civil rights bill has led many to weigh who won and who lost, President Bush or the senators who have been pushing the bill over his objection.
But few have noticed the one institution that unquestionably ended up with egg on its face: the Supreme Court.
The agreed legislation would overrule six recent Supreme Court decisions that narrowed the scope of civil rights laws.
Has there ever before been such a multiple legislative rejection of the Court's decisions in a field of law?
If there has, I do not know of it.


Charlie O. Finley Is at It Again
You know how you always thought the pebble grain on a football makes it easier to grip?
Not so, says that eminent icon-smasher CHARLIE O. FINLEY, who unsuccessfully tried to get baseball to adopt an orange ball.
The former owner of the Oakland Athletics asks, referring to the football, "Why not invert the pebbles and make the ball more grippable?" He has done this and his ball has been approved by high school and college federations. . . .
"Dear Mr. President," the letter starts.
"Perhaps you have lost our phone number." It is from MILT KANTOR, owner of the Dayton (Ohio) Wings, who is trying not to sound miffed that his team hasn't received a congratulatory call from the White House.
The Wings recently captured the World Basketball League title.
That's the league for players no taller than 6 feet 5 inches.
Perhaps the President simply overlooked it.


In Turmoil, Isuzu Looks to G.M.
As if the General Motors Corporation does not have enough troubles these days, its closest partner in the Japanese auto industry, Isuzu Motors Ltd., is running a huge operating loss, appears ready to jettison its president and has reportedly turned to G.M. for financial help.
The troubles at Isuzu have been brewing for months.
In recent days, as the giant Tokyo Motor Show started and executives from G.M. poured into Tokyo, the industry has been abuzz with talk that Isuzu is in desperate need of a bailout.


Jeffries Aides Warns CUNY On Sanctions
A lawyer representing Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. yesterday called a proposal by City University of New York leaders to limit the professor's term as a department chairman "unconstitutional," and said it would be challenged in court if adopted by the university's board at a meeting today.
The lawyer, C. Vernon Mason, said that the proposal to reappoint Dr.
Jeffries chairman of City College's Afro-American Studies Department for one year, subject to review in June, instead of to the traditional three-year term, would be an "unprecedented" effort "to put a chairman of a department in effect on academic probation" for remarks he made outside the classroom.


For Smoltz and Morris, History in Blank Verse
The odds of two teams' reaching the seventh and final game of the World Series are relatively slim.
Only 32 of the 88 Series thus far have played out to the maximum limits.
The chances of a pitching duel of the sort waged by Atlanta's John Smoltz and Minnesota's Jack Morris tonight are even slimmer.
In fact, the two right-handers accomplished something that Koufax could not against Kaat, Gibson could not against Lolich, Hurst could not against Darling.
And that's carry a nail-biting, nerve-racking double shutout through the seventh inning.


Mexican Trade Pact Advances
Four months into their discussions on a North American Free Trade Agreement, negotiators from the United States, Mexico and Canada said today that they were ready to begin drafting treaty language.
But even as they swapped smiles and handshakes, they declined to specify areas in which they had moved closer to agreement, and a senior American trade official who privately discussed the talks acknowledged that in some areas, they had run into roadblocks.


Uncertainty on Gorbachev Gives New Twist to Meeting With Bush
For the first time in the long history of East-West summit-level diplomacy, the American President will go to meet the Soviet President in Madrid on Tuesday uncertain whether the man across the table has real power to represent his country or is little more than a figurehead.
The talks between President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev are not even planned as a full-scale summit conference, a far cry from past meetings that rewrote Europe's map, forged arms control agreements, provided the setting for cold war confrontation or ushered in warmer phases in Soviet-American relations.


Economic Watch; Various Culprits for Ailing Recovery
It was forecast to be the recession that Washington could safely ignore -- a stumble in response to gulf war jitters, then a graceful return to growth with hardly a break in stride.
But somebody apparently forgot to tell Corporate America, whose efforts to regain financial stability and to become more competitive have slowed the recovery to a crawl.
Bad news keeps trickling in: falling auto sales, depressed lending activity, rising unemployment insurance claims.
And last week the Federal Reserve reported flat manufacturing output and flatter moods across the economy.
A plausible guess now is that it will take another year to erase the effects of national recession -- and at least five more to complete the recovery in the badly depressed Northeast.
Two Reasons Cited
What went wrong?
Americans are used to seeing the economy bounce back after recession.
But the sharper business swings of the past are not useful as a benchmark for this recovery for two reasons, says Neal Soss at the First Boston Corporation.
Mild recessions like the one we have just had, he argues, are generally followed by weak recoveries because as companies scramble to increase inventories, the built-in kick is smaller.


Baker Defends Waiver of Sanctions Against Israel on Missiles
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today defended President Bush's decision to waive Congressionally mandated sanctions against Israel for violating an international convention aimed at preventing the proliferation of missiles in third-world countries, saying the Administration had been "following the law very, very specifically."
Under an agreement first disclosed today in The Washington Post, the Administration waived sanctions against Israel in exchange for an Israeli pledge to stop violating the Convention for the Limitation of the Spread of Missile Technology, which was adopted by the United States and other nations in 1987.
Sanctions against violators of the convention were approved by Congress last year.


Game 7 Was a Gift From Above
NOTHING was happening, nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing but increasing tension.
The zeros on the scoreboard last night in the Metrodome were dropping inning after inning after inning, as if a row of hens were working overtime.
It appeared that the best and concluding moments of this baseball season -- maybe the best of any baseball season -- might last forever.
This was the seventh game of the World Series, and, after three, four, five, six, seven innings, nobody could score.
People tried: The Minnesota Twins got a runner to third in the third inning; the Atlanta Braves did likewise in the fifth.
But nothing happened.
The pitchers, Jack Morris of the Twins and John Smoltz of the Braves, were matching sets of excellence, bookends of bravado.


Continental Agrees to Sell Its Micronesia Air Routes
Continental Airlines said yesterday that it had reached an agreement to sell its Micronesia routes to a Hong Kong investment group for $270 million in cash.
The sale would strengthen Continental's cash position and improve the carrier's chances of successfully reorganizing and emerging from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
The deal would require the approval of Judge Cornelius Blackshear, who is overseeing Continental's reorganization in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York.


Agency Finalists Picked For Lottery and Scotch
Finalists were named last week in two closely watched reviews for multimillion-dollar accounts, with winners to be named by the end of the year.
The Illinois State Lottery selected five agencies from 14 that submitted written proposals for the $19 million account.
They are: the incumbent, Bozell Inc.; Bayer Bess Vanderwarker; Foote, Cone &amp; Belding; Ogilvy &amp; Mather, and Tatham/RSCG, all in Chicago.


Marian Garber Wed
Marian Ruth Garber and Keith Eric Marlowe were married yesterday at the Princeton (N.J.) Jewish Center.
Cantor Robert Freedman officiated.
The couple are associates in New York law firms, she at Lane &amp; Mittendorf and he at Reid &amp; Priest.


Quite Simply, Giants Aren't Good Enough
IN the hours before last night's game, Joe Gibbs was portrayed as "never more confident" by a member of the Redskins' front office.
As if the coach knew that the Giants couldn't cope with his offense and defense, that the Redskins would streak to an 8-0 record and virtually eliminate the Giants' distant hope of somehow finishing first in the National Conference East.
But as the Giants jumped to a 10-0 lead in the first quarter, the Redskin offense produced one yard of net offense.
One yard.


Bills Seek More Competition in Electricity Market
Access to the power transmission grid, a key element of the utilities' monopoly control of the nation's electric system, is up for grabs for the first time in the history of the industry.
As part of the National Energy Strategy package moving through the Congress, a House subcommittee has approved provisions that will require utilities to carry electricity from independent buyers across the utilities' territory to independent sellers, even if the utilities lose electric sales as a result.
The version of the bill that the Senate is planning to take up this week does not have the same provision.


McVie Wrote the Book On Woes of a Franchise
Coach Tom McVie of the Devils has no sympathy for George Kingston, the coach of the expansion San Jose Sharks.
McVie coached three expansion franchises in six years and suffered a great deal through humiliating losses, the kind Kingston is experiencing now.
"I don't feel sorry for him," McVie said about Kingston shortly after his Devils handed the Sharks their ninth consecutive loss Saturday night.
"He's only gone through 11 games with an expansion team. I went through three franchises." Kingston has actually gone through 12 games with the Sharks, losing 11, but McVie's point was clear.


Gibbs Comes in From Cold
The Giants and the Redskins met last night in an atmosphere that evoked the grand old days of spydom.
Last week, Coach Ray Handley moved the Giants' practice into Giants Stadium because, he said, he had been tipped that the practice field outside the stadium could be seen from a hotel near the Meadowlands Sports Complex.
Handley needn't have worried, said Redskins Coach Joe Gibbs.
On Saturday, Gibbs confessed that he had only once been party to obtaining films of an opponent in less than an honorable way.


Accounts
*
Dockers men's casual footwear, an addition to the Levi Strauss &amp; Co. apparel line, to Griffin Bacal, New York, for a fall 1992 print campaign.
The shoes will be produced and marketed by Johnston &amp; Murphy Co., which signed a licensing agreement with Levi Strauss for the Dockers name.
Billings were not disclosed.


CHRONICLE
JOSEPH A. CALIFANOhas come up with a new answer to a question that intrigues students of the pivotal political year of 1968: Did Lyndon B. Johnson sabotage Hubert H. Humphrey's chance of succeeding him?
Mr.
Califano, who was often at President Johnson's side from the time he awakened until he went to bed during his second term, believes he did not work directly to undermine Mr.
Humphrey's campaign, The Associated Press reports.


Congress, Spiraling Downward
It's scarcely news that Americans are disenchanted with Congress and politicians generally.
It
is
news when two-thirds of the people think that politicians are corrupt.
According to a New York Times/CBS News Poll taken after the House banking scandal and the Senate's embarrassing Clarence Thomas hearings, only 29 percent of Americans say they like the way Congress is handling its job.
More devastating was the response when people were asked whether politicians generally were "financially corrupt" or "honest." Only 34 percent said: honest.


Review/Music; Eisenstein's 'Nevsky,' Ozawa and The Boston
The ice battle in Sergei Eisenstein's "Alexander Nevsky" is unforgettable for anyone who has seen the 1938 film: the expanse of the frozen lake; the white Raven rock standing like an enormous skull overlooking the stillness; the Russian soldiers straining to see movement on the horizon.
When the Teutonic knights finally emerge out of the bleak whiteness, mounted on horses and riding in knife-sharp formation, their evil onslaught both releases and heightens the tension.
Not until the ice cracks under the weight of their armor, drowning them as if in an icy version of Exodus's Red Sea, is the tension released and turned to horror at the sea of bodies lying dead upon the ice.
But anyone who saw the film on Friday night at Avery Fisher Hall will not soon forget the
sound
of these scenes either: the desolate drone of the strings with rising cello heartbeats; the brass pulses, metallic and anxious; the sighs and slow shifts in harmony.
The instruments suggested the sound of distant, thudding hooves or the clank of armor heard across a great cold expanse.


Europe's Shifts on Trade May Help World Talks
The agreement last week to create a 19-country common market in Europe, combined with a recent shift in Germany's position on agriculture subsidies, means that a broad international agreement lowering trade barriers worldwide may well be reached by February, senior European and American officials say.
The sticking point in the five-year-old world talks on freeing trade has been agriculture, with the United States and other countries with internationally competitive farm economies refusing to strike a deal unless the 12-member European Community substantially reduces its agricultural export subsidies, import quotas and direct farm subsidies.


Chief Gates Is Coy on His Pledge to Quit
The search for a new chief of the Los Angeles Police Department is well under way, but the incumbent, Chief Daryl F. Gates, is still fighting back, calling his critics a lynch mob and asserting that the city might have to "drag me out and try to fire me."
After a highly critical report on the department issued last July by an independent commission, Chief Gates announced he would step aside, as the commission recommended, in April.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  3 Points for LaFontaine Pat LaFontaine, traded by the Islanders to the Buffalo Sabres on Friday and who signed a multiyear contract with his new team hours before game time last night, scored one goal and assisted on two others to lead the Sabres to a 5-1 victory over the Hartford Whalers in Buffalo.
LaFontaine opened the scoring with a power-play goal at 19 minutes 17 seconds of the first period, earning a standing ovation.
He also assisted on Dave Andreychuk's second-period goal and a third-period score by Aleksandr Mogilny. (AP) TENNIS  Becker Ends Drought  Boris Becker ended a nine-month victory drought yesterday, outlasting Stefan Edberg in a serve-and-volley duel to win the Stockholm Open.
Becker won, 3-6, 6-4, 1-6, 6-2, 6-2, for his second straight triumph at Stockholm.
The second-ranked German, who trounced Edberg in last year's final, won his first tournament since the Australian Open in January.
Edberg, who had a 21-match winning streak that started with the United States Open, dropped five out of his last six service games.
Becker, playing only his second tournament after the United States Open, where he suffered a thigh injury, broke Edberg at love in the final game, ending the match with a perfect lob. (AP) Graf Defeats Garrison: Steffi Graf won 9 of the last 10 games to beat Zina Garrison, 5-7, 6-4, 6-1, in the final of the indoor tournament in Brighton, England.
The victory earned the world's second-ranked female player her seventh title of the year and her fifth in the Brighton event.
After winning the first set, Garrison broke for a 4-3 lead in the second.
But Graf responded by winning six straight games to even the match at one set apiece and take a 3-0 lead in the deciding set.(AP) GOLF  Fast Finish for Allem  Fulton Allem of South Africa made up seven strokes yesterday with a back nine that featured five birdies and emerged from the pack to win the Independent Insurance Agents Open by one shot over Tom Kite, Billy Ray Brown and Mike Hulbert in The Woodlands, Tex.
Allem had a final-round 66 to take advantage of stumbles by Brown and tour rookie Jeff Maggert -- who was the leader after each of the first three rounds -- while holding off a charge by Kite.
Kite hit the flag on his second shot on the par-4 18th hole.
His ball bounced within inches of the cup and rolled about 10 feet away.
Then he missed the putt that would have sent the tournament to a playoff.
It was the first American tour victory for the 34-year-old Allem, who now plays out of Heathrow, Fla. (AP) Brodie Finally Wins His First: John Brodie, who made a smooth transition from National Football League quarterback to television analyst to professional golfer, needed only a 4-inch birdie putt on the first playoff hole to beat Chi Chi Rodriguez and George Archer for his first Senior PGA Tour title, the Security Pacific Senior Classic.
The victory in Los Angeles, which was worth $75,000, ended a drought that covered 7 seasons and 157 tournaments on the 50-and-over circuit for Brodie, 56, who turned pro in 1961 but never played in a regular tour event.
Brodie had a final-round 68 for a 54-hole total of 13-under-par 200 over the 6,307-yard Rancho Park municipal course.(AP) Davis Holds Off Faldo to Win: Rodger Davis of Australia fought off a strong bid by Nick Faldo of England yesterday and won the Volvo Masters tournament in Sotogrande, Spain, by one shot.
Faldo closed with a three-under-par 68, but came up short as Davis held on with a par 71. (AP) RUGBY  Australia in Title Game  Australia defeated New Zealand, 16-6, yesterday in Dublin in the World Cup semifinals.
Australia will face England for the championship Saturday at Twickenham, England. (AP) DOG SHOW  The Top Dog, Again  The top winning Pekingese in the country, Ch.
Jo-Li Wind in the Willows, yesterday was named best at the 59th annual Progressive Dog Club show at the Days Inn in Manhattan.
The event is the only one in the East held only for toy breeds.


CHRONICLE
SENATOR JAY ROCKEFELLER, a West Virginia Democrat, was taken to a hospital Saturday night after a piece of meat lodged in his throat at a Democratic Party dinner in Nashville, a hospital spokesman told The Associated Press.
"He's in stable condition," said LEE POSTON, a spokesman for Vanderbilt University Medical Center.
"He's been basically a little uncomfortable, but it's not life threatening."


After Being on a Roll, Giants Roll Over
Last season, the Giants became the Super Bowl champions, the best team in pro football.
This year, they will not even win their division, and they may struggle to make the National Football League playoffs.
Listen to Coach Ray Handley after his team rolled to an impressive 13-0 lead over the Washington Redskins in the first half tonight, then crumbled in the second half and lost, 17-13.
The Redskins improved their record to 8-0 and the Giants fell to 4-4.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday (reprinted from some Friday editions) about Gene Roddenberry, the creator of the "Star Trek" television series, misstated the day of his death.
He died on Thursday.


Golan Heights' Return Called Syria's Chief Aim
The Syrian Government of President Hafez al-Assad is going to the Madrid conference on Wednesday with the hope that it can, above all else, persuade Israel to return the Golan Heights, Western diplomats say.
But Syrian officials have repeatedly said that they will not strike separate deals with Israel.
They say that any exchange of land for peace must be part of a package that would include all of the occupied territories and be approved by all neighboring Arab countries and the Palestinians.


Erica L. Marks Has Wedding
Erica Louise Marks, the managing director of the New York dance company Dances Patrelle, was married yesterday to Dr.
David Panush, a fellow in neuroradiology at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
Rabbi Harlan J. Wechsler officiated at the James Burden Mansion in Manhattan.
A graduate of Wellesley College, the bride, 29 years old, will keep her name.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred M. Marks of New York.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Brumbaugh Graves Donahue &amp; Raymond.


Gains but No Profits at Eagle Snacks
Staring at two six-foot racks of salty snacks that flank the entrance of an A.&amp; P. in Manhattan, Malcolm Horton pointed to a red, white and blue bag of Eagle potato chips.
"It's really a super-looking design," said the 22-year-old shopper, dismissing the cascade of Frito-Lay chips on the other rack just four feet away.
"At 99 cents, how can you go wrong?"


Mother and 2 Children Die In Brooklyn Apartment Fire
An early-morning fire in Bushwick, Brooklyn, killed a pregnant woman, her 11-year-old daughter and 6-year-old son and critically injured another son yesterday when he jumped from a third-story window to escape the flames and fell onto an iron fence, a Fire Department spokesman said.
In separate fires yesterday in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, and in Westbury, L.I., two other young boys died.


Vicki Banner Wed to Alan Winkler
Vicki Margot Banner, a daughter of Sy Banner of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., and the late Adele Banner, was married yesterday to Alan Winkler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Winkler of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi Elan Adler officiated at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.
Ms.
Banner, 32 years old, will keep her name.
A graduate of Dickinson College, she received a master's degree from the American Graduate School of International Management.
She is a vice president of Michael Klepper Associates, a New York public-relations concern.
Her father is a corporate vice president of the Four Winds Hospital in Katonah, N.Y., and an associate professor at the New York Medical College.


Liberals Retain Edge in Colombian Election
The governing Liberal Party held onto a slight majority in national legislative elections today as about 70 percent of the eligible voters stayed away from the polls.
In the race for the Senate, the Liberals had captured more than 21 percent of the vote with 20 percent of polling stations reporting.
They were followed by the Democratic Force Party, a conservative splinter group led by a former mayor of Bogota, Andres Paltrana, which won 15.5 percent of the vote.
A former guerrilla group, the M-19 Democratic Alliance, was running third with 10.2 percent of the Senate vote.


People
*
Ross Sutherland, a senior vice president at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, has been promoted to executive creative director from creative director. *
David G. Ferm, publisher of Golf Digest magazine, has been named to the additional newly created position of president of the Golf Company, which includes the golf publications and golf-related activities in the sports/leisure division of The New York Times Company Magazine Group.


National Show Adds an Insider's Touch
Last year, despite performances by the same caliber of ethereal equines that have made the National Horse Show the World Series of its genre for more than a century, the show, humbled by an austerity budget, was on the fritz.
This year, back at the Meadowlands for a third year, the Manhattan transplant promises to put on the Ritz, right from the moment the country-and-western singer Ronnie Milsap, with Marilyn Quayle on hand as official chairwoman, croons into a spotlighted arena on opening night.


House Unit Is Offered Tapes in Auburn Case
A former Auburn football player who said he secretly recorded tapes that show he received money from a booster during his playing days will meet with a special House investigator tomorrow to turn over tapes.
The player, Eric Ramsey, has said the tapes show that Pat Dye, the Auburn football coach and athletic director, knew about the payments, which would have been a violation of National Collegiate Athletic Association rules.


Gerard A. Perez, Makeup Editor, 71
Gerard A. Perez, a retired makeup editor at The New York Times, died on Friday at Victory Memorial Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 71 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
Mr. Perez died of cancer, his family said.


World Economies


Qualifying Under New Law That Licenses 12-Year-Old Hunters


Books of The Times; They Went For the Money, Piles of It
Den of Thieves By James B. Stewart  Illustrated. 493 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
Aside from greed, what makes financial skulduggery possible is that few people really understand money.
So it is James B. Stewart's singular accomplishment to have written, in "Den of Thieves," not only a morality play in which villains and heroes clash dramatically over money, but also a book about financial skulduggery that the average reader can easily comprehend.


The Talk Of Hollywood; High-Stakes Battle: Midler and Streisand Go Screen to Screen
There's the Streisand team at Columbia, and the Midlerites at 20th Century Fox.
With the highly competitive film industry in an economic torpor, two of the biggest studios in town have, in not so subtle ways, taken on the public persona of their competing stars: Bette Midler and Barbra Streisand.


William J. Kridel, 76; Partner in Legal Firm
William J. Kridel, a partner in a Manhattan law firm, died at Mount Sinai Medical Center on Thursday.
He was 76 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Kridel died of complications after heart surgery, his family said.


What Led to Crackdown on Homeless
As Manhattan Borough President, David N. Dinkins championed the rights of the homeless and New York City's obligation to house them.
Faced with the harsh realities of governing, though, he shifted gears just six weeks after his inauguration as Mayor.
The epiphany came quickly.
It signaled the start of an evolving strategy that has become more aggressive as the public and Mr.
Dinkins have grown increasingly concerned with the consequences of homelessness.


Man in the News: Kiichi Miyazawa; Self-Assured Leader of Japan
At the height of the oil shortages of the 1970's, a Cabinet minister in Japan caused a furor when he accused the United States of poor leadership, mismanagement of its economy and "dragging its feet" on energy.
Today, that official, Kiichi Miyazawa, was chosen to become Prime Minister at a time when grumbling over American policies is louder than ever.
The triumph was sweet for this courtly but shrewd veteran of countless political wars, who had tried for years without success to attain the top job.


Dividend Meetings


In California, Nature Refuses to Remain Mastered
In a grim way, it was symbolic that the deadly fire that swept Oakland and Berkeley last Sunday should have started near the Caldecott Tunnel.
The tunnel, opened in 1937, was one of those daring and defiant acts of engineering that Californians have long used to tame a harsh environment that has proved to be as dangerous as it is beautiful.
The tunnel punched a nearly mile-long hole through the Berkeley Hills, opening the way to vast suburbanization of the arid and geologically unstable hills east of San Francisco Bay.


Targeting Croatia's Culture Is War Crime
To the Editor:
A vicious war is raging in the territory of Croatia in spite of several cease-fire agreements signed during the last few weeks by all parties involved.
Its consequences so far have been catastrophic with regard to loss of life as well as villages and towns leveled with earth.
The insanity of the war craze does not spare hospitals, mental institutions, schools and libraries, not to mention homes, factories and communication facilities.


Metro Matters; Cuomo Struggles Toward Answers To Big Question
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all, And thus the native hue of resolution Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought, And enterprises of great pith and moment With this regard their currents turn awry And lose the name of action. -- "Hamlet," Act III, Scene 1
To run or not to run away -- that is the question.


BBC's Global Challenge to CNN
Emphasizing that it is not American and insisting that more than one global television news network is needed, the British Broadcasting Corporation intends to take on the Cable News Network around the world.
BBC executives say their news reports will be more analytical than CNN's and will carry less live coverage of big events.
"One danger is if you go to a press conference and turn on a camera and think that's journalism," said Christopher Irwin, chief executive of the new BBC World Service Television.
"It's not."


Review/Pop; An Evening of Tributes To a Singer From Cuba
The Caribbean Cultural Center's tribute to the singer Graciela rocked along nicely at Town Hall on Saturday night.
Graciela, who is one of Latin music's better-known singers, was paid tribute by everyone from Mayor David N. Dinkins to dancers who frequented the Palladium in the 1950's to plaque-bearing politicians.
Graciela has been a fixture on the New York Latin music scene since her arrival here in 1943 from Cuba, and people were there to see and hear someone who has helped define Latin musical expression since then.
The show started with Afro-Cuban traditional music, with drummers singing and chanting religious call-and-response tunes.
They were joined by more percussionists and a handful of dancers and singers dressed as if they had stopped in for a moment on their way to a carnival.
Las Hermanas Marquez, two sisters, came out and sang a few funny songs in Spanish, only to be replaced by Dizzy Gillespie (who received several standing ovations), Mayor Dinkins, and various tributaries all acknowledging Graciela, who, typically, was funny and self-deprecatory in her comments.


Redskins' Half a Loaf Proves Better Than None
Their most explosive rusher was a rookie on the bench with the jitters, and their best receiver had dropped a certain touchdown pass.
But this was only tonight's first half.
And the Washington Redskins did not become an unbeaten team by playing only 30 minutes of football.


Teen-Age Drinking: Let's Get Realistic
To the Editor:
Drinking is deeply ingrained in American culture, and no amount of public service messages will counteract the drinking in sports bars, at cocktail parties and during football games -- everywhere.
Beer commercials featuring scantily clad women are not the source of the problem.
Moreover, teen-age drinking is as unpreventable as adult drinking, and trying to stop it is counterproductive.


Dance in Review
Stephanie Skura and Company
Bessie Schonberg Theater 219 West 19th Street Through Sunday
Stephanie Skura theatrically demonstrated that life is ridiculous.
As she did so, she demonstrated that theater is ridiculous.
Everyone had a wonderful time wallowing in absurdity in "The Bad Play," the dance-theater work that Stephanie Skura and Company presented on Friday night.


Business Keeps Smith on the Run
Ranger General Manager Neil Smith is working with the legal department at Paramount on a new contract for Mark Messier, one that will make him the richest Ranger ever.
On Monday morning, Smith is due in Toronto to haggle over less than $150,000 with defenseman Mark Hardy before a salary arbitrator.
There is also a new contract to be worked out with defenseman Brian Leetch, who is playing in his option year, and another one to be negotiated for Mike Richter, the star goaltender.


Dinkins Plans Munich Trip, Expenses Paid
Mayor David N. Dinkins, whose international travel plans have stirred controversy in recent months, said yesterday that he has accepted an expenses-paid invitation to attend a tennis tournament in Munich, Germany, in December.
The Mayor, an unabashed tennis fan, added that he hoped to use the trip for other purposes, including exploring economic opportunities for New York City in Central Europe and visiting a memorial to Germans who defied the Nazis.


The Best Games Of Our Lives
MIKE TORREZ, now a furniture salesman, and BUCKY DENT, now a St.
Louis Cardinals coach, greeted each other and smiled.
"Do I have to see you again?" Torrez asked Dent, whose three-run home run in a one-game playoff in 1978 led the Yankees to an American League East title over Torrez's Boston Red Sox.
The occasion of their meeting last week was a news conference celebrating "Baseball's Greatest Games," a 24-week series starting tonight at 7 P.M. on SportsChannel that revives classic games from the past, including that 1978 Red Sox-Yankees playoff game.
The series repackages the games into two-hour programs -- which forced some editing -- and starts with Game 2 of the 1978 Dodgers-Yankees World Series.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-12
The Palestinians have set sober goals for the Middle East peace conference.
Many have parted with claims for an independent state and are striving to save what is left of the Israeli-occupied territories.
Page A1
News analysis: Israel's agenda for the Madrid conference, according to the most cynical assessment, is to avoid the blame if the talks fall apart.
But many Israelis say that is also the most realistic view.
A12


Dr. Rhonda Schiff Weds Eric Press
Dr.
Rhonda Schiff, a resident in anesthesiology at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, was married yesterday to Eric Press, a third-year student at the Yale Law School.
Rabbi Peter J. Rubinstein officiated at the Metropolis Country Club in White Plains.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from the six-year honors medical program at Northwestern University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Chester Schiff of Kings Point, L.I.
Her father is a consulting electrical engineer in New York, and her mother, Vivian Schiff, is an artist.


Wendy Chazan, Executive, Wed
Wendy Sue Chazan, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Solomon Chazan of Fair Lawn, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew James Mensch, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Mensch of Jericho, L.I.
Rabbi David Greenberg officiated at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
A graduate of Boston University, Mrs.
Mensch, 30 years old, is a vice president of Edelman Medical Communications, a New York public-relation company.
Her father is a pediatrician in Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J.


U.S. Tool Orders Up by 3.4%
Orders for American-made machine tools showed a modest rise of 3.4 percent in September, the fourth straight month of increases, the Association for Manufacturing Technology says in a report to be released today.
The gains in September, however, were well below the 22 percent surge of orders in August, the trade group said.
September orders rose to $243.65 million, from $235.75 million in August.


An Eagle Speaks, Make That Raps
He goes by the name of K-JACK, and his recorded rap message to the United States is to change for the better.
It goes in part: Yes, I made it but my past can't be faded you invented the game and I played it but with ideals separate but equal I don't dream for one I dream for my people checks to be cashed let's sweep out the trash I can't think about the future forget about the past look me eye to eye or put your mind in a cast It's not a choice between me or the other one and the same A true brother.
K-Jack also goes by the name of KEITH JACKSON, the Philadelphia Eagles' stellar tight end.


Review/Pop; James Taylor Sings the Old And the New
James Taylor has tampered very little with the basic musical style that brought him to prominence two decades ago, singing introspective ballads like "Fire and Rain" and "Sweet Baby James." A subtle amalgam of Appalachian folk-blues, rock-and-roll and gospel, it is a deceptively low-key idiom for a songwriter and singer obsessed with wanderlust and the meaning of life.
In his wry, wistful lyrics and reedy voice, which quivers with emotional crosscurrents, Mr.
Taylor projects one of pop music's most refined sensibilities.
"New Moon Shine," Mr.
Taylor's newest album (Columbia), finds him near the top of his form in songs like "Slap Leather," a playfully pungent rock-and-roll critique of social and environmental ills, and "Copperline," a nostalgic ballad remembering his North Carolina roots.
And on Saturday evening at the Paramount at Madison Square Garden, where he is appearing through Oct. 31, Mr.
Taylor gave a characteristically impeccable show that interwove several songs from the new album with many of his longtime concert favorites.


China to Ease U.S. Trade, But Differences Persist
In a modest step toward resolving trade frictions, China has declared its willingness to reduce certain tariffs and eliminate an import surcharge on American products, a senior United States trade official said last week.
Chinese officials also indicated that they would replace certain import bans with quotas and cut by two-thirds the number of products that require import licenses, Joseph A. Massey, the assistant United States trade representative, said Friday after four days of talks.


Anti-Apartheid Groups Seek Meeting of All Parties
Moving to wrest the initiative for change from President F. W. de Klerk, a new "patriotic front" of anti-apartheid forces demanded today that a conference of all political parties be held as soon as possible.
A declaration concluding a three-day unity meeting here said the "transfer of power from the white minority regime to the people as a whole now is the most important necessity of struggle."


Market Place; Promising Drug Bolsters Synergen
OVER the next few months, some analysts expect Synergen Inc. to move from "best of the rest" status to join the first tier of biotechnology, claiming a place just behind Amgen, Biogen and Chiron.
David S. Webber, an analyst with Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons, calls Synergen "the most compelling emerging biotech company."
Bouyed by favorable analysts' reports and promising clinical trials data, Synergen's stock has soared to a high of $70.25, from a 52-week low of $5.50, closing Friday at $68.625, down 87.5 cents.
Nevertheless, several analysts, including Mr.
Webber, still rate Synergen a "strong buy." Others are more cautious, rating the stock a "hold" at current prices.
The 10-year-old company now has a market valuation of more than $1 billion.


Europe Community Faults Serbian Forces on Truce
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia, Oct. 27
As clashes between Serbian and Croatian forces continued in eastern Croatia, the European Community accused the Serbian-dominated Yugoslav Army today of flagrantly violating the latest cease-fire accord.
"Cease-fire agreements have been violated by all parties, but recent Yugoslav Army attacks are out of all proportion to any noncompliance by Croatia," the European Community statement said.


Review/Television; Mayor Curley of Boston With Foibles and Warts
Only people old enough to suffer from memory lapses are apt to remember James Michael Curley, who, between World War I and World War II, was elected Mayor of Boston four times, Congressman four times and Governor of Massachusetts once, and who spent a brief spell in jail during his last term in City Hall, for a mail fraud incident.
"Scandalous Mayor," tonight's somewhat sentimental offering from "The American Experience," at 9 on Channels 13 and 49, catches a style of politicking that has gone the way of vaudeville.
Curley, whose parents came to America around the turn of the century on what he called the Irish Mayflower, was a champion of the immigrants in a city controlled by descendants of people who had come over on the real Mayflower, more or less.
Movie shorts of the period picture the Irish as happy-go-lucky clowns, not so different from the stereotype of blacks.


Coming Back; See the Future, in the Schools
No issue is more important to New York City's future than the performance of its public schools.
The economy cannot prosper without a well-educated labor force, the city's huge immigrant population cannot be assimilated without good schools and more middle-class families will flee if they think the schools are inferior or dangerous.
There is some reason for concern.
Test scores are improving slightly, but still only equal the average for the rest of the state.
The physical plant was allowed to deteriorate; only since 1987 has there been a coherent building plan.
And budget cuts this year have stripped away hundreds of teachers and counselors, forcing crowded classrooms, reduced course offerings and shortages.


Dance in Review
En Danca  Triplex Theater
The world of international modern dance has shrunk so much in the last decade that it is surprising when a superb foreign company comes into New York unheralded and stays for a mere two performances.
But that was the case when En Danca performed on Friday night.
Founded in 1980 and based at the University of Brasilia in Brazil, the five-member troupe and its dances are a small miracle of passion, skill, taste and imagination.


Kids and Horses: Perfect Together
The National Horse Show, which has never reached out to the schools for an audience, is enjoying an overwhelming response to the debut of its educational program, which will bring 5,000 children to Byrne Meadowlands Arena for opening day tomorrow, and then again on Friday.
For $5, kids from nursery-school through eighth grade can spend a day at the show, where they'll receive a "passport" entitling them to six activities and an ice cream (at day's end, when sticky fingers don't matter).
In addition to watching films on horse care and demonstrations involving New Jersey's state animal, children will be able to visit a petting zoo and an egg hatchery, and to ride a pony.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday None Tuesday  G.N.P. . . . 3d Qtr.
Consumer Confidence . . .
Oct.
Wednesday Personal Income . . .
Sept.
New-Home Sales . . .
Sept.
Thursday  Factory Orders . . .
Sept.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday Construction Spending . . .
Sept.
Leading Indicators . . .
Sept.
Purchasing Managers' Report . . .
Oct.
Unemployment . . .
Oct.


A Title in the 10th: Twins Are Sitting on Top of the Dome
When the Minnesota Twins and the Atlanta Braves were finished playing one of the most scintillating World Series in the event's 88-year history tonight, the Twins were left as THE team that had soared from worst to first.
In the battle of teams that won division championships after finishing last in 1990, the Twins prevailed in a seventh game that was a fitting climax to the Series because only one run was scored.
And the Twins scored it in the 10th inning.


The Men Who Survived Chernobyl's Cleanup; Pro-nuclear Bias
To the Editor:
Surely Peter Matthiessen's profile of Vladimir Chernousenko, "The 'Madman' of Chernobyl" (Op-Ed, Oct. 14), will arouse indignant attempts at rebuttal by pro-nuclear "experts." But Mr.
Chernousenko's arguments are much saner and far more honest than any that might be raised against him.


Zornitza Journal; A Junction of Ottoman Hate and Today's Mistrust
In the mountain village where Atem Mustafov Karabelov lives, history has left a curious trace.
People here are Bulgarian Muslims, a religious inheritance forced on them during 500 years of occupation by the Ottoman Turks and all but snuffed out by nearly half a century of Communist rule.
Mr.
Karabelov, 85 years old, is the local hodja, or Muslim religious leader, but his flock has almost disappeared.
In 1986, the Communists knocked down the 100-year-old mosque in Chepelare, five miles away at the bottom of the valley.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury plans to hold only its regular Monday auction of three- and six-month bills this week.
By late in the day on Friday, the bid-ask range on outstanding three-month bills was 4.94 to 4.96 percent, and the range for six-month bills was 5.01 to 5.03 percent.


Review/Television; For Halloween, Bobbing for Giggles and Guffaws
The trick this week is in finding a television program not tied to Halloween.
The treat, in many cases, will be in succeeding.
But there are scattered goodies.
Once upon a time, not that long ago, Halloween was a rather modest affair, done up in makeshift costumes and confined to an hour or two of trick or treating.
Today, it's big business, anticipated weeks in advance with a blitz of product tie-ins ranging from greeting cards to elaborate makeup kits.
George Romero fans will remember with a delicious shudder the shopping mall metaphor in his film "Dawn of the Dead," in which flesh-eating zombies became the ultimate consumers.


PALESTINIANS LOOK TO MODEST GOALS AT MADRID TALKS
After years of struggling against Israel, Palestinians are approaching the peace conference in Madrid on Wednesday with a sober appreciation: they must part with loftier claims of an independent Palestinian state and strive to save what is left of the Israeli-occupied territories from Jewish settlements.
What is more, a new layer of Palestinian leaders from the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip have emerged as negotiators, sharing responsibility with the Palestine Liberation Organization for setting the Palestinian political agenda.
These new leaders are more concerned with bettering their lives than with pressing for independence, the traditional goal of the P.L.O. over the 20 years it has dominated Palestinian decisionmaking.


New Budweiser Theme: 'Genuine' Consumers
Budweiser beer has returned to portraying the consumer as hero, rather than the product, in a new series of television commercials.
The four spots, by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis, mark the first significant changes in advertising for the country's largest-selling beer brand since the theme "Nothing Beats a Budweiser" replaced "This Bud's for You" in January 1990.
They are also the first changes since August A. Busch 4th was named Budweiser brand director in July.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly MEETS AT 3 P.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE AGAINST APARTHEID -- 11 A.M.
AFRICAN DAY DEVOTED TO DEBT RELIEF -- 10 A.M. and 2:30 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


The Men Who Survived Chernobyl's Cleanup
To the Editor:
Peter Matthiessen's " 'Madman' of Chernobyl" (Op-Ed, Oct. 14) gives too little detail to discover whether there is any basis for even one of Dr.
Vladimir Chernousenko's claims about the aftermath of the Chernobyl nuclear accident.
Dr.
Chernousenko's ailments are not described, nor is his total radiation exposure given.
We do not know where he worked and with whom, to obtain some corroboration.


William Echikson Wed Anu Ristola
Anu Sirkku Anneli Ristola, a daughter of Raija Ristola of Jyvaskyla, Finland, and the late Yrjo Ristola, was married in Paris last night to William Ira Echikson, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alan Echikson of Short Hills, N.J.
Rabbi Stephen Berkowitz performed the ceremony at the Beaugrenelle Synagogue.
Miss Ristola, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
She directs her own industrial design agency, the Design Workshop in Paris.
She graduated from the Ecole Superieure du Design Industriel in Paris.
Her mother is a retired official of a retail clerks' union in Jyvaskyla.


Horace Sutton, 72, Magazine Columnist And Travel Author
Horace Sutton, one of the pre-eminent American travel writers during the years of the greatest expansion of tourism, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 72 years old and died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Sutton was indefatigable as a traveler and prolific as a writer.
He traveled at least 100,000 miles a year at the peak of his career and wrote 11 books, including the "Footloose" series, which began with "Footloose in France" in 1948.


Zaire's Chief Vows to Stay in Power and Warns West Not to Meddle
President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire vowed today to stay in power despite growing opposition to his rule.
He accused Western governments of wanting "my head at any price" and declared, "They cannot dictate how I run Zaire."
In an interview with foreign reporters at his home near Kinshasa, the capital, the President said there would be no compromise with the main opposition leader, Etienne Tshisekedi, whom he dismissed as Prime Minister last Monday.


Terror and Death at Home Are Caught in F.B.I. Tape
Hoping to hear evidence of terrorist activities, the Federal Bureau of Investigation planted listening devices in the tiny apartment of a Palestinian-American more than two years ago.
What the F.B.I.  taped were the screams of a teen-age girl being stabbed to death.
Now, a jury that heard the tape-recorded voice of the 16-year-old pleading in vain for her life has convicted her parents of murder and recommended that they be put to death.


Knicks Show Their Defensive Stance
Any questions about the Knicks' readiness to open the season were answered this afternoon.
Holding the San Antonio Spurs scoreless for the first 8 minutes 12 seconds of the fourth quarter here at the HemisFair Arena, the Knicks steamrolled to a 98-91 victory in their preseason finale.


Law Enforcement Run Raises $25,000 for Local Charities


12-Year-Olds Like Lower Hunting Age
Twelve-year-old Chris Duntz carefully aimed his rifle and gently squeezed the trigger.
With a soft pop, the bullet plowed into a white target card 50 feet away on the firing range of the Elizaville Game Club here in southern Columbia County.
With the successful completion of his firearms training and a written test on safety in the field, Chris became eligible for a juvenile hunting license, under the provisions of a new state law that lowered the minimum age for hunting in New York from 14 to 12.
Parents Have No Qualms
Under the law, passed by the State Legislature early this year, New York became the last of the 50 states to permit 12-year-olds to hunt for small game like pheasants, ruffed grouse, rabbits and squirrels.
Hunting with rifles for big game like deer and bear is still prohibited for those under 16 in New York.


Bears Perk Up in Time to Upset Saints
With a performance that said, "Forget about what I've done for the past 58 minutes," Bears quarterback Jim Harbaugh engineered the perfect two-minute drill late in the fourth quarter today to help rally the Bears to a 20-17 upset over the previously unbeaten Saints.
Harbaugh had completed only 2 of 19 passes (with 11 consecutive incompletions) for 16 yards before the Bears mounted their game-winning 48-yard touchdown drive with 1 minute 54 seconds to play and no timeouts.


QUESTION BOX
Most Famers in World Series
Q.
Counting the players on the two teams combined, which World Series had the most future Hall of Fame members?


Patterns
How Halston Deceived
A fascinating view of an American fashion legend, "Halston: Absolute Modernism," goes on exhibit today at the Fashion Institute of Technology.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16
Boris Yeltsin offered drastic reforms and proposed to take charge of the Russian republic in a grim speech to legislators.
He said he intended to lift price controls by year's end and to speed up the privatization of agriculture and light industry.
Page A1


Japan Court Upholds A Genentech Patent
In what is being called the first significant biotechnology patent case in Japan, a court has ruled in favor of Genentech Inc. in a suit brought against the Toyobo Company in 1987.
The Osaka District Court ruled that Toyobo had infringed Genentech's Japanese patent by selling a drug known as TPA, which is used to treat heart attack patients.
The court issued an order blocking the sale of Toyobo's product.


Corrections
A brief report by The Associated Press in Business Day on Thursday about the Monsanto Company's earnings misstated the main reason given by the company for the quarter's decline in sales.
It was a drop in the sales of Monsanto's agricultural and chemical divisions, not the exclusion of $550 million in sales from units the company plans to close or sell.
That exclusion was for the entire year, not the quarter.


Dinkins Panel Is Moving to Revive Needle Exchange to Combat AIDS
In a reversal of health policy, the Dinkins administration is moving to revive a needle-exchange program for intravenous drug users to help slow the spread of AIDS, senior administrations officials said yesterday.
Although details were not available yesterday, administration officials said a group of New York City commissioners, headed by Acting Health Commissioner Margaret A. Hamburg, would recommend some form of needle-exchange program in a report they are scheduled to deliver to Mayor David N. Dinkins by the end of the week.


Quotation of the Day
"Apologizing is great politics. It's basically quite becoming, especially in people you do not expect to apologize." -- Alan Ehrenhalt, commenting on a cluster of senatorial apologies.  [ A18:5. ]


Campeau Backed
Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation said that a Federal Bankruptcy Court in Cincinnati had approved their disclosure statement and had authorized voting on a reorganization plan to begin on Nov. 5.
The retailers said the approval was critical in their plan to emerge from bankruptcy next year.
The companies' creditors must approve the plan by Dec. 20.
Federated and Allied, units of the Campeau Corporation of Canada, filed for bankruptcy protection in January 1990.


Salomon Profits Rise
Salomon Inc. announced yesterday that third-quarter profits rose 7.6 percent, to $85 million, or 60 cents a share, from $79 million, or 55 cents a share, in the same period last year.
Revenue fell, however, to $2.42 billion, from $2.57 billion last year.
Salomon, which has been involved in a scandal over improper Treasury auction bids, set aside $200 million to cover expected costs of fines and legal claims.


Big Mexico Bank Stake Is Sold for $2.55 Billion
The Mexican Government managed to sell off its most valuable bank for the second time today, winning $2.55 billion for 51 percent of Bancomer S.A.
Bancomer is Mexico's leading retail bank.
But it had generally been considered the second prize in the Government's 18-bank privatization effort, after the corporate giant Banamex, which came with a more prestigious name, one of Mexico's finest private art collections and assets recently valued at $29 billion -- $3.1 billion more than Bancomer.


Hankie Doodle Dandy: Even Buck Was Terrific
For the seventh game of the World Series, Jack Buck came back.
Was it the game's cosmic script, seemingly co-written in Cooperstown by Christy Mathewson and Don Larsen?
Or Buck's salary drive to make CBS pick up his 1992 option?
Whatever the reason, Buck returned from an oblivion that found him overanticipating plays, forgetting players' names and forcing the burden of the telecast too much onto Tim McCarver's loquacious tongue.


Powell Wins Special Council Primary
Adam Clayton Powell 4th, the son of a legendary Harlem Congressman of the same name, was elected in a landslide as the Democratic candidate for a City Council seat in a court-ordered runoff election yesterday.
By a ratio of almost 3 to 1, Mr.
Powell defeated William Del Toro, the 51-year-old brother of a powerful State Assemblyman, Angelo Del Toro, head of a small cadre of Puerto Rican politicians in eastern Harlem.


'Wonderhouse' Closes
"Andre Heller's Wonderhouse," a variety show written and directed by the Austrian multi-media artist Andre Heller, closed after the matinee on Sunday at the Broadhurst Theater, 235 West 44th Street.
The show ran for 11 previews and 9 regular performances.


Questions to Those Who Corroborated Hill Account
A Personal Relationship
SENATOR JOSEPH R. BIDEN Jr.
Mr.
Carr, you were dating Anita Hill.
I assume that's what you meant by having a -- we use a lot of euphemisms in this town, old-fashioned word.
You had a relation, you were dating Professor Hill at some point in the past, is that correct?


Lemieux Ready to Play Tonight
MARIO LEMIEUX, who has missed the Penguins' last three games with back and hip pain, plans to play tonight when Pittsburgh opens a four-game homestand by facing Washington.
Doctors say that Lemieux is likely to be bothered by his chronic back spasms for the rest of his playing career. (AP)


Marathoner of Animals
A CHEETAH might win a 100-yard dash, but a pronghorn antelope is the odds-on favorite in a marathon.
When threatened by a fleet-footed prairie predator like a wolf, the pronghorn can average 40 miles an hour for more than six miles.
The secret to its endurance is not in the size of its leg muscles or a unique chemical process.
Evolution provided the pronghorn with a series of small, painstaking improvements in the design of its lungs, heart and muscle tissue, researchers say.


Anderson-Nets Impasse Continues
KENNY ANDERSON and the Nets seem no closer to reaching a contract agreement, WILLIS REED, the Nets' senior vice president, said yesterday.
Reed said, however, he had not given up hope that Anderson, the second pick over all in the National Basketball Association draft, will be in uniform for the opener at Charlotte on Saturday.
Reed said he spoke with RICHARD HOWELL, Anderson's Atlanta-based attorney, yesterday, and that they planned to continue talks today. (AP)


Father of Utah Tourist Sobs As He Tells of Son's Slaying
Sobbing on the witness stand, the father of a tourist from Utah told a jury yesterday how his fatally wounded son had chased a band of knife-wielding young men who had attacked them in a subway station in midtown Manhattan.
The father, Sherwin Watkins, testified that his 22-year-old son, Brian, had collapsed with blood gushing from his chest.
Mr.
Watkins told the jury in State Supreme Court that he had administered a blessing to his son, who was still breathing.


A Positive Move For Illinois Central
A leading Midwestern railroad company -- the Illinois Central Corporation -- got a green light yesterday from the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
The rating service put the company on its Creditwatch with positive implications, which means that its current B rating on subordinated debt might be raised in the near future, along with improved ratings on other debt like equipment trust certificates.
A total of about $177 million of debt is involved.


Lageman Has Big Plans for Jet Defense
Even though the Jets' defense has sacked opposing quarterbacks 17 times in the first eight games this season, the exact number they had at midseason last year, most people would say their defense is greatly improved.
Defensive end Jeff Lageman thinks there is still room for improvement.
"Our run defense has been very good all year," said Lageman, a first-round draft choice out of Virginia in 1989.
"Our pass rush still needs to improve; our turnover ratio needs to improve, and our defense has to take the next step and maybe score some points because the offense can't seem to put a lot of points on the board."


YELTSIN IS TELLING RUSSIANS TO BRACE FOR SHARP REFORM
Declaring that the time had come to act "decisively, sternly, without hesitation," President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic told his people today to brace for drastic reform and proposed to take personal charge of the republic's government.
Speaking grimly for more than an hour to the Congress of People's Deputies, the highest assembly in the Russian republic, Mr.
Yeltsin declared his intention to lift price controls by year's end, to sharply accelerate the privatization of agriculture and light industry, to stop financing central ministries and all foreign aid and to bolster the ruble.


Bradley Makes Appeal to Bank
Mayor Tom Bradley expressed concern that the proposed merger of the Security Pacific Corporation and the BankAmerica Corporation could cost jobs, increase office vacancy rates and close bank branches in low-income areas.
In a letter to Richard Rosenberg, the chairman of Bank of America, a BankAmerica subsidiary, Mr.
Bradley said he was especially concerned about Bank of America's "high rate of denial" of mortgages to minority applicants.


Slap at Polish Reform
The results of the Polish elections have significantly increased the pressure for braking Poland's economic reform.
News analysis, page A3.


Right-to-Die Proposal: Imperfect but Desirable; Doctors' New Role
To the Editor:
Your article about Washington State's Initiative 119 on the right to die (front page, Oct. 14) was balanced for the most part, but unbalanced on two issues.
With regard to the part of the initiative that would permit doctor-assisted suicide, there is an impli cation that doctors are feeling anguish because they would "become agents of death."


Wheat Prices Fall Sharply After Heavy Rain in Plains
Wheat futures prices fell sharply today on the Chicago Board of Trade after a weekend of heavy rain in the southern Great Plains eased worries about the winter wheat crop.
Soybean prices surged and corn was little changed.


Series Is Over, but the Relish Remains
The baseball season officially ended at one minute after midnight Eastern time Sunday night, but the scintillating World Series still had people talking excitedly today.
The Series captured nationwide attention not only because of the Cinderella nature of the teams that played but also because of the high level of intensity that produced a succession of breathtaking games.


New Delhi Journal; TV Comes In on a Dish, and India Gobbles It Up
Inder Kumar Gujral, former Ambassador to Moscow, former Foreign Minister, impeccably turned out in an ivory safari suit and delicate black loafers, stroked his white goatee with his hand, coughed slightly and then admitted that he did not watch MTV compulsively.
"Occasionally," he confessed, "but not all the time."


On My Mind; One Homeland Each
The road forward was mapped clearly for the Palestinians by the United States, Israel and a single Arab leader spectacular in bravery.
That was in 1978.
The proposal put together at Camp David will be on the table again in Madrid, 13 wasted years later.


Classical Music in Review
'Nosferatu'  Silent film, with the Orchestra of St. Luke's Metropolitan Museum of Art
Experience tells us that people deprived of one sense (sight, hearing) tend to develop exaggerated sensitivity in some of the four others.
Silent film is a little like that, compensating for its lack of speech with pronounced visual gesture and also with music.
Music was a strong competitor for our attention at Friday night's screening of "Nosferatu," F. W. Murnau's powerful vampire movie of 1923.
Armin Brunner conducted members of the Orchestra of St.
Luke's positioned on each side of the screen.
The music was by Bach, arranged, spliced and ordered by Mr.
Brunner himself.


Kansas City Group Fights Jailing of 20
It started with a banner with the words BASTA!
BASTA! waving from a small airplane over Arrowhead Stadium during a Kansas City Chiefs football game on Sept. 22.
Jean Paul Bradshaw 2d, the United States Attorney for Western Missouri, was in the stands that day.
But he did not know then that "basta" was the Italian word for "enough." He found out soon enough.
Within a month the two-word message began appearing on T-shirts and billboards and at the steps of the Federal courthouse in demonstrations.


Books of The Times; Rethinking the Holocaust With a Comic Book
'Maus II'  A Survivor's Tale.
And Here My Troubles Began.
By Art Spiegelman  136 pages.
Pantheon Books. $18.
When the first volume of "Maus" appeared in 1986, it created a sensation: Art Spiegelman had chosen to recount the experiences of his father, Vladek, as a Holocaust survivor through the form of a comic book, a form associated in most readers' minds with the Sunday funny papers.
That Mr.
Spiegelman portrayed Jews as mice and the Nazis as cats, however, did not end up trivializing the event, as one might fear; rather, it served to goad the reader into looking at the event anew.
By turns horrifying and funny, "Maus" created a moving portrait of one man's terrifying encounter with history and his son's frustrating attempts to come to terms with him.


King Hussein Fears a 'Dark Phase'
Battered by Jordan's deteriorating economy, an influx of 300,000 Palestinian refugees from the Persian Gulf conflict and his own political isolation after the gulf war, King Hussein said today that he hoped that the lasting achievement of his nearly 40 years on the throne would be "to contribute toward peace and see it coming."
But the King warned that if the Israelis proved inflexible at the peace conference opening in Madrid on Wednesday, and continued to build Jewish settlements in the occupied territories, "a very dark phase in the life of this entire region, on either side of the dividing line, and maybe the world," would result.


Prosecution of Pregnant Addicts Won't Prevent Crack Babies
To the Editor:
It is encouraging to see your support for Medicaid financing of drug treatment for pregnant addicts ("The Cost of Not Preventing Crack Babies," editorial, Oct. 10).
But in making the moral and economic case for this needed reform, you did not mention the other essential component of any policy to bring pregnant women into treatment and to prevent harm to their fetuses: an end to prosecutions of pregnant drug users.


Review/Television; Alzheimer's: The Cruelest Disease
One in three American families has been struck by Alzheimer's disease.
"Losing It All: The Reality of Alzheimer's Disease," tonight's poignant documentary at 10 on HBO, reports on five of those families.
Competition among ailments is a no-win game, but this hour makes a painful case that Alzheimer's, which destroys the brain, eroding memory and thinking, and for which there is no cure, "may be the cruelest disease."
The focus is less on the sufferers themselves, the once-alert, effective people who are now, as the narrator says, "lost in time and space forever," than on the wives, husbands and children who are doing their best to look after them.
As one woman whose husband's Alzheimer's was diagnosed five years ago says, "The grief never stops." Pat Ryan forgets things, gets lost, can't manage to put on his socks without direction.
When he decides to play his trombone, he picks up an electric shaver instead.


Palestinians Wielding a Softer Image
In tougher-talking times, Palestinians liked to say that they offered the world a choice: the gun or the olive branch.
Tonight, as their representatives from the Israeli-occupied territories arrived for the Middle East peace conference, all they brought -- symbolically, at least -- was the olive branch.
Back in the Israeli-occupied West Bank, the peaceful emblem seemed to wither back to more violent roots when two Jewish settlers were shot to death in the town of Ramallah.
But those arriving here insisted that they had a different agenda.


Corrections
A chart on Friday with an article about foreign investments in New York City condominiums referred incorrectly to a $2.57 million purchase at 30 East 85th Street.
It was for two apartments, totaling nine rooms, not a single apartment of four and a half.
The article also referred incorrectly to a prohibition on the sale of co-op apartments to corporations.
It was a Federal restriction, no longer in effect, not a state law.


U.S. Prosecutor Met Sheik Involved in the B.C.C.I Case
A Federal prosecutor has traveled to Egypt to interview the former director of Saudi Arabian intelligence on the the Bank of Credit and Commerce International scandal.
The Justice Department refused to say today what happened at the meeting in Cairo last week but law-enforcement officials have been interested in Sheik Kamal Adham because of his role as a major shareholder in the bank.


Honors
*
Adweek's Marketing Computers magazine has presented its first annual Marcom awards for excellence in high-tech advertising, public relations and marketing communications.
Top honors went to Data General Corp., Westboro, Mass., and its agency, Lois/GGK, New York, and to Micrografx Inc., and its agency, the Creative Services Group, both of Richardson, Tex.


In Debate on U.S. Poverty, 2 Studies Fuel an Argument on Who Is to Blame
For seven consecutive years beginning in 1983, the celebrated American economic expansion brought disappointing results in the fight against poverty, defying historical experience and leaving the country with poverty rates unusually high among prosperous Western nations.
The question has been why.


Accounts
*
Skybox, a line of basketball cards licensed by the National Basketball Association, to Grey Advertising, New York.
The billings, as reported in this week's issue of Advertising Age, are $3 million.
The account had been handled by the association's advertising department.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the ethics of euthanasia misstated the university affiliation of an expert.
The Rev.
John J. Paris is the Michael P. Walsh Professor of Bioethics at Boston College; he is no longer at Holy Cross.


Staten Island Democrats Warn Dinkins on Support
Staten Island Democrats came to City Hall yesterday to denounce Mayor David N. Dinkins, saying they were tapping into a growing anger among middle-class homeowners who believe they have been ignored by his administration.
They said that they would no longer support Mr.
Dinkins and that no Democratic candidate for City Council could win in the borough without running against the administration.


Our Towns
Here's the scenario: A well-dressed lady who knows everything that's fit to print about the community leaves her car in the fading afternoon suburban sunshine.
She walks toward the house along a leaf-strewn sidewalk, never cutting across the lawn.
She approaches the door of the house on one of an endless number of streets lined with substantial private homes owned by hard-working professionals and their mortgage companies.
The woman rings the doorbell, then steps back to leave some nonthreatening distance in front of the door.
She shifts the huge wicker basket with the pretty bow to her left hand to permit a handshake with these strangers.
When the husband appears, the woman smiles broadly, introduces herself and is welcomed into the home just like that, without a badge or references.
But first, she wipes her feet.


New Machines From Tandem
Tandem Computers Inc. today introduced a line of computers that it said were cheaper and faster than previous models.
The new systems employ RISC, or reduced instruction set computing, which speeds computation and is more commonly used in engineering computers.


Review/Dance; Another Round of Balanchine Performed by the Kirov Ballet
History's timing is not the best.
George Balanchine did not live long enough to see the Kirov Ballet drive an audience into a frenzied ovation after a performance of his "Tchaikovsky Pas de Deux."
The Soviet troupe has just ended a two-week engagement at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts here with virtually an all-Balanchine program before embarking on a national tour.


Business and Health; Sun Belt Shock: High Health Costs
COMPANIES that move from states like New York to lower-cost areas like south Florida, Houston or Dallas rarely inquire beforehand about employee medical costs.
They are mainly concerned about wages, real estate and taxes, which are indeed lower in most Sun Belt states.
But benefits consultants say some executives may be shocked after the move to find health-care costs as high or higher than in New York.
Robert D. Eicher, a principal in New York with A. Foster Higgins, a benefits consulting firm, said several client companies recently moved to south Florida and ended up spending $7,000 an employee for health care -- more than double the national average of $3,200 an employee and 40 percent higher than their New York costs of about $5,000.
He said health-care costs for some big companies in Houston and Dallas were also $5,000 or more.


Light at the End of Digital's Tunnel
For the Digital Equipment Corporation, the $14 billion computer giant, the last two years have been the worst of times.
The country's second-largest computer maker has experienced plummeting earnings, stagnant revenues, a staggering decline in hardware sales, huge layoffs for the first time in its history and dismal morale.
A recent reorganization has driven off a spate of top executives, while Digital stock has languished below book value.


Sylvia Fine Kaye, 78, Songwriter; A Proponent of Musical Theater
Sylvia Fine Kaye, a producer, lyricist and composer, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 78 years old.
She died of emphysema, said her daughter, Dena Kaye of Manhattan.


Apple's New Vision for Notebooks
COMPARED with DOS-based notebook computers, the three new Apple Powerbook notebook computers introduced at the Comdex Fall trade show in Las Vegas last week might appear rather mundane.
Makers of I.B.M.
PC-compatibles have been selling smaller, lighter, cheaper and more powerful notebooks for two years.
That does not mean that Macintosh users will not buy Powerbooks as fast as Apple Computer Inc. can make them, of course.
They are greatly superior to Apple's original Macintosh Portable, an expensive, heavy model, now discontinued.


Blue Jays Drop Wilson
MOOKIE WILSON, who sparked the Toronto Blue Jays to the American League East title in 1989 after being obtained from the Mets, no longer figures in the club's plans.
The team said yesterday it would not exercise its option on the 35-year-old outfielder-designated hitter, who hit .241 in 86 games this season.
Wilson is free to make his own deal with any major league club.


CUNY Board Votes to Keep Jeffries in Post
Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., the City College professor who for years has made racially charged remarks about Jews and other whites, was allowed last night to remain as chairman of the black studies department for another eight months while officials continue to assess his performance.
With conflicting groups of demonstrators chanting on the streets outside, the trustees of the City University voted to give Dr.
Jeffries until June 30, in what one official called "a middle road" between two uncomfortable approaches.
The trustees could have voted to let Dr.
Jeffries keep his chairmanship for three years, as is customarily done with chairmen, or they could have moved to strip him of that job.
The administration had favored the approach adopted by the board.


Critic's Notebook; The Right Impresario For His Turbulent Era
Anyone who attended concerts in the late 1960's and early 70's at the Fillmores West and East, or anyone interested in rock-and-roll, for that matter, had to be shocked at the death last weekend of the rock impresario Bill Graham, the victim of a particularly gruesome helicopter crash near San Francisco.
Pacing the stage, shouting and arguing, cajoling and exhorting, Mr.
Graham was as much the image of rock as the artists he deigned to present.
The Grateful Dead, the Jefferson Airplane, Country Joe and Janis Joplin epitomized San Francisco's hippie scene to the nation and the world.
Mr.
Graham put on their concerts, but more than that, he won a fame (some might call it notoriety) to equal theirs.
The 60's died long ago, but for anyone who lived through that turbulent, exhilarating time, Mr.
Graham's death at the age of 60 was a painful loss.


Modern Alchemists Transmute Nuclear Waste
RENAISSANCE alchemists sought in vain for a way to transmute base metals into gold, but modern nuclear alchemists believe they have hit upon an even more valuable discovery: a means of transmuting America's deadly mountain of long-lived radioactive waste into substances that lose their radioactive sting relatively quickly.
New transmutation processes under study at a half dozen major American laboratories, and at institutions in the Soviet Union, Japan, France and Britain, can treat waste that would otherwise remain dangerously radioactive for up to 10 million years.


Lindros to Join Canadian Olympic Team
ERIC LINDROS has left the Oshawa Generals of the Ontario Hockey League for a month to join the Canadian Olympic team.


Washington Talk; Old Political Tool Takes On a New Role
Call it the apology bandwagon.
In the aftermath of a rush of hometown criticism about the Senate Judiciary Committee's handling of the Supreme Court confirmation hearings of Clarence Thomas, a most unusual spectacle has begun to unfold.
Senators Howard M. Metzenbaum of Ohio and Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, both Democrats, and Alan K. Simpson, a Wyoming Republican, have admitted varying degrees of guilt at mishandling the inquiry into sexual harassment accusations by Anita F. Hill, a former Thomas aide who is a University of Oklahoma law professor.


BRIEFS
*
Comdisco Inc., Rosemont, Ill., a computer company, signed a definitive agreement to acquire the European high-technology leasing operations of USF &amp; G Corp., Baltimore, a holding company. *
International Game Technology, Reno, and Electronic Data Technologies, Las Vegas, Nev., agreed that International Game would acquire the 57 percent of Electronic Data that is publicly owned.


A New Gene Therapy To Fight Cholesterol Is Being Prepared
MOVING with a swiftness that far exceeds expectations of just a few months ago, researchers are preparing to use a new type of gene therapy against a lethal hereditary illness, a rare disorder that results in extreme cholesterol buildup throughout the body and early death, usually from a heart attack.
Scientists at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor recently vaulted over the biggest hurdle to gene therapy experiments, winning permission from two important government panels that monitor attempts to manipulate human genes.


Greenspan Now Sees A 'Sluggish' Economy
In his gloomiest assessment since last winter, Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, said yesterday that the nation's economy had taken a turn for the worse.
The economy is still slightly, he told a group of business executives, but "in recent weeks, it's turned demonstrably sluggish."
This is marked contrast to the tone he took just a few months ago.
In July, when he gave Congress his official mid-tyear review of the state of the economy, Mr.
Greenspan had proclaimed the recession over, reported signes that inflation was slowing, predicted progress on the Federal budget deficit and was otherwise remarkably optimistic.


Deal on Time Warner Seen
The Toshiba Corporation and C. Itoh &amp; Company, Japan's largest trading house, scheduled a joint news conference for late today when they are expected to announce a $1 billion investment in Time Warner Inc.
Earlier this month, executives involved in the transaction said that the two Japanese companies would take an interest in a new venture being created by Time Warner that will encompass its movie, record and other entertainment businesses, including the Warner Brothers studio.


Banks Plan A Merger In Detroit
Two strong Detroit-based banking companies, Comerica Inc. and the Manufacturers National Corporation, announced plans yesterday for a friendly merger that would create one of the nation's 25 largest banking companies and the largest in the Detroit market.
The new company, which plans to operate under the Comerica name and will have total assets of $26.8 billion, intends to cut costs by eliminating duplicated operations of the two former competitors.
By closing 60 of their combined 413 branches and eliminating 1,800 of their 13,500 jobs, mostly through attrition and retirement, the new Comerica expects to save about $145 million annually by 1994.
In the first nine months of this year, the two companies had combined profits of $199.5 million, up 9.5 percent from $182.2 million last year.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article in Business Day yesterday about an effort to weaken the monopoly held by the nation's electric utilities included scrambled passages in some copies.
The first 39 lines of the continuation -- beginning "seller, who want round-the-clock access" and ending "to the majority of a utility's customers may be compromised,' it said" -- should have appeared at the end of the article.


N.C.A.A.'s Panel Recommends Updated Rules for Investigations
Amid continuing complaints about the fairness of National Collegiate Athletic Association investigations, a special committee has recommended sweeping new guidelines, including the creation of an independent review process for cases involving major violations.
By proposing to have a hearing officer determine the facts of a case if the N.C.A.A. and the accused cannot agree on the violations and penalties, the special committee would establish a form of appeal that is unavailable under the current rules.


By Design; Platform Soles, the Reawakening
Here is a bit of news that is positively uplifting.
The platform sole shoe is back in style.
After slumbering away in fashion history since the 1940's (with a brief rerun in the 70's), it was brought back with a bang by Karl Lagerfeld last week in Paris for the Chanel spring collection.
Made of black suede, these Chanel versions were shaped just like the sandals of the 40's.
The stiff two-inch soles curved to make a towering chunk of a heel.
They had a wide toe-band and a crisscross strap around the heel and ankle.
The one modern touch was the Velcro on the ankle straps.


Northern Telecom
Northern Telecom, one of the world's largest suppliers of telecommunications equipment, has won a $200 million contract to supply telephone switching equipment to Telecom Australia.
The equipment made by the Mississauga, Ontario, company will be used by the Australian telephone company to provide services for corporate customers in need of private networks -- special voice and data systems reserved for an organization's use.


Is Linus Guarding the Pumpkin Patch?
"Why aren't there any pumpkins?" asked a woman emerging from a picked-over patch at the Lewin Farm with her three crestfallen children and empty-handed husband in tow.
"A lot of people are asking that," said David Ecklund, the man behind the counter.


Boeing Gets Japan Jet Order; Earnings Rise
Underscoring the success of the Boeing Company's newest jetliner, Japan Airlines said today that it had placed 20 orders and options for the mid-sized 777's.
The order, valued at $2 billion, comes two months after a $3.6 billion order for 777's from British Airways, and brings the number of customers for the new plane to six.
United Airlines is to take first delivery of a 777 in May 1995.


Big Board Move
The New York Stock Exchange yesterday awarded its advertising account to Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York, for a print and broadcast campaign expected to begin as early as December.
The other agencies in the review were Grey Advertising and Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, both of New York.
The incumbent, Brouillard Communications, New York, was not included.
According to Leading National Advertisers, the exchange spent $1.7 million on advertising last year.


Market Place; Soviet Gold News Has Little Impact
THE recent disclosure by a top Soviet official that his nation had far less in gold reserves than was thought in the West has had surprisingly little impact on the price of gold, which has jumped by just over $11 an ounce, or 3.3 percent, since mid-September.
Gold is still near the bottom of its recent trading range, and, at $358 an ounce yesterday, is far from the peaks of $400-plus that it touched a few times since February 1990.
And gold analysts do not expect the price to move significantly higher, although the Soviet acknowledgement was one of the first pieces of positive news for the gold market in some time.


Boy, 11, Tracks Suspect to Lead Police to Quarry
An 11-year-old boy was been credited with helping the police arrest a suspect wanted in a series of robberies of elderly people in a Brooklyn neighborhood.
After the robber fought with two men in their 60's and stole cash and credit cards, the police said, the boy nonchalantly trailed the man and then led officers to him.
"I'm looking into getting a civilian award for him," Sgt.
Robert McDonald, commander of the 75th Precinct Robbery Identification Program said of the boy.
"He did a terrific job." The Vermont Street Block Association in East New York is also thinking about presenting an award to the boy, whose identity was not revealed for his safety.


Pro Bono
*
Gay Men's Health Crisis is introducing a public service announcement to promote its second annual AIDS dance-a-thon, to be held in New York on Nov. 30.
The spot, which is being shown on the Sony Jumbotron screen in Times Square, as well as on television, features dancing animated versions of figures by the late artist Keith Haring.
Victor Mignatti of Bank Street Pictures created the spot, which was animated by John Canemaker of R/Greenberg Associates, both of New York.


SUNSPOT ACTIVITY IS TERMED SEVERE
Unusually powerful sunspot activity that began over the weekend created a disturbance in the Earth's magnetic field yesterday, disrupting electrical systems around North America and putting some utility officials on alert.
Equipment failed in scattered places, but so far no power losses have resulted.
Physicists said the disturbance would probably continue through the week and could intensify as the Sun, acting on cues that are mostly invisible to scientists, continued to release bursts of energy.


Inquiry on Thomas Leaks Unsettles Some in Senate
The Senate's plan to investigate unauthorized disclosures to the news media has caused uneasiness among some staff members of liberal senators who fear they may be blamed for making public the sexual harassment accusations against Clarence Thomas.
The chamber's vote last week to appoint a special counsel has also set off grumbling by senators of both parties over the scope of the inquiry, with Democrats arguing that it should be broader and Republicans saying it should focus on the Thomas matter.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption in Business Day on Thursday about a controversy between insurers and psychotherapists misidentified the health economist in charge of the American Psychiatric Association hot line for complaints about insurers' managed-care companies.
She is Sajini Thomas.


Blue Chips Lead a Rally; Dow Adds 40.70
Stocks rose strongly yesterday on moderate trading volume, with blue-chip issues leading the broader market.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 40.70 points, to close at 3,045.62.
Although trading ended on a strong note, many investors remained noncommittal and held neutral positions as they awaited economic reports due out this week; data on third-quarter gross national product is to be released today.


Revision Urged In Expectations
L.
Ross Love, the new chairman of the Association of National Advertisers, wants advertisers to once again consider their advertising agencies "as our partners in building our businesses." But such a renewed partnership would require more effective work from agencies, he said.
"Agencies should not be viewed as suppliers," said Mr.
Love, who is also vice president of advertising of the Procter &amp; Gamble Worldwide unit of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company.
He said advertisers "need to set higher standards for the bottom-line business results we expect from the advertising."


Drunks Who Drive and Kill: A Problem Personified
The electrician had just stepped out of his pickup truck after attending a premarital class at a church here with his fiancee when a car speeding down the wrong side of the street struck and killed him.
When the police finally stopped the car, they found that the driver, Roger A. Koney, was drunk.
They also found that he had been convicted eight times over the past few years for drunken driving, had 19 other convictions for serious motor vehicle offenses and had repeatedly been sentenced to jail.
Moreover, his driver's license had been revoked since 1986.


Right-to-Die Proposal: Imperfect but Desirable
To the Editor:
Thank you for publishing a balanced report on the Initiative 119 debate in Washington State on the right to die (front page, Oct. 14).
Whether the initiative passes or not, it has served a useful function of stimulating discussion among physicians and citizens.


Political Chaos in Zaire Imperils AIDS Studies
POLITICAL violence in Zaire has jeopardized one of the world's largest and most important AIDS research programs, a project that was crucial in defining the scope of the epidemic in the 1980's and that was expected to yield vital clues for fighting the deadly disease in the 1990's.
Instability in Zaire's capital, Kinshasha, and the evacuation of foreign scientists has brought research to a halt in the program, known as Project SIDA, for the French acronym for AIDS.
The project is run by scientists from the United States, Europe and Zaire.


Observer; The Joys of Autumn
When you live in New York your leaf consciousness can drop to zero unless you're one of those swells with the fancy apartments that look down on Central Park.
Ours looked down on a 40-foot square of concrete surrounded on all four sides by towering brick walls.
That was the first-floor tenants' garden.
In the summer they'd put a potted plant out there and invite us down to share in an old New York ritual which involved saluting the growing season with a martini pitcher.
In those days you could still do that without getting run in by the health police.


Pavarotti Is to Offer Classes
The tenor Luciano Pavarotti is to hold two master classes at the Juilliard Theater, 155 West 65th Street, at 4 P.M. tomorrow and Thursday.
He is to coach 17 singers at the first class.
The second class will consist of six singers and the final act from "La Boheme." The classes are open to the public.
Admission is $20, which is to benefit the Juilliard scholarship fund.
Information: (212) 769-7406.


Salvadoran Foes Debating a New Police Force
Political and military leaders and diplomats have begun to debate and study the creation of the broad-based national police force that is to be an important element in the Salvadoran peace accord, even while the guerrillas and armed forces attacked and taunted each other without letup in recent days.
Archbishop Arturo Rivera y Damas said in his Sunday homily that El Salvador was hearing "songs of peace," played to "music of war."


Dollar Gains on Expectation Of Strong Report on G.N.P.
The dollar closed higher against most major currencies yesterday on optimism that the United States economy might be stronger than expected.
Gold prices fell.
Several traders said the dollar's rise came amid speculation that the Government's report on gross national product for the third quarter, scheduled to be issued today, would suggest faster growth.


Yankee and New York Disagreeing on Dollars
Elizabeth Holtzman, the New York City Comptroller, wants the Yankees to give the city more than peanuts and Cracker Jack.
In fact, she said yesterday, the ball club owes New York almost $1 million.
In a statement describing an audit of the team for 1987-89, Holtzman said the team had underreported cable-television revenue and not counted luxury-box income as part of admission receipts at Yankee Stadium.
Holtzman's office also released the audit.
The timing was timely: It was the day after the baseball season ended.
"A coincidence," a spokesman for the comptroller's office, Louis Haber, said.


Slovak Nationalists break Up a Speech By Prague President
President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia was forced today to abort an appearance at a rally in Bratislava, the capital of the Slovak republic, after Slovak nationalists heckled him and threw eggs.
It was the second such incident this year.
In March, Mr.
Havel was forced to leave another rally in Bratislava by Slovak demonstrators who heckled and shoved him.


No Surprise: Showalter Is Yanks' Man
In one of the worst kept surprises since they dismissed Manager Stump Merrill earlier this month, the Yankees will today name former third-base coach Buck Showalter as their new manager.
The Yankees will have a news conference at Yankee Stadium today to announce the hiring of Showalter, who was dismissed with Merrill and four other coaches 22 days ago.
A club official said last Tuesday that Showalter would be named after the World Series ended and the Yankees were simply waiting to sign him.
Just as when they dismissed Merrill, the appointment is no shock because the rumor has been confirmed several times in the last week.


Pfizer in Deal With Colgate
The Colgate-Palmolive Company has agreed to buy the overseas business of Plax mouthwash from Pfizer Inc. for $105 million in cash, the companies said yesterday.
Pfizer, which started Plax in 1989, will continue to market it in the United States and Canada.


From Pilot to Chairman Of Micronesia Airline
When he was 4 years old, George Doubleday 2d saw a Mustang fighter plane buzz past his house.
"I wanted to fly airplanes ever since," he recalls.
Mr.
Doubleday, who has been named chairman of the Pacific Micronesia Corporation, which will take over the Micronesia routes of Continental Airlines, has ended up spending much of his life in aviation.


The Hard Times Roll on Syracuse Campus
By any measure, the 1980's were good to Syracuse University.
Enrollment flourished, 10 new buildings were opened, the university upgraded many of its academic programs and its basketball and football teams became national powerhouses.
Syracuse seemed to be the academic equivalent of a bull market that had driven the bears into hibernation.
But, like so many institutions and industries that flourished in the 1980's, it is now retrenching -- prompting a critical re-examination of the university's strengths and weaknesses that some Syracuse officials say is long overdue.


Opinions Vary on '92 Bid By Cuomo (Including His)
The division of opinion on whether Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo should run for President extends far and wide, but it also extends deep into Mario Cuomo.
At least that's what the Governor said today, explaining that his heart was telling him yes but that he was still "working on my head."
His ruminations, in an interview on a Long Island cable-television station, appeared to be the first time he has ever described himself as wanting to be President.
On the other hand, they offered no firm clue about his ultimate intentions because he still dwelt at length on what he described as an obligation to be Governor that could preclude him from being able to run for the White House.


Plot to Send Soviet Tanks to Israel
A secret project under which the German intelligence service was planning to ship tanks to Israel was disclosed today after the tanks were found aboard an Israeli freighter docked in Hamburg, a Government spokesman said today.
The spokesman, Norbert Schafer, said at a news conference that Chancellor Helmut Kohl and other senior Government officials had been unaware of the project.
He also said it was begun without the knowledge of Konrad Porzner, the head of Germany's secret service, or members of Parliament charged with overseeing intelligence operations.


New Supercomputers Signal Industry's Direction
A new wave of American-made supercomputers will be announced in the next month, and they are likely to set the standard for the world's fastest machines through the mid-1990's.
The first to announce formally its next-generation product will be the Thinking Machines Corporation, which is scheduled to show off its CM-5 supercomputer at a news conference today in Cambridge, Mass.


2 Jewish Settlers Are Slain And 5 Are Hurt by Gunmen
Two Israeli adults were killed and five children wounded today when gunmen ambushed a bus filled with Jewish settlers on their way to a mass rally to urge that Israel not exchange land for peace at the Middle East peace talks that open on Wednesday.
It was not clear who had fired on the group as it moved in a three-bus convoy through the heart of the Israeli-occupied West Bank toward Tel Aviv.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about a lawsuit filed against a plutonium plant near Denver reversed the identities of the plaintiffs.
Jaqueline M. Brever was at the left and Karen A. Pitts at the right.


Portugal's Rating Is Raised a Notch
The Republic of Portugal's debt rating has been raised to Ai-plus, from single Ai, by S.&amp; P., which revised the outlook for that nation to "positive" instead of "stable."


Helen Herrmann, Preservationist, 89
Helen Herrmann, a veteran volunteer worker and former farmer in Monmouth County, N.J., who donated 71 acres of farmland to the county for preservation as open space, died on Thursday at her home in West Long Branch, N.J.
She was 89 years old.
She died after a stroke, said a friend, Virginia P. Kamin.


Muslim Militia Leader Seeks to Block Talks
A religious leader of the Party of God, a hard-line Lebanese Muslim militia guided by Iran, said today that the Madrid peace conference was "a shameful process" and appealed for immediate action to prevent the meeting of Arab leaders with Israel, an Iranian broadcast said.
The cleric, Sheik Abbas Musavi, asked Muslims worldwide to interrupt what he called "the peace conspiracy with the Zionist enemy." According to the broadcast, Sheik Musavi said in Beirut that the Madrid conference was intended to put Muslims in a position of "capitulation and defeat." The report did not elaborate on the means by which the meeting could be prevented or interrupted.


Japan's Worldly New Leader
Extraordinary economic success has made Japan a superpower.
Yet its international profile has remained remarkably low.
That's changing dramatically now, and the change will accelerate with the selection Sunday of Kiichi Miyazawa as Japan's next prime minister.
Mr.
Miyazawa is an intellectual in politics, given to thoughtful reflection about Japan's postwar humiliations, present economic power and future global responsibilities.
He is also a veteran broker within the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, with the clout needed to build consensus policies and make them stick.


It's Silk Handkerchiefs From Absolut This Year
TBWA, New York, is placing specially designed silk handkerchiefs into magazines next month for its annual holiday ad for Absolut Vodka.
The ad, to cost $1 million, features a cardboard insert that appears to be a gift-wrapped package and carries the tagline, "Open for an Absolut surprise." Inside is the subtitle "Absolut gift" and a plastic package holding a handkerchief decorated with Absolut bottles.
It was designed by Nicole Miller, who also creates flamboyant ties that are intended to spur conversations.


Kodak Posts A Loss After Job-Cut Costs
Having piled on $435 million in after-tax restructuring costs when the economy was weak, the Eastman Kodak Company yesterday reported that it lost $118 million in the third quarter.
A year ago the company reported an even larger loss of $206 million when it wrote off $909 million it paid to the Polaroid Corporation to settle patent infringement litigation.


Mulroney Withdraws From the U.N. Contest
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada withdrew today from consideration to be the next Secretary General of the United Nations.
Canada's representative here, Yves Fortier, said that in spite of pressure from "many capitals and all regions of the planet," Mr.
Mulroney had made "an irrevocable decision" to remove his name from a list of 14 candidates for the job, the world organization's top post.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
NINTH PLEDGING CONFERENCE FOR WORLD DISARMAMENT CAMPAIGN  General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Don't Let French Dilute U.S.-Europe Ties
To the Editor:
"Why Not a French-German Army?" (editorial, Oct. 21) misses the point that gives concern to many supporters of the movement toward stronger European unity.


Review/Music; High Priest of a Piano-Worship Cult
Music has room enough for two religions of the piano.
Tolerance demands it.
The first begins, but does not end, with the instrument: we offer it in sacrifice and hope that through it musical revelations will come.
The second makes the piano itself the deity, asking us to learn its rituals, solve its puzzles and brave its mysteries.
Young Yevgeny Kissin, who played Schubert, Brahms and Liszt at Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday afternoon, has evidently been brought up in the second of these two faiths.
The piano is his god; Schubert, Brahms and Liszt are his means to serve it.
To say that Mr.
Kissin is a pianist, not a musician, on the other hand, is to mislead.
He has, besides a splendid tone and sweeping technique, a musical sense of equilibrium that allows phrases to bend and tempos to expand and contract, all with no thread of movement broken.
This is an extraordinary talent.


Morris Tells the Twins He'll Seek a New Deal
Less than 12 hours after winning the seventh game of the World Series and its most-valuable-player award, Jack Morris notified the Minnesota Twins yesterday that he would not exercise the option in his contract for 1992.
The pitcher can remain with the Twins by signing a new contract -- he will seek more money -- or he can file for free agency in the next two weeks.
Morris, who has been a free agent three times in the last five years, would have received a $3.65 million salary for next season if he had exercised the option.
He will presumably seek a new contract averaging in the $5 million-$5.5 million range, where Roger Clemens and Dwight Gooden stand as the highest-paid pitchers.


Pohl on Morgan Panel
Karl Otto Pohl, former head of Germany's central bank, the Bundesbank, has become a member of the International Council of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, Morgan said today in a statement.
Ali I. Naimi, the president and chief executive of Saudi Aramco, the state-owned oil company, also joined the council.
The council is made up of leaders in business and public life from 13 countries who advise Morgan's management on international issues.
The current chairman is George P. Schultz, former Secretary of State.


For U.S., No Nobels May Mean A Fluke
ANXIETY over American researchers' having won none of the recent Nobel Prizes in science appears, upon analysis, to be premature.
Although the United States was shut out from the science and medicine awards for the first time in 34 years, the exclusion appears to be a statistical fluke rather than a symptom of decline in American science.
This month, the physics prize went to a French specialist in liquid crystals, the chemistry prize to a Swiss pioneer in chemical analysis, and the prize in physiology or medicine to a pair of German scientists for discoveries in basic cell function.


Right-to-Die Proposal: Imperfect but Desirable; Wrong Exit
To the Editor:
After being away on a study retreat for several weeks this summer, I stopped into the local bookstore to see what was new in literature.
There, for the first time, I came face to face with the new best seller "Final Exit," a guidebook to committing suicide.


New Vistas for Tourism's Mr. Italy
Until he joined the army in 1944, Mario Perillo had never journeyed farther than 40 miles from his home in the Bronx.
But since then he has traveled much of the world, and he has taken more than a million others with him -- most of them to Italy, the land of his parents.
Now, at age 65, Mr.
Perillo is striking out in several new directions.
Compared with a decade ago, the number of participants in his package tours to Italy has fallen by half, leaving Perillo Tours -- one of the nation's largest independent tour operators, with annual revenue approaching $60 million -- to make up the difference by promoting Caribbean cruises and Hawaiian packages.


In Brooklyn, Congress Hears From Artists
Kathleen Turner, Alec Baldwin, Eric Bogosian and Chuck Close led a roster of 17 artists and arts administrators who testified yesterday at the Brooklyn Museum against stronger anti-obscenity restrictions on the National Endowment for the Arts.
"Artists cannot create within a prison of vague threats, wondering what is decent, what is acceptable," Ms.
Turner told a Congressional subcommittee; the actress expressed a view that was to be repeated by others throughout the day.


Virginia's Big Wave
A meteorite that fell into the Atlantic 40 million years ago created a huge wave that devastated the Virginia coast, a geologist says.
"It appears that an enormous wave, perhaps initially hundreds to thousands of feet high, gouged out a 200-foot-deep Connecticut-size area in the coastal region and filled it with a spectacular assortment of large boulders and shock-altered minerals," said Dr.
C.
Wylie Poag, a researcher for the United States Geological Survey.


TRANSACTIONS
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Waived Gerald Henderson and Trent Jackson, guards.
LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Waived Rory Sparrow, Marvin Andrews and Clinton Smith, guards.
MIAMI HEAT -- Released Carlos Funchess, guard, and Milos Babic, forward-center.
PORTLAND TRAIL BLAZERS -- Waived Gerald Paddio, guard.
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Waived Kevin Pritchard, guard. Released Paul Mokeski, center.
UTAH JAZZ -- Waived Walter Palmer and Dan O'Sullivan, forwards.
Continental Basketball Association
ALBANY PATROONS -- Signed Derrick Chievous and Jose Slaughter, guards.
Waived Tony Walker, forward, and Herman Alston, guard.
GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Signed Sydney Grider, guard.
Waived Keven Davis and Joe Faulkner, forwards, and Brian Nolan and Jim Paul, centers.
Global Basketball Association
MID-MICHIGAN GREAT LAKERS -- Signed Malcolm Hollensteiner, center and LaBron Gladden, guard.
FOOTBALL National Football League
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived James Pruitt, wide receiver; Brent Fullwood, running back, from the physically-unable-to-perform list; and Ernie Rogers, offensive tackle, from the practice squad.
Recalled Fred Banks, wide receiver, from waivers.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Connors Again Stirs in Paris Jimmy Connors won the last four games to beat Ronald Agenor, 5-7, 6-4, 6-2, yesterday in the first round of the Paris Open.
Five months ago, Connors needed five sets and nearly four hours to beat Agenor in the second round of the French Open.
Yesterday, it took him more than two hours to beat Agenor.
By the time the match finished, the spectators at the Bercy Sports Palace were cheering every point that Connors won.
"I love it when the public gets involved," Connors said.
"The crowd here is a lot like New York. They yell, they scream, they get up between points." (AP) BASEBALL Seibu Wins Japanese Series The Seibu Lions won their seventh Japanese baseball championship yesterday, beating the Hiroshima Toyo Carp, 7-1, in Game 7 of the series.
Last year, the Lions won the Japanese title with a four-game sweep over the Yomiuri Giants.
This time, the Pacific League champions rallied from a 3-2 deficit in games to beat Carp, the Central League champion. (AP) HOCKEY Kings Win; Gretzky Returns Wayne Gretzky returned to the Los Angeles lineup after missing five games to be with his ailing father, but it was Tony Granato who scored two goals to lead the Kings to a 4-3 victory over the Red Wings in Detroit.
Jari Kurri also scored a goal for the Kings, giving him 480 for his career.
Karri is trying to become the 17th player to score 500 goals in his career.
Gretzky, who had one assist, is still seeking his first goal of the season. (AP) Blues and Leafs Tie: After each giving up first-period goals, goaltenders Grant Fuhr of the Toronto Maple Leafs and Curtis Joseph of the St.
Louis Blues dominated the 1-1 game, played in the Toronto.
Fuhr stopped 26 shots, Joseph 29. (AP)


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.18
5.18
7.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.96
4.96
7.12
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.02
5.03
7.13
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.30
7.34
8.51
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.02
8.04
8.83
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.05
9.05
9.92
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.88
6.88
7.73
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Another Way to Work at a Desk
THE desktop metaphor is a powerful one for software designers and, perhaps, software users, too.
That the computer screen should suggest the top of a desk with its various projects and tools sorted into folders and drawers was present at the creation of the Macintosh.
The notion migrated later to MS-DOS computers, most successfully with Windows 3.0.
It is only a metaphor, however, and not necessarily a persuasive one.
My desktop, or yours, does not hold folders bearing cute pictures that must be opened with a mouse.
The mouse is not a metaphor for anything at all.


Topics of The Times; Play by Play by Play
Atlanta against Minnesota in the World Series?
The early reaction ranged from ho-hum to panic.
Neither team sported household names like Strawberry or Clemens or Canseco.
Neither represented mega-media markets like New York and Los Angeles.
Neither possessed the pedigree of, say, the Cardinals.
CBS, which paid millions for the TV rights, was terrified nobody would watch.
But people did watch, in steadily increasing numbers.
These two teams just grew on you: superbly matched, full of improbable young heroes, going at one another not just game by game but play by play by play.
There was just one blowout; five games were decided by one run; three went to extra innings.
In games like these, every pitch carries the potential for triumph or disaster.


5 Convicted in High-Tech Burglaries
Five men were convicted yesterday of operating a sophisticated burglary ring that Federal prosecutors said was responsible for stealing "tens of millions of dollars" from banks and stores in New York and New Jersey.
One defendant, Vincent Zappola, 39 years old, was identified by the prosecutors as a leader of the ring and a member of the Lucchese crime family.
The jury convicted the defendants of all the charges against them in the two-month trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Q&amp;A
Dry Ice
Q.
How is dry ice made?


Belfour Finally Signs With Blackhawks
The Chicago Blackhawks announced yesterday they have signed holdout goalie ED BELFOUR to a one-year contract with an option year.
Belfour was expected to join the team in time for today's practice.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.


Classical Music in Review
Leonid Kuzmin  Pianist Alice Tully Hall
Liszt is our ultimate multi-purpose composer.
Important minds find his music a generous host to the noblest of sentiments.
Others use him as a platform for stentorian oratory or a convenient handkerchief in which to cry self-indulgent tears.
For Leonid Kuzmin, who played the composer's music at Alice Tully Hall on Sunday evening, Liszt becomes a kind of private gymnasium.


The Helpful Vampire
Vampire bats, whose blood-thirstiness has given all bats a bad name, have recently been found to have some redeeming qualities.
Dr.
Gerald S. Wilkinson, a zoologist at the University of Maryland, discovered that vampire bats take care of one another even if they are not directly related.


CHRONICLE
There's the popular perception of a Club Med vacation as a sybaritic escape.
Then there's the kind of Club Med vacation just taken by EVAN G. GALBRAITH and WILLIAM F. BUCKLEY JR.  and their wives, BOOTSIE and PAT.
They spent part of a week's cruise of the Carribean aboard the Club Med I locked in a cabin planning strategy for a run by Mr.
Galbraith, chairman of LVMH Moet Hennessy-Louis Vuitton and a former United States Ambassador to France, for the New York State governorship in 1994.
Mr.
Buckley is to announce today the formation of a committee on behalf of a Galbraith candidacy.


Wachtler v. Cuomo: Duel of Ex-Friends
Back in 1981, before either Mario M. Cuomo or Sol Wachtler was at the head of a branch of state government, they were friends and frequent dinner companions in Albany: one night they were out for "six pleasant hours of jokes and discussions," according to a passage in Mr.
Cuomo's diaries.
In that same diary entry, Mr.
Cuomo said he believed that Mr.
Wachtler, a Republican, was thinking seriously of running for governor the next year.
As things turned out, Mr.
Wachtler opted to remain a judge, and Mr.
Cuomo went on to win the race.


Sports of The Times; Better Than This There Never Was
WALL to wall, someone was saying, this World Series, this seven-game thriller between the Twins and the Braves that finally ended 1-0 in favor of the Twins in the 10th inning of the seventh game Sunday night, was the best World Series he'd ever seen.
Wall to wall, your correspondent decided, it might have been the best sustained sporting event anyone has ever seen.


Greenspan Sees Turn For Worse
In his gloomiest assessment since last winter, Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, said today that the national economy had taken a turn for the worse.
The economy is still growing slightly, Mr.
Greenspan told a group of business executives in Providence, R.I., but "in recent weeks, it's turned demonstrably sluggish."


Sir Andrzej Panufnik Is Dead; Composer and Conductor Was 77
Sir Andrzej Panufnik, a Polish-born composer and conductor who, with Krzyzstof Penderecki and Witold Lutoslawski, established a distinctive contemporary Polish style, but who left his country in 1954 in protest against restrictions on his freedom of expression, died at his home in London on Sunday.
He was 77 years old.
Sir Andrzej left a large and varied legacy that included 10 symphonies and many other orchestral works, several concertos, a catalogue of chamber works and a sizable body of choral and vocal music.
Many of his works embodied extramusical associations, sometimes naturalistic, sometimes mystical and often political.
His "Sinfonia Votiva," for example, was a response to the Gdansk shipworkers' strike and the Solidarity movement in Poland in 1980, and he dedicated his 1986 Bassoon Concerto to the memory of the Rev.
Jerzy Popieluszko, a Roman Catholic priest who was tortured and killed by the Polish secret police.
Conservative and Tonal
Sir Andrzej's best music is dark and mysterious in texture and tone, although he composed outgoing and even exuberant music when it suited his purpose.
His language was conservative and essentially tonal, with veins of expressive dissonance that give his works a rich emotional resonance.
And he preferred to work in structures that were clear and easily grasped, if sometimes unorthodox.
His most recent work is a cello concerto, completed two weeks ago.
It is to be given its premiere in June 1992 by the London Symphony Orchestra, with Mstislav Rostropovich as the soloist.


European Nations Tell Serbs They Face Sanctions
European Community foreign ministers threatened today to impose economic sanctions on Serbia, Yugoslavia's dominant republic, if it does not accept a European peace plan for Yugoslavia by next Monday.
In the fighting today, warplanes of the pro-Serbian Yugoslav Army attacked positions across Croatia's eastern panhandle, making a shambles of the 10th cease-fire declared since fighting began in earnest soon after Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia on June 25.


Tracing Illegal Ivory: Forensic Scientists Take On Smugglers
SOON after President Bush banned the importing of African elephant ivory into the United States in 1989, Federal wildlife officials noticed a suspicious surge in ivory shipments claiming to come from an unusual but legal source -- the excavated tusks of mammoths, a long-extinct ancestor of the elephant.
But determining whether unscrupulous importers were mislabeling elephant ivory shipments to evade the new law was a challenge.
Mammoth ivory, preserved for tens of thousands of years in the permafrost of Siberia and Alaska, is identical in appearance to elephant ivory, and traditional dating methods, such as carbon-14 analysis, could not be used because the ivory would be destroyed.


Six Winning Tickets to Share $88 Million in Florida Lotto
Six of the millions of Florida Lotto tickets sold last week had the numbers to win a share of a $88 million jackpot.
Each ticket is worth an estimated $14.7 million, Marcia Mann, the Lottery's secretary, said on Sunday.
The winners have 180 days to claim their prizes, which will be paid over 20 years.


Musings On 27-Year Gestation Of a Novel
The small painting depicts a hog with four spots and a sincere smile.
"It's the artist's view of consumeritis," says Harold Brodkey, bending over the picture in his office at The New Yorker, explicating with pleasure.
"I find it oddly piercing."
The phrase has the Brodkey ring to it.
It's about 10 degrees off center, suggestive of pain and sudden insight.
There's even a bit of sex in the subtext.
And it's a touch rhetorical.


Xoma Wins Patent Ruling In Biotechnology-Drug Case
A jury in Federal District Court here today upheld the validity of the Xoma Corporation's patent on the use of certain monoclonal antibodies to treat septic shock, ruling that Centocor Inc. had infringed on Xoma's patent.
Centocor, based in Malvern, Pa., and Xoma, of Berkeley, Calif., have been locked in a desperate race to win Food and Drug Administration approval for these drugs.
Analysts expect the winning company to produce the next big biotechnology drug, with potential sales of hundreds of millions of dollars a year.


Resignation At Mellon Bank
David L. Eyles, a vice chairman of the Mellon Bank Corporation and chairman of the bank holding company's credit policy committee since 1988, resigned yesterday, Mellon's chairman, Frank V. Cahouet, announced.
Mr.
Eyles, 51 years old, left Mellon because "he and the chairman agreed that his resignation was appropriate," Thomas W. Butch, a Mellon spokesman, said.
"Mr. Cahouet was wholly satisfied with credit policy," he added.


With No Major Trends, Variety Wins
When it came down to the bottom line, there were few totally successful collections in the spring fashion marathon that opened in Milan, Italy, early this month, moved briefly to London and settled in for a stay in Paris before ending last week.
In his first ready-to-wear line for Norman Hartnell, Marc Bohan brought his sensibilities, honed at Christian Dior in Paris for almost 30 years, across the English Channel and thereby upgraded the image of London fashion.


Treasuries Up on Greenspan Talk
A pessimistic economic assessment by the Federal Reserve chairman helped to lift the prices of Treasury notes and bonds yesterday.
In a speech to business executives at the University of Rhode Island, the Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan, said the economy had "turned demonstrably sluggish" in recent weeks.


Ervins Gives 'Skins Their Own Meggett
As the Redskins prepared for the Giants last week, Ricky Ervins was asked about his exhilarating running against the Cleveland Browns and how he might parlay that into a rousing performance against the Giants.
"Well," Ervins began, "I finally got the opportunity and it was only in the second half against Cleveland. Maybe I'll get as good a chance against the Giants, but I just want to contribute. I'm just a rookie, you know."
Ervins smiled.


Oh, Those Radical Wags Of the Weimar Republic!
During the years of the Weimar Republic, cabaret in Germany offered Bertolt Brecht and his compatriots a place where they could express their deepest fears about the Nazi threat.
Accenting the radicalism of Weimar comedy, Jeremy Lawrence has entitled his musical revue, "Cabaret Verboten."
As presented at the CSC Theater (in repertory with Jean Stapleton in "Bon Appetit!"), the show is an uneven anthology of songs and sketches ridiculing fascism and racism.
It gives a feeling but not the full flavor of a desperate time when theater played the role of political provocateur.
In Mr.
Lawrence's adaptations of writings of the 1920's and 30's, the sketches survive less well than the songs.


Rolls-Royce Post Filled
Rolls-Royce P.L.C. said today that Michael Townsend had been appointed finance director, effective Nov. 1.
Mr.
Townsend previously was director of finance of Rolls-Royce's aerospace division.
He succeeds Peter Macfarlane who left the company to become group finance director at Allied-Lyons P.L.C.


Restoring Lost Wetland: It's Possible But Not Easy
SPRINGY peat soil seemed to quiver underfoot as Ed Garbisch led a small inspection party out of a stand of towering loblolly pines and onto the bank of one of the innumerable fingers of Chesapeake Bay that meander through Maryland's Eastern Shore near here.
"Does this look like a wetland to you?" Dr. Garbisch asked.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Las Virgenes, Calif., $60 million in municipal water district certificates of participation, by Lehman Brothers, which priced the nearby serials to yield 4.60 to 6.40 percent for maturities from 1992 to 2006.
The 2016 maturity was priced to yield 6.587 percent.
The certificates were rated AAA because of insurance by Municipal Bond Investors Assurance.
COMMON STOCK *
DNX, Princeton, N.J., a developer of therapeutic products, has filed for 2.5 million shares through Hambrecht &amp; Quist, to be offered at between $13 and $15 a share. *
Retix, Santa Monica, Calif., a software company, has filed for 3.4 million shares, to be offered at $8.50 to $10 a share, through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co. *
Teradata Corp., El Segundo, Calif., has filed for 2.3 million shares through Montgomery Securities, to be sold at about the $19.37-a-share price for currently traded stock.  *
Vitesse Semiconductor Corp., Camarillo, Calif., has filed for 3.2 million common shares to be sold through Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co. at prices between $8 and $9 a share.
RATING *
Inspiration Resources Corp.'s single-B convertible subordinated debt rating covering about $73 million in securities has been placed on the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation's Creditwatch list with positive implications, meaning that the rating service may soon raise the rating.
The company, based in New York, has sold its Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company and is refocusing on agribusiness.


Protestant Gunmen Step Up the Violence in Northern Ireland
Borrowing a page from the shadowy killers of the rival Irish Republican Army, a new and more ruthless generation of Protestant gunmen is stalking Northern Ireland, waging a war of assassination and reprisal that has helped drive the toll of sectarian violence in the province to its highest level in several years.
Police and Government officials here say the militants who now control such groups as the illegal Ulster Volunteer Force and Ulster Freedom Fighters, the main Loyalist paramilitary organizations, are nearly matching gunmen from the mostly Roman Catholic Republican organizations like the I.R.A. in reprisal killings.


Crime Doesn't Pay for the Destitute Either
To the Editor:
The director of the Community Service and Referral Center in Lansing, Mich., reportedly on occasion tells clients who are poor or sick to commit a simple larceny because "it's a roof over their head. It's free food, free medical treatment for their pneumonia" ("To Avoid Deficit, Michigan Ends Welfare to Some Adults," front page, Oct. 7).
While it is truly sad that in an affluent country like ours people go hungry or are homeless, it is inconceivable to me that a public official is telling people to commit a crime to redress a larger social problem.
The courts and prisons are already so choked and overcrowded that dangerous criminals are being released because we can't process or incarcerate them.
To add the poor and sick to that already overburdened system is truly irresponsible.
This "solution" only aggravates the problem for the individual.
Even if there were jobs to be had, how likely would it be for a person with an arrest record to be hired?
Does such an official really believe she is acting in her clients' interests to thus advise them?
B.
RUNI MUKHERJI  Huntington Bay, L.I., Oct. 17, 1991


INSIDE
To Restore a Wetland
With new regulations requiring restoration of marshes, swamps and bogs after development, the trick is finding experts with the knowledge that will let them do it effectively.
Science Times, page C1.
Still Drinking, Still Driving
While arrests for drunken driving have declined since 1982, repeat offenders account for a disproportionate number of fatal accidents, pointing out flaws in state laws to keep offenders off the road.
Page A18.
Writ Large, Long and Slowly
After a 27-year gestation period since the signing of the contract, Harold Brodkey's mammoth first novel, "The Runaway Soul," is about to be published.
Page C13. 'Middle Road' at CUNY
Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., the City College professor who has made racially charged remarks, was allowed to remain as department chairman for eight more months.
Page B1.


A Plausible Revolution in Health
Medical insurance is in crisis, and Americans reflexively look to Washington for a solution.
Congressional leaders have proposed grandiose plans to provide universal, affordable coverage.
But their proposals threaten widespread dislocations, and have triggered paralyzing opposition.
But there's no need to depend on Congress.
On the contrary, far from Capitol Hill, major corporations are moving to adopt cost-effective managed care plans, like Health Maintenance Organizations.
The movement would become a national rush except for roadblocks thrown up by Federal and state laws.
Thus there is one simple, powerful and effective step for Congress to take: Get legal obstacles out of the way.


Restoring Faith With Tongue Lashings and a Call to Arms
LIKE a preacher whose sermon is all the more inspired by his fear that the faithful are losing faith, the head of the world's largest advertiser issued a challenge to his peers yesterday.
In an exhortation filled with words like "belief" and "conviction," Edwin L. Artzt, the chairman and chief executive of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, told the 82d annual meeting and business conference of the Association of National Advertisers that "we, as leaders of our businesses, simply must do a better job of demonstrating our own strong faith in advertising."


World Series Is a TV Hit, But CBS Still Faces Losses
CBS executives expressed delight and relief yesterday at the results of the network's telecasts of the 1991 World Series, saying baseball had redeemed itself as a television sport.
Even so, the network expected to lose heavily on its deal with Major League Baseball.
Sunday night's final game between the Minnesota Twins and the Atlanta Braves scored a huge rating of 32.1 in the nation's 25 largest cities. (Each rating point represents 921,000 homes.)


U.S. Agency Accused of Manipulating Crash Tests
Two consumer groups today accused the Transportation Department of manipulating car crash tests and selectively making the results public to support the automobile industry's contention that stricter fuel economy standards would produce more dangerous cars.
In a caustic rejoinder, the head of the department's traffic safety agency dismissed the accusations, lending the debate over fuel efficiency and safety an increasingly bitter tone just as the Senate prepares to consider tougher standards for gas mileage.


Miscellany
*
The new owners of the Clio Awards are planning to hold next year's ceremony on June 22 at the New York State Theater in Lincoln Center, the traditional venue for the presentation.
The assets of the Clio Awards were sold Sept. 27, several months after this year's ceremonies were disrupted and canceled amid reports of financial turmoil.
Although the old organization still has outstanding debts, the new investor group said it was preparing entry forms for next year.
Ruth L. Ratny, a Chicago trade publisher who leads the new group, said yesterday that a new advisory board included Marcio M. Moreira, the vice chairman and chief creative officer-international at McCann-Erickson Worldwide, New York; David Perry, the executive vice president-director of broadcast production at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide, New York; Susan Gillette, the president at DDB Needham, Chicago, and Ralph Rydholm, the chairman and chief creative officer at Tatham/RSCG, Chicago.


Chess
Not since Adolf Anderssen of Germany, 1818-1879, has any world class player preferred knights to bishops, but Anderssen got his comeuppance at the hands of Wilhelm Steinitz, the world's greatest player from 1866, when he defeated Anderssen, to 1894.
Now along comes the 21-year-old Ukrainian grandmaster, Vasily Ivanchuk, to champion the knight.


Kurdish Chief Challenges Rivals Over Talks
The Kurdish leader, Massoud Barzani, has challenged his political rivals to an electoral test of strength to settle the question of whether Iraq's 3.5 million Kurds should reconcile with the Government of Saddam Hussein or take a more confrontational stand against him.
Speaking in an interview after political consultations with Kurdish tribal leaders here, Mr.
Barzani reiterated in forceful terms his view that the majority of Kurds want only autonomy on their traditional lands in Iraq and that they believe the only way to achieve this is through successful negotiations with the Government in Baghdad.


The 'The' That Brought Mideast Rivals to Table
One word deliberately left out of the text of the Security Council resolution on the framework for resolving the 1967 Arab-Israeli war has provoked considerable disagreement through the years, but in a way it has also made this week's peace talks in Madrid possible.
On the one hand, the ambiguous wording of Resolution 242 is a product of the equally ambiguous interpretations of the 1967 Middle East war.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a plan by Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez to hire private contractors to provide custodians for New York City's schools reported the average salary of the city's teachers incorrectly in some editions.
It is $38,000.


Tale of Woe From Long Island Pumpkin Patches: Not Enough for Everyone


Robert O. Swain, Administrator, 81
Robert O. Swain, a former president of the International Road Federation, a nonprofit group whose members are mainly companies, organizations and government agencies concerned with highways, , died on Sunday at a hospital in Middletown, Conn.
He was 81 years old and lived in Essex, Conn.
He died of cardiac arrest caused by kidney failure, said a son, Robert Swain Jr. of Manhattan.


ARCO Posts Loss; Unocal Net Off Sharply
ARCO Inc. said today that it took a $340 million charge against earnings to pare 2,100 workers from its payroll and other actions, and that as a result it reported a net loss of $156 million in the third quarter.
The Unocal Corporation said its net income fell by 92.5 percent in the quarter.
Unocal, like ARCO, has faced gasoline price wars in California through much of this year, as well as sharply lower natural gas prices in the United States.


A Top Official Resigns At American Express
A senior American Express executive who ran the company's charge card business has resigned to take a job with the Primerica Corporation.
The resignation marks an important loss of management talent at American Express during one of the most difficult points in its history.
The defection of Edwin M. Cooperman, the chairman and co-chief executive of American Express's domestic Travel Related Services Company, comes after months of turmoil at the division, including a third-quarter loss of $88 million.
That loss was in part a result of the costs of reorganizing the unit, as well as a flood of defaults stemming from the company's Optima credit card.


Bridge
It is now more than 60 years since lovely Myrtle Bennett was acquitted by an impressionable jury for shooting her husband after a fight at the bridge table.
She had trouble after that getting partners, but she left a legacy: For many years husbands were slightly less likely to scream at their wives for overbidding or underplaying.
For a generation that has forgotten, there is now a very funny book: "How to Play Bridge with your Spouse . . . and Survive," by Roselyn Teukolsky. (The book is available from Granovetter Books, of Ballston Lake, N.Y.)


Compaq Stock
The Compaq Computer Corporation's stock sank to a 52-week low yesterday, still reeling after last week's news of a first-ever quarterly loss and the dismissal of its president and chief executive, Joseph (Rod) Canion.
The stock fell $1.25, or slightly more than 4 percent, to $29, and was the second-most-active issue on the Big Board.
The previous 52-week low was $29.875.
Compaq is based in Houston.


Costly and Scarce, Marijuana Is a High More Are Rejecting
Not long ago, hosts at some Upper East Side dinner parties would set out little silver bowls of home-rolled marijuana cigarettes along with the after-dinner drinks.
Rock concerts unfolded under canopies of marijuana smoke, and the drug's syrupy aroma drifted across schoolyards and campuses, construction sites and corporate offices, public parks and private patios.
But as quietly and gradually as the widening of a waistline, America's infatuation with the herb of many names -- grass, pot, dope, weed, ganja, sess, sens, smoke, skunk and, quaintly, in the long ago, Mary Jane -- has been fading.


In Polish Vote, a Clear Slap at Reform
The results of the Parliamentary elections on Sunday have significantly increased the pressure for braking Poland's program of economic reforms, which are widely regarded as the boldest in Eastern Europe.
With about 75 percent of the votes counted today, the results of a survey conducted among voters as they left the polls appeared to have been confirmed.
No party came close to winning a majority, and the seats in the new Parliament were evenly divided among a number of parties, including those formed by former Solidarity members, nationalists, religious groups and former Communists.


CHRONICLE
There were two major surprises for the 1,000 guests at the annual dinner of the American Committee for the Weizmann Institute of Science.
First, KIRK DOUGLAS, who was to receive the Weizmann Award in the Sciences and Humanities for his long-term activism on behalf of Israel, was fogged in at Halifax, Nova Scotia, where he is making a movie.
His son MICHAEL DOUGLAS read Mr.
Douglas's speech to the crowd, which included 12 Nobel laureates and dozens of other eminent scientists.


EXECUTIVES
*
C&amp;S/Sovran Corp., Charlotte, N.C., announced that Eileen Friars, executive vice president for corporate development, would become president of Nationsbank Card Services, when C&amp;S/Sovran and NCNB Corp. merge to form Nationsbank. *
Walt Disney Co., Burbank, Calif., named Charles Wickham and Michael Lynton senior vice presidents in its consumer products division.


Mobutu Meets With Opponents in Zaire
President Mobutu Sese Seko met today with opposition leaders in a potentially significant gesture of conciliation aimed at ending Zaire's political deadlock, African and Western diplomats said.
Even though key details remained vague, President Mobutu's willingness to meet with his adversaries was the most meaningful effort in recent days to create a climate that might end Zaire's civil and military unrest.


Giants' Decline May Just Be an Oversight
The problem with the Giants is that they seem to have forgotten how to win.
In their last two games, they have looked like killers in the first half and sleepwalkers in the second.
The big plays they made last season en route to their Super Bowl victory are now being made by the opposition.
The breaks they once got seem to be going against them.
Their big plays have become scarce.


Fitting Ending for a Storybook Series
The Series will forever be remembered because of The Game, The Pitcher and The Play.
For 10 innings Sunday night, the Minnesota Twins and the Atlanta Braves achieved the impossible, wringing more emotion and drama from a single game than had been thought possible.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
The economy has taken a turn for the worse, the Fed chairman said.
Alan Greenspan told executives in Rhode Island that the economy was still growing slightly, but that "in recent weeks, it's turned demonstrably sluggish." He gave no indication, even indirectly, of his intentions on interest rates.  [ Page D1. ]
A Federal prosecutor has traveled to Egypt to interview the former director of Saudi Arabian intelligence about the Bank of Credit and Commerce International scandal.  [ D1. ]


LEADERS ARRIVING FOR MIDEAST TALKS
Venturing out of the Soviet Union for the first time since the failed Kremlin coup in August, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev arrived in Madrid today for the opening of the Middle East peace conference on Wednesday.
As some Arab and Israeli delegates also arrived here, security concerns were very high, given threats from terrorist groups to upset the conference.
Spanish police, many wearing bulletproof vests and toting automatic weapons, guarded the hotels around Madrid housing the Soviet, American, Israeli, Syrian, Jordanian, Palestinian and Lebanese delegations.


Careers; Many Banks Are Seeking Help in Sales
AS a training specialist from the outside, W. Anthony Turner, executive vice president of the Selbst Group of White Plains gets an inside look into many banks.
And he says that despite a wave of layoffs and consolidations in banking, the growing number of brokerage operations at many banks provides some job opportunities for people with sales or financial bankgrounds who have lost their jobs at other types of companies.
Mr.
Turner's firm specializes in training bank personnel at many levels, including customer service representatives, branch managers and private bankers who handle the accounts of wealthy individuals.


Far From Fearsome, Bats Lose Ground To Ignorance And Greed
BATMAN'S youthful imitators may forever try to terrorize those who refuse them Halloween treats.
But real bats are not the aggressive, dirty or dangerous creatures of lore.
They are, in fact, industrious and invaluable assets to people and the planet.
And they are succumbing worldwide at a frightening rate to human ignorance, greed and destruction.
In misguided efforts to protect people, crops and livestock, bats are being poisoned, blasted with dynamite, asphyxiated by burning tires or entombed alive by the millions in caves and mines where they seek a day's or a winter's rest.
Many others are felled by hunters or die when spelunkers disturb their dwellings.


Channel Home Centers Narrows Choices to 5
Channel Home Centers Inc., Whippany, N.J., a hardware supplier, has selected five finalists in the review for its account, advertising executives said yesterday, confirming a report in this week's issue of Adweek.


Irate Dinkins Defends Trip To Germany
Bristling with indignation, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday defended his plan for an expenses-paid "working vacation" to a German tennis tournament in December, questioned the motives of his critics and insisted that whatever his popularity or problems at home, he still stood tall around the world.
Mr.
Dinkins said that he had accepted the invitation to the Compaq Grand Slam Cup in Munich, Germany, at the behest of its German promoter because, "among other things, they're going to pay for it," and that he saw nothing wrong with taking free trips.
He said that the promoter, Dr.
Axel Meyer-Wolden, had no financial ties to the United States Tennis Association, which is seeking to expand its tennis center in Queens, and that the trip posed no conflict of interest. 'Best Interests of Our City'
The Mayor said he also intended to visit the Dachau concentration camp and other historical sites to honor the memory of Holocaust victims and to court European businesses with a side trip to Berlin on what he said would be a three- to five-day visit, starting Dec. 10, just a month after his planned weeklong trip to South Africa.


Mayor Says Recycling Program to Continue
Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that the city's recycling program, which had been scheduled to end Dec. 1 for lack of money, would continue.
The Mayor announced that financing to carry forward recycling programs "at current levels" would be included in a new financial plan his administration was preparing.
He said he had asked Sanitation Commissioner Steven M. Polan and the Department of Sanitation to look for ways to increase productivity, such as extending routes of drivers who make curbside pickups.


Braves Just Accent Atlanta's New Spirit
Atlantans were being pulled in three different emotionally wrenching directions simultaneously today.
They mourned their team's narrow defeat in the extra innings of the last game of the World Series.


Topics of The Times; A Stargazer's Playground
Gene Roddenberry, the creator and producer of "Star Trek," was the Jules Verne of his time.
Well before man walked on the moon, he catapulted the Starship Enterprise, and millions of viewers, into a new intergalactic order.
Long before laptop PC's, he gave his Enterprise crew a user-friendly computer.
Mr.
Roddenberry even anticipated the collapse of the cold war.
The Enterprise, which included a Russian ensign among its crew, was part of a federation of planets with a peaceful mission -- "to explore new worlds, to seek out new life and new civilizations, to boldly go where no man has gone before."


Suits Force U.S. and States To Pay More for Medicaid
Hospitals and nursing homes around the country are successfully suing states to force them to increase Medicaid payments to levels that more nearly reflect what it costs to treat patients.
The multimillion-dollar judgments, propelled by a 1990 Supreme Court decision permitting such suits, are severely straining the budgets of the Federal and state governments, which jointly finance the program to provide medical care to low-income people.


Heinz Plans to Cut Jobs Worldwide
The H. J. Heinz Company plans to make large cuts in its worldwide work force of 40,000 to lower costs, its chairman, Anthony F. J. O'Reilly, said.
He also said the food products company would open a factory in China, try to expand in Eastern Europe and look for a joint venture in South Africa.


Sleepers Masquerade As Race Newcomers
The 26.2-mile course has been checked and rechecked, the finish line drill has been tested, and yesterday someone was painting a big bright red apple right in the middle of the final stretch, where it will be polished by close to 50,000 tired but happy feet on Sunday.
That's when the 22d New York City Marathon will begin on Staten Island with a record field of 25,845 starters and end in Central Park with an expected record of 24,000 finishers.


The Flights From City Hall
For Mayor David Dinkins to accept an expense-paid trip to watch tennis in Germany has conveyed a casual attitude about the business of governing New York City.
It's easy to understand why the Mayor, a tennis fan, might be tempted by the offer.
But his easy acceptance warrants serious second thoughts.
The invitation, which includes free airline and hotel accommodations for the Mayor, a guest and two aides, was extended by a German promoter of the Compaq Grand Slam Cup in Munich.
The Mayor described the promoter as someone with "connections" to the United States Tennis Association.
Initially, that raised questions about an actual or apparent conflict of interest.


Classical Music in Review
Boris Berman  Pianist 92d Street Y
Boris Berman is celebrating the Prokofiev centenary by recording all of the composer's piano music for Chandos, a British label.
So far, 4 of at least 10 projected compact disks have been released, and on Sunday afternoon, Mr.
Berman offered a progress report in the form of an energetic all-Prokofiev recital.


McEnroe's Doubles Hope Becomes Slim
JOHN McENROE's chance to play for the United States Davis Cup team may have evaporated when he lost a chance to play doubles in the Paris Open.
TOM GORMAN, the United States captain, is looking for a doubles team to face France in the Davis Cup final at Lyons, France, Nov. 29-Dec. 1.
After SCOTT DAVIS and DAVID PATE lost in the semifinals of the Davis Cup against Germany and the top United States pair of KEN FLACH and ROBERT SEGUSO indicated they were not interested in playing, Gorman began searching for a competitive pair to play against the French.


Few People Will Eat Whatever Crawls Onto the Plate
WANT to scare someone? Really give them the creeps on Halloween?
Chances are there is a food they will find more fearful than any wandering Frankenstein monster or Madonna clone.
Try serving them some liver, or lima beans, or maybe just a fried egg.


A Maze of Issues Lies Ahead for Israeli and Arab Negotiators
As soon as the opening ceremonies of the Middle East peace talks end in Madrid, Israel is supposed to begin direct negotiations with Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and the Palestinians.
Here are some of the disputes they hope to resolve:  Israel and Lebanon
The main issue in these talks is the future of Israel's self-declared "security zone" in southern Lebanon.
Lebanon has frequently demanded that Israel withdraw its troops and disband the South Lebanon Army, the Lebanese militia that it pays to help patrol the zone.


Suffolk's Executive Runs Against Economy
Iraida Gerena listened to the speeches, ate the beef stroganoff and rice, and tried to explain why she no longer supported Suffolk County Executive Patrick G. Halpin in his bid for re-election.
"I think Halpin did the best he could under the circumstances, but we need some kind of change because things are bad on the Island," said Mrs.
Gerena, who forked over $35 to attend a fund-raiser for Mr.
Halpin's Republican opponent, Assemblyman Robert J. Gaffney, at a country club here the other night.
"What makes me think Bob Gaffney would do a better job? I really can't answer that."


4 New Plays Win A.T.&amp;T. Awards
Three new plays and a musical received sponsorship awards yesterday from the A.T.&amp;T.
Foundation as part of its international theater program, A.T.&amp;T.: Onstage.
Individual grants for the presentation of the new works are to be $30,000 to $75,000, and will be supplemented by A.T.&amp;T. assistance in advertising, promotion and publicity.
The plays, chosen from proposals submitted by 39 regional theaters, are "The Baltimore Waltz," by Paula Vogel, to be presented at the Circle Repertory Company in New York City; "Dream of a Common Language," by Heather McDonald, to be presented at the Berkeley Repertory Theater in Berkeley, Calif., and the Women's Project and Productions in New York City, and "Today," by Valetta Anderson, to be developed by Jomandl Productions in Atlanta.
"Bandido," a musical by Luis Valdez, is to be presented by El Teatro Campesino in San Jose, Calif.


Bush, in Madrid For Conference, Sees Gorbachev
In what American officials described as an effort to counter the forces pulling apart the beleaguered Soviet central Government, President Bush offered praise to his "friend" President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today and urged the restive Soviet republics to give him power to negotiate foreign aid programs.
"I sense no difference in how we talk and the frankness with which we exchange views -- no difference in, certainly from my standpoint, the respect level for President Gorbachev," Mr.
Bush said at a news conference with the Soviet President on the eve of the opening of the Middle East peace conference.


No Turn in Exodus Of Garment Makers
To the Editor:
The headline "U.S. Garment Makers Come Home" (Business Day, Oct. 8) is not borne out by an article based on limited interviews with a few apparel manufacturers -- including major importers.
You speak of an "imperceptible" shift and express doubt that it will seriously affect United States apparel manufacturing.


Bridge
A character from the pages of Damon Runyon: That was how many viewed Harold Berlin, who died Saturday, a week after falling sick at a regional tournament.
He was 73 years old and lived in the Bronx.
The retired owner and manager of a trucking business, he was crusty, crafty and contentious, and is mourned by several generations of young New York City players to whom he taught the vital parts of the game that cannot be learned from books: table feel, savvy, and competitive hand evaluation.


Islanders Push Past the New Guys
Millionaires with spare change to throw around might want to look closely at the investment potential of the expansion-level hockey that was displayed tonight at Nassau Coliseum.
The game featured the San Jose Sharks, a first-year team from the end of the earth, against the Islanders, a 20-year-old team that has regressed in recent years to the ways of to a previous life.


CHRONICLE
More than 2,000 people crowded into Temple Emanu-El in San Francisco on Monday to attend memorial services for Bill Graham, the impresario who promoted the careers of dozens of rock performers and who organized and marketed rock music around the world in live concerts, records, films, videos and television shows.
According to The Associated Press, those who eulogized him at the private service were friends whose careers he had helped advance, including MICKEY HART of the Grateful Dead and PAUL KANTNER of the Jefferson Airplane.
CARLOS SANTANA performed "I Love You Too Much."


About New York
You could feel sorry for Alberto Torres, who is blind.
The last thing he remembers seeing was his daughter, Lauren, being born 13 years ago.
Then the world went blank; he can only imagine what his only child looks like as a cheerleader and honor student.
Total darkness came as a result of an inflammation of his optic nerve -- a condition that was unrelated to the retinal disease that had obscured his vision since birth.
"I went to sleep and woke up with nothing," he said.


Warner-Lambert Net Rises; $690 Million Charge Is Set
Facing a difficult period for some of its leading products and rapid changes in world markets for drugs and consumer goods, the Warner-Lambert Company announced drastic cost-cutting measures yesterday.
The company said it would take a charge of $690 million against its 1991 pretax earnings and cut 2,700 employees, or about 8 percent of its work force, over five years.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 25
Oct. 18
Oct. 26
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
6.9
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.9
2.9
Gasoline stocks
205.7
211.8
220.4
Distillate stocks
134.8
135.4
138.1
Crude imports, daily
6.2
5.5
5.1
Product imports, daily
1.5
1.9
1.7
Crude stocks
347.8
338.3
339.5
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
81.5
83.3
82.5
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


New York Organizers Look Ahead
Five days before the 22d New York City Marathon, the race director, Fred Lebow, and the coordinator, Allan Steinfeld, were already looking ahead to the 25th race.
That's because 1994 will be the next year there will be neither an Olympics (1992) nor a world championship (1993) to draw off the world's best runners, as the 1991 world championships have done.


Manager Shuffles Insure Nothing
When a general manager of another team was told yesterday that the Yankees had hired their 18th manager in the last 15 years, he said, "Oh my."
Fred Claire's reaction was understandable.
He works for the Los Angeles Dodgers, and they are not in the business of serving as a shuttle system for managers: in one door, out the other.


Bank Cuts Prime Rate
First Fidelity Bancorporation of Newark, the nation's 24th-largest banking company, yesterday announced a cut in its prime lending rate to 7.75 percent, from 8 percent, begining today.
No other large banks matched First Fidelity, but analysts said other banks would probably lower their rates if the Federal Reserve eases monetary policy and cuts short-term interest rates.


Ukraine Is Now Getting Serious About Its Drive for Independence
Real statehood may still be a distant glimmer and the way to it hazy, but the Ukraine is demonstrating with increasing force that its drive to independence is not a passing whim.
Recently, the Ukraine declined to join eight other republics in signing an economic agreement and refused to send delegates to a new union parliament.
A new Ukrainian currency is being printed in Canada, and all candidates for election to a new executive Ukrainian presidency scheduled for Dec. 1 have come out staunchly for independence.


Iran Is Said to Seek To Make Atom Arms With Chinese Help
United States intelligence officials have concluded that Iran is trying to develop a nuclear weapon and that China has provided Iran with equipment for the project, The Washington Post reported today.
In an account in its Wednesday issue, The Post said that some United States analysts suspect that Iran may be seeking to build a nuclear weapon that can be used to enhance its power in the Middle East.


Hawkins Is Nominated for Hall of Fame
CONNIE HAWKINS, a New York City schoolboy and schoolyard star who was banned by the National Basketball Association for seven years before being allowed into the league, heads a group of eight players nominated yesterday for the Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Mass.
Six coaches, including LOU CARNESECCA of St.
John's and AL MCGUIRE, the former Marquette coach, were also nominated for consideration next spring.
To be elected, the nominees need 18 of 24 votes from the Honors Committee.
The enshrinement ceremonies are scheduled for May 11.


Corrections
A calendar listing on the Sports Leisure page on Saturday about Metrosports Magazine Endurance Night, a fitness symposium with Paula Newby-Fraser, triathlete, and Bill Rodgers, runner, misstated the date.
It is tonight at 6 P.M. at the Vertical Club, 330 East 61st Street.
The information number is (212) 627-7040.


Mets Allow Templeton To File for Free Agency
The Mets said yesterday they would not offer salary arbitration to Garry Templeton, which means he could become a free agent next week.
Barry Jones of the Montreal Expos became the first player to demand a trade, which means he could wind up with the Mets.
The Mets traded Tim Teufel to San Diego for Templeton last May 31.
He played in 80 games for the Mets and batted .228.
The 35-year-old infielder could not become a free agent because he was a free agent three years ago.
The Mets, however, had to offer him salary arbitration within five days after the World Series or he could file for free agency.
Now that the Mets have decided not to offer arbitration, he can file when the five-day period is up.


Turner Buying Hanna-Barbera
Turner Broadcasting System Inc. said today that it had signed a definitive agreement to acquire Hanna-Barbera Productions Inc., the Hollywood cartoon producer, for $320 million.
Turner said the acquisition would be made as a 50-50 joint venture with a partner, the Apollo Investment Fund, led by the financier Leon Black.


CUNY Vote On Jeffries Pleases Few
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday denounced the decision by the trustees of the City University of New York to reappoint Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. as chairman of the black studies department at City College, even as Dr.
Jeffries complained that he had not been given a chance to defend himself before the decision was made.
The appointment was to an eight-month term rather than the standard three years.
The Governor, who appoints 10 of the university's 16 voting trustees, had previously condemned racially charged remarks by Dr.
Jeffries about Jews and other whites and had called on the university to take action.
But he had never spelled out what action he favored, saying as recently as Friday that it was "very much up to" the trustees to decide what to do.


David Ogilvy's Hard Advice
David Ogilvy, the legendary creative force of modern advertising, lashed out today at the "lunatic fringe" he said had damaged his industry and its ability to sell products.
"I am supposed to be the No. 1 creative genius in the whole world," Mr.
Ogilvy, 80 years old, told the closing session today of the 82d annual meeting of the Association of National Advertisers here, "and I don't even know what the hell the word 'creativity' means."


Which Came First, Cuffs or Cuff Links?
THE Duke of Windsor wore them.
So did Marlene Dietrich and Cary Grant.
But Louis XIV didn't.
When it came to the end of his sleeve, he probably just used a tiny piece of colored string.
What Louis XIV lacked was cuff links, and they are the subject of a lavishly illustrated book published this month by Harry N. Abrams.
The book, appropriately titled "Cuff Links," follows their design from the Victorian era through Art Nouveau, the Edwardian age, Art Deco, modernism and postmodernism.
The almost 200 illustrations include designs by Faberge, Cartier, Tiffany, Georg Jensen, Jean Schlumberger, Rene Lalique, Josef Hoffmann and Alexander Calder.


2 Killed in Shootout at Harlem Gambling Den
Two people, including a 66-year-old woman, were killed and two others were wounded on Monday in a shootout in a Harlem grocery store, which the police said had doubled as a gambling parlor.
The police said the shootout, in the Harlem Deli/Grocery at 301 West 130th Street, involved a store employee and two men who the police said were trying to force the store to replace its gambling machines with their own machines.
Such machines have become a major source of income for organized crime, the police said, and can turn a profit of as much as $1,000 a week.


Walter Davis Waived by Trail Blazers
The Portland Trail Blazers waived the 14-year veteran guard WALTER DAVIS yesterday as the team reached the 12-player limit.
Davis is 37 years old and 21st on the league's career scoring list.
He was acquired by Portland from Denver last season in a three-team deal that sent DRAZEN PETROVIC to the Nets.
But he never found his role with Portland, and his age and contract, which is nearly $1 million for this season, have inhibited Portland's efforts to trade him.
Boston Celtics guard DEE BROWN suffered a torn cartilage in his left knee during practice yesterday and will undergo arthroscopic surgery today, team officials announced.
Brown, the Celtics' No. 1 pick in the 1990 draft, will start the season on the injured list.
Brown played in all 82 regular-season games last season and averaged 8.7 points per game. . . .
Washington Bullets forward BERNARD KING said yesterday that his right knee has been slow to heal from surgery, and as a result he will miss much more time than originally anticipated.
King, 34, underwent arthroscopic surgery on Sept. 6 to repair torn cartilage in his right knee and was expected to return by the season opener.


Ex-White House Aide Ends Legal Job for B.C.C.I. Figure
A former senior White House aide said today that he had terminated a $600,000 contract to represent the former head of Saudi Arabian intelligence who is under scrutiny in the investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Edward M. Rogers Jr. said he was withdrawing from the contract to avoid embarrassment to President Bush and to escape "unfair inferences" about his relationship with Sheik Kamal Adham, a key figure in the criminal investigations into B.C.C.I. and its illegally acquired subsidiary, the First American Bank of Washington.
Mr.
Rogers left his post as a principal aide to John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff, in August.


CHRONICLE
When WHITNEY TOWER JR.  first heard that the Whitney Museum of American Art was planning to honor his aunt FLORA MILLER BIDDLE at the celebration of its 60th anniversary tonight, he decided to put together a cousins' committee to rally around "Auntie Flora."
Mrs.
Biddle, whose grandmother, Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney, founded the museum as a showcase for American art, served as its president from 1977 to 1985, when she then became its chairwoman.


White House Threatens Banking Measure Veto
With Congress preparing to take up a comprehensive banking bill this week, the White House threatened today to veto any measure including a hard-fought compromise by two key Democratic chairmen.
It is significantly more restrictive of banks than the Administration's proposal.
The White House announcement, which was not unexpected given the Treasury Department's harsh reaction to the agreement last week, raises the prospect that the months of political tussling between the Administration and the lawmakers over the details of the sweeping legislation could ultimately lead to a substantially narrower bill.


USX Units' Profits Fall; LTV Gains
The USX Corporation, which operates the nation's largest steel company, said yesterday that third-quarter earnings from its steel group dropped 93.8 percent, reflecting continued low demand and falling prices.
USX also said that net income of its Marathon Group declined 45.8 percent in the quarter, primarily because of the drop in crude-oil prices since the war against Iraq.


Data Give Big Lift To Bonds
Treasury bond prices exploded and long-term interest rates fell well below 8 percent yesterday after the Government reported that a critical inflation measure posted a big decline in the third quarter.
In addition, a respected survey showed that consumer confidence fell to recessionary levels in October.
The day's events only heightened speculation that the Federal Reserve Board would move soon to lower short-term interest rates to provide additional relief to what appears to be a faltering recovery.


Editorial Notebook; A Day Downtown
Like most New Yorkers, I am ambivalent about this city, so ambivalent I have a bolt hole.
My bolt hole is not an actuality, however, but the promise implied by a photograph in the kitchen.
It is of a house with a big front porch and a privet hedge; and the promise is of peace, privacy and as much security as a flawed world can guarantee.
The actual house is 200 miles northeast, and is for sale.
My imagination has furnished every room and I have sat on the front porch watching passers-by, and on the back porch watching the leaves fall.
Here there will be no burglaries (whereas in Manhattan I have had three) and no purse-snatchings.
Sometimes I am halfway there.
Yet I suspect the house will stay what it is -- an image propped against a kitchen scale -- rather than my home.
And all because of days like the one I had last week.


Split on Homosexuality, Church Rejects a Prospective Leader
The Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), a generally liberal Protestant denomination with one million members, yesterday rejected as head of the church a candidate who had refused to declare that homosexual acts were always sinful and that sexually active homosexuals should not be ordained.
The candidate, the Rev.
Michael K. Kinnamon, dean of the Lexington Theological Seminary in Kentucky, won 65.1 percent of the 5,651 votes cast by delegates to the denomination's General Assembly, which was meeting in Tulsa, Okla.
The result left Dr.
Kinnamon just short of the two-thirds vote he needed for approval.


Spacecraft's Maps Show Evidence of Active Volcanoes on Venus
New radar images from the Magellan spacecraft reveal that the planet Venus has apparently been completely resurfaced by volcanic eruptions and its second-highest mountain seems to be covered with fresh lava from an active volcano, scientists reported yesterday.
Dr.
Stephen Saunders, the project's chief scientist, said Magellan's first detailed mapping survey of the planet over the last 14 months has produced compelling evidence that Venus "is dominated by volcanism on a global scale."


I'll Have My Milk With Cream, And Pass the Butter
THE dairy case is full of contradictions, as low-fat faces off against old-fashioned rich flavor.
Despite the rise of nonfat yogurts, reduced-fat spreads, cholesterol-free cheeses, cream substitutes and skim and 1-percent-fat milk, the people who make creme fraiche, rich European-style butters and whole milk in bottles are suddenly finding that they cannot keep up with the demand.
What's going on?
"Perhaps people are starting to believe in quality calories," said Steven Jenkins, the manager of the cheese department at Dean &amp; DeLuca in Manhattan.
"Even though I haven't seen a decrease in the diet stuff, at the same time I do see an increase in sales of traditional cheeses. I can't keep my French butter in stock."


Florida Lottery Cuts Agency Choices to 4
About two months after deciding to hold a second review for its $25 million advertising account, the Florida Lottery has narrowed the field to four agencies.
The finalists are Bozell, Tampa, the incumbent: Earle Palmer Browne, Tampa, which won the first review in May; BBDO South, Atlanta, and W. B. Doner &amp; Company, Southfield, Mich.


To Teach Distant Pupils, Educators in Kentucky Turn On Interactive TV
Four years ago, educators in Kentucky were already using television sets to connect teachers and students separated by hundreds of miles, but they were casting about for a way to improve that way of teaching by making it interactive.
They found their answer in a sports bar in downtown Lexington.


AT ISRAEL FUNERAL, MOOD IS DEFIANT
Her neighbors and fellow settlers laid Rachel Druck to rest today in the rocky soil of biblical Samaria, mourning her violent death and vowing that they will stay on this disputed land forever.
It was part-funeral, part-political assembly as hundreds of people from Shillo and other Jewish communities in the West Bank gathered at Mrs.
Druck's graveside a day after she and an Israeli man were killed in an ambush attack on a busload of settlers.


Theater in Review
No Cure for Cancer  Actors' Playhouse 100 Seventh Avenue South, near Bleecker Street Manhattan Through Nov. 17 Written and performed by Denis Leary; directed by Chris Phillips; scenic lighting by Larry Lieberman; music by Mr.
Leary, Mr.
Phillips and Adam Roth; sound by Peter Klusman; executive producer, Full Circle Management.
Presented by Jason M. Solomon, Pamela Ross and Comedy Central.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about King Hussein of Jordan misstated the reason the King and Prince Hassan were at the Amman airport.
They were bidding farewell to the Jordanian delegation to the Madrid peace talks.
They themselves were not leaving for the talks.


2 Scholars Act as Palestinians' Data Base
One was born in Jerusalem and speaks English with an Oxford accent.
The other is a New Yorker at heart and coaches Little League games in Chicago.
Both are Palestinian-Americans, eminent academics at Harvard and Chicago Universities, sons of one of the best-known, oldest Palestinian families of Jerusalem.
Together, they are a potent weapon in the negotiating arsenal of the joint Palestinian-Jordanian delegation, supplying research material, knowledge and position papers to back up the Palestinian claim to self-determination in the Middle East regional peace conference starting here Wednesday.


Toshiba and Itoh Agree To Time Warner Deal
In a deal to further reduce the debt of Time Warner Inc. and give it more flexibility in attracting additional partners, the company announced yesterday that it had signed an agreement for the Toshiba Corporation and C. Itoh &amp; Company to invest $1 billion for a 12.5 percent stake in Time Warner Entertainment.
Time Warner Entertainment, a new limited partnership, will own Time Warner's cable television operations, the Home Box Office cable channel and Warner Brothers Inc., the film and television operation.


Personal Health
THE windswept fires that destroyed nearly 2,000 homes in Northern California last week forced many people to face the often suppressed possibility that a fire could occur in their own homes, jeopardizing the lives of the people closest to them.
Fire is just too horrible to think about.
Yet, by preparing in advance -- taking steps to help prevent fires and planning a course of action should a fire occur -- you can greatly diminish the risk of losing lives and precious property.
Do you, for example, have a plan to help you and your family escape safely should a fire break out anywhere in your house or apartment?
And, if you do, have you rehearsed it recently?


Mubarak Warns Israelis On East Jerusalem Issue
President Hosni Mubarak, the head of the only Arab country to have diplomatic ties with Israel, warned today that if the Israelis refused to reverse their annexation of East Jerusalem, there could never be peace in the region.
While the Egyptian leader believes that Israel may eventually agree to concede some territory to Palestinians and its other Arab neighbors in the peace talks to begin in Madrid on Wednesday, he worries that the Israelis have failed to grasp the symbolic and religious significance of East Jerusalem to Arabs.
It is the site of Al Aksa Mosque, Islam's third holiest shrine.


Inquiry on Report of '80 Hostage Deal
In an atmosphere of intense partisan combat, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee narrowly voted today to authorize an investigation into whether the Reagan Presidential campaign struck a deal with Iran in 1980 to delay the release of American hostages until after the election.
The committee voted 9 to 8, with one abstention, to spend about $600,000 over six months to look into the accusations that have tantalized Democrats and infuriated Republicans.
The House is set to begin its own investigation of the same issue.


President of Allergan Named Chief Executive
Allergan Inc. today named William C. Shepherd, its president, to be chief executive.
Allergan is a leading producer of contact lens solutions, contact lenses and other eye and skin care products.
Mr.
Shepherd started his career with Allergan, based in Irvine, Calif., in 1966 in the research department and has been president and chief operating officer since 1964.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about the songwriter Sylvia Fine Kaye omitted a survivor.
He is Robert Fine Forrest, of Manhattan, her brother.


Food Notes
A Sweeter Peanut Butter
Is nothing sacred?
Best Foods, which makes Skippy peanut butter, has introduced a new flavor, roasted honey nut.
Plain Skippy peanut butter has been sold for about 60 years.
Actually, the roasted honey nut, in smooth or "super chunk," has a fuller, richer flavor than the regular and is not as salty.
A two-tablespoon serving contains 100 milligrams of sodium, compared with 150 milligrams in the regular.


Morris Lifts His Game To Much Higher Level
Baseball people, whether they be players or managers, have been known to talk about taking the game to higher and higher levels.
Some, like Ernie Banks and Don Mattingly, have never held the key to any level beyond the regular season.
Some, like Rod Carew and Gene Mauch, couldn't do enough as players or as managers to find the key that opens the door to the World Series.
Then there's the level of achievement that results in the wearing of the championship ring.
The Boston Red Sox are in their eighth decade in search of a way back to baseball's pinnacle of achievement.
The Chicago Cubs and the Chicago White Sox are in the same class.


Quotation of the Day
"We probably have a better global map of Venus now than we have of Earth." -- Dr.
Stephen Saunders, chief scientist for the Magellan mapping project.  [ A21:3. ]


Patch With Painkiller Circumvents the Needle
FOR patients who need painkillers but who fear the sting of a doctor's needle, an experimental skin patch with an extremely potent painkilling drug may offer hope.
The small patches, carrying a drug called fentanyl, may be as effective for treating surgical patients as drugs given by the traditional poke of a shot, a new study has found.
It will probably be several years before fentanyl patches are sold.
Even then, they are not likely to be available over the drugstore counter, said Dr.
Pierre Fiset of Standford University, who worked on the fentanyl patch study.


Dollar Plunges After Report On Consumer Uncertainty
The dollar plunged in heavy trading on world currency markets yesterday as an unexpectedly weak report on United States consumer confidence led to a selloff on the assumption that interest rates are headed lower.
Gold prices were narrowly mixed.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery settled at $359.40 an ounce, up 40 cents from Monday.
Republic National Bank said gold rose 55 cents an ounce, to a late bid price of $358.90.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-13
The Middle East peace talks begin today in Madrid under a mood of guarded optimism after both Israeli and Palestinian leaders issued encouraging statements.
Page A1
News analysis: The conference has already highlighted new relationships between Arabs and Arabs, between Israel and the United States and most importantly between the United States and the Soviet Union.
A11


Alumni Gifts Pay for Legacy Admissions
To the Editor:
Jake Lamar makes some strong points about preferential treatment for alumni children at major universities in "Whose Legacy Is It Anyway?" (Op-Ed, Oct. 9), but he misses the central reason for the problem.


Sidney Schwartz; Food Executive, 70
Sidney Schwartz, a frozen-food industry pioneer, died on Oct. 16 in Padua, Italy, while vacationing with his wife.
He was 70 years old and lived in Long Beach.
He died in an accidental fall, said a daughter, Eileen Lieberman.


Review/Film; Nazism as an Esthetic Ploy
It is not news that the Nazis embraced bad art, glorying in heroic statues and sentimental landscape paintings while condemning modern art as "degenerate." Josef Goebbels, the Minister for Popular Enlightenment and Propaganda, was a sometime poet and playwright, and Hitler himself was the world's most notorious failed painter.
But it is a long leap from those facts to the argument put forth by the simplistic documentary "The Architecture of Doom."
Peter Cohen, a Swiss film maker, draws on a wealth of still photographs and films from the period, from kitschy floats in Nazi parades to banal portraits that Hitler kept at home.
He uses this material to contend that politics offers too narrow a lens for understanding Hitler and the Holocaust; Nazism, he suggests, was a movement driven by esthetics.


Los Angeles Is Split Not by Earthquakes But by Area Codes
At Pennyfeathers, a popular Los Angeles restaurant, placing a call to the other side of La Cienega Boulevard is about to get more complicated.
On Saturday, everything from La Cienega west to the Pacific Ocean will be cleaved from the 213 area code, forming the new 310 area code.
"It does seem asinine to dial a different area code to call across the street," said Jack G. Pitcher, the owner of Pennyfeathers.
Mr.
Pitcher will also have to dial 213 when calling his other restaurant, Cafe Sushi, three blocks away.
"What a hassle," he lamented.


Adirondack Park Land Swap on Ballot Threatens Environment
To the Editor:
On Nov. 5, the people of New York State will be asked to accept or reject a proposal to trade a tract of Adirondack Forest Preserve for a parcel of private land.
Since 1894, Article 14 of the New York State Constitution has forbidden the sale, lease or exchange of forest preserve.
Ballot Proposal 2 is an amendment to the constitution to allow the transfer of 50 acres of forever-wild Adirondack Forest Preserve from the people of New York to the town of Arietta.


Simplifying Surgical Removal Of Precancerous Lesions
A GROWING number of American women with common precancerous conditions of the cervix are being treated with a very simple new tool that scoops out abnormal tissue in a matter of seconds.
Doctors say the device, an electrified wire loop that resembles the tool potters use to scrape away excess clay, increases the accuracy of detecting hidden cancers and stems the spread of sexually transmitted disease.
The condition is diagnosed and the woman is treated in only one office visit, they say, for less money than currently popular treatments.


Wine Talk
CAN a glass make a difference in the taste and smell of wine?
Absolutely.
Can it make a big difference?
Georg Riedel says it can.
Who is Georg Riedel?
He is an Austrian whose family has been making glass in Austria and in what is now Czechoslovakia for two centuries.


Pennsylvania Senate Race Tightens
The Harris Wofford campaign scheduled a tour at a hospital here to promote the Senate candidate's major issue, a call for national health insurance.
But so many television crews showed up to quench the state's growing thirst for information about this little-known Democrat that the candidate had to make the tour twice.
Viewers got to see Mr.
Wofford, accompanied by his actor friend, Mike Farrell, who played B. J. Hunnicutt on the television series "M*A*S*H." The two chatted with new mothers, and Mr.
Wofford said things like, "I hope that when Ashley grows up she'll have national health insurance."


Weight Scores Winner as Rangers Rally for 3d in Row
The young and the brave led the Rangers back to victory last night over an intimidating enemy at Madison Square Garden.
Faced with bulk and bravado in black-and-green uniforms, the Rangers got key goals by undaunted rookie roommates Tony Amonte and Doug Weight.
They got another emotional pep talk from Mark Messier before the final period.
Eventually, they got a 3-2 comeback decision over the Minnesota North Stars for a third straight victory and their fifth in six games.


Books of The Times; Of Rights and Rhetoric About Rights
Visions of Liberty The Bill of Rights for All Americans By Ira Glasser Illustrated. 288 pages.
Arcade/Little, Brown. $24.95.
Rights Talk The Impoverishment of Political Discourse By Mary Ann Glendon 218 pages.
Free Press. $22.95.
After ratification by the states, the first 10 Amendments to the Constitution were adopted on Dec. 15, 1791, thanks to James Madison, Thomas Jefferson and those inspiring barons at Runnymede in 1215, who set down their rights and the rights of freemen in Magna Carta, which established the basis of due process of law.


Lawmakers Vote to Delete Limits By U.S. on Abortion Counseling
A House-Senate conference committee voted today to overturn the Federal regulation that forbids doctors and other counselors at federally supported family planning clinics to mention to pregnant women that abortion is one of their choices.
The provision that would void the rule was part of a $204 billion bill to finance three Government departments in the fiscal year that began Oct. 1.
The entire bill is expected to win easy approval in both houses of Congress but to be vetoed by President Bush because of the counseling provision.


Fitch Wonders if Drafting Anderson Was a Mistake
From where Coach Bill Fitch sits, which is on the bench of a pretty bad basketball team, the Nets' drafting of Kenny Anderson looks as if it may have been a mistake.
That is what he said yesterday, when he was quick to add that he wasn't in such a great mood and was therefore exercising his right to 20-20 hindsight.
"You have to think about all the things you could have done," Fitch said after the Nets finished a three-hour workout at their practice site in North Bergen, N.J.
"If I had known I wasn't going to have the guy in camp, sure, anyone would say they wonder if they would've made the same decision.


U.S. Will Impose a Trade Ban on Haiti
In a sharp increase in pressure for a return to constitutional rule, the United States announced a strict ban on trade today with Haiti, the hemisphere's poorest country.
The measure comes nearly a month after soldiers overthrew the nation's first democratically elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
The trade ban comes after the Organization of American States unanimously approved a resolution this month to impose stringent sanctions as a means of reversing attempts to legitimize the overthrow of Father Aristide, who fled the country at gunpoint Oct. 1.
The ban makes exceptions only for narrowly defined humanitarian aid, including some food.
Beginning Nov. 5, according to an executive order signed in Madrid today by President Bush, "all commercial trade" with Haiti, including both imports and exports of goods and services, will be indefinitely suspended.
By some estimates, the United States accounts for nearly three-quarters of all Haitian trade, as well as most of its foreign investment.
Since the imposition of limited sanctions against Haiti by the United States this month banning all American transactions with the Haitian Government, diplomats say, Washington has struggled over sending an even stronger message to the provisional leadership here, while not irreparably damaging the fragile economy and further hurting the country's poor.
U.S.
Urges Repatriation
A United States statement on the embargo made public here seemed to address these concerns, saying, "The disruptions which these additional sanctions will place on the Haitian economy have been brought upon the Haitian people by those who seized and hold power today."
In anticipation of new hardships and the danger of civil strife, the State Department ordered the repatriation of all "nonessential" personnel from Haiti, and diplomats here stepped up efforts to persuade as many as possible of the 8,500 American citizens registered with the United States Embassy here to leave the country.
Haitian reaction to the embargo was mixed, with people applauding it or denouncing it, depending on their feelings toward Father Aristide.
Nearly all, however, expressed trepidation about the effect on the nation, where the annual per capita income hovers at about $360.
"For 187 years we have been used for this kind of action," Jean-Jacques Honorat, Haiti's provisional Prime Minister, said in a telephone interview.
"A commercial embargo against a country that produces nothing will be all-out barbarism. We will have to eat each other soon." Legislators Displeased
Asked if he thought the measure would result in greater accommodation by the Haitian military, Mr.
Honorat said, "I don't think this will force any Haitians to their knees."
Haitian legislators who voted to declare Father Aristide's office vacant and appointed an interim Government to replace him expressed displeasure, while allowing that the measures might speed discussions with an O.A.S. mission expected in Haiti on Thursday.
"At least Nov. 5 gives us until the end of the week to do something," said Guy Bauduy, a former Senate leader.
"If we came to an agreement with the O.A.S. mission while it was here, the sanctions could be rescinded." Popular With the Poor
Father Aristide remains very popular with Haiti's poor masses, but is loathed by many in the small educated elite as a threatening figure who, they say, legitimized vigilantism and showed little respect for institutional checks and balances.
In Carrefour-Feuilles, a poor hillside quarter of tin-roofed shacks overlooking the capital's broad bay, residents on Monday spoke with enthusiasm for the sanctions, which have been widely predicted.
"It doesn't matter if we have to go hungry," said one young man as a crowd of Father Aristide's supporters gathered.
"If they have to flatten the country, just bring him back.


U.S. UNVEILS RULES TO LIMIT ACID RAIN
The Environmental Protection Agency today proposed regulations to cut in half the kind of air pollution that is mainly responsible for acid rain, while allowing for the first time the widespread buying and selling of pollution rights to cut the costs of compliance.
The proposed rules, required under revisions to the Clean Air Act that passed last year, were welcomed by environmental groups and by industry as a signal that innovation and consultation, rather than obstruction and confrontation, can guide the development of costly new environmental rules.


60-Minute Gourmet
WHEN this column was conceived in 1975, there was a mandate to find dishes that were easy, quick and inexpensive.
Immediately I thought of chicken, that staple of many American diets.
Nothing is as versatile and easy to work with.
And those who are really in a rush can buy chicken breasts.
I've probably made more recipes with chicken breasts than with any two other ingredients taken together.
Some of my favorite preparations include pounding the breasts, sauteing them, and serving them in "a la minute curry sauce." Another delightful recipe is cutting the chicken breasts into cubes and serving them with a shrimp sauce enhanced with the anise-flavored liqueur, Pernod.


Tokyo Journal; Japan's Premier Issue? Naked Idol, by a Landslide
Suddenly, all of Japan is talking about Miyazawa.
Not Kiichi Miyazawa, whose selection as Prime Minister has been treated by the Japanese press as evidence that nothing really changes in this country's aging leadership.


Bowe Gets the Boot, but Wins
The fight wasn't much, but the ruckus that followed kept the crowd's interest.
The bell ending the first round of a scheduled 12-round match here tonight between Riddick Bowe, an undefeated heavyweight contender, and Elijah Tillery, a sparring partner of Mike Tyson's, had sounded.
It climaxed a round in which Bowe had battered Tillery liberally, even scoring a knockdown.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Aug. 23 about environmental destruction in the Pantanal region of Brazil referred incorrectly to a species being depleted by poachers.
A zoo curator has pointed out, in a letter received Sept. 16, that the animals are Yacare caimans, an endangered species belonging to the alligator family, not alligators, which are not endangered and are legally farmed for their skins.
Research on the issue by the writer of the article was delayed by his absence from South America.


Florio Tells Voters in '91 to Send Bush a Message for '92
Gov.
Jim Florio urged economically battered voters tonight to "send a message" to President Bush by voting against Republicans in the elections next Tuesday for control of the State Legislature.
"If the people who are hurting want to send an advance message to the President, prior to next year, they can vote against Republicans in this year's election," Mr.
Florio said in a speech to about 800 Essex County Democrats.
"That will send a message."


Survey Finds Growing Pessimism Among Consumers
Consumer confidence fell sharply in October, as Americans grew more pessimistic about the economy and the outlook for jobs, a survey said yesterday.
The Conference Board, a business research group based in New York, said its index of consumer confidence fell by 12.5 points, to 60.4, from 72.9 in September.
The group said its barometer, whose 1985 base totaled 100, had fallen to recession levels.


Computer Speech -- Also Free
The Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith counts itself among the staunchest friends of free speech.
That's special reason to regret the league's recent attempts to force censorship of a computer-based discussion service run by the Prodigy Services Company.
Prodigy, a joint venture of I.B.M. and Sears, Roebuck, offers shopping, banking and information services to 1.1 million subscribers through their personal computers.
Like other services, it also offers electronic bulletin boards -- forums for discussions on travel, literature, politics and other subjects.
Boardwatch magazine says there are more than 40,000 bulletin boards in the U.S.
Prodigy alone posted five million notes last year.


Wealthy Couple Repays Alma Mater: $51.4 Million to University of Houston
In a tale of love and money, John J. Moores and Rebecca Baas of Sugar Land, Tex., were high school sweethearts who struggled to make it through the University of Houston in the 1960's and then made it big with their own computer software company.
Now quite wealthy, the Mooreses have given their alma mater a total of $51.4 million this year, the largest donation ever made to a public university in the nation.


EXECUTIVES
*
Chartered WestLB, London, a merchant bank, named David C. Olson executive director of North American corporate finance. *
Walt Disney Co., Burbank, Calif., promoted Lawrence P. Murphy to executive vice president-strategic planning and development from senior vice president-strategic planning and development.


Grains and Soybeans Rally On Talk of Help for Soviets
Grain and soybean futures prices rallied strongly late yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade amid indications that the Bush Administration was about to offer new food aid to the Soviet Union.
Wheat for delivery in December settled 4 3/4 cents higher, at $3.62 1/4 a bushel; December corn was 2 3/4 cents higher, at $2.53 1/4 a bushel; December oats rose 2 1/4 cents, to $1.32 3/4 a bushel; November soybeans rose 7 3/4 cents, to $5.56 3/4 a bushel.


Yields on C.D.'s and Bank Funds Off Slightly for Week
Yields on certificates of deposit and bank money market accounts dropped slightly in the last week, but there are prospects of a much sharper fall in coming weeks, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, a publication that covers interest rates.
"This week's modest decline in savings yields should accelerate quickly as the Federal Reserve moves to ease rates. Negative economic news will force the Federal Reserve to cut its discount rate and the banks to trim their prime rate," Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Bank Rate Monitor, said yesterday.


Theater in Review
Caught Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea  Performance Space 122 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street Manhattan Through Sunday Written and performed by Peggy Pettitt; directed by Remy Tissier; visual and set design by Mr.
Tissier; lighting by Jan Bell-Newman; costume consultant, Pascaline Tissier.
Presented by Performance Space 122.
The text of Peggy Pettitt's "Caught Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea" is subtle and surprisingly affecting poetry, and her performance of this hourlong play at Performance Space 122 is bewitching.


Curbing the Telephone Robots
They don't eat, they don't sleep and their feelings never get hurt when people curse them or hang up on them.
They just call and call and call -- each one up to 1,500 times a day, together delivering millions of recorded telephone sales pitches for everything from "free" vacations to cemetery plots.
They are automated telephone dialers, a growing army of robot sales representatives that can systematically call every number in a telephone exchange -- listed and unlisted numbers, cellular telephones, pagers, corporate switchboards and unattended answering machines.
By one industry estimate, at least 20,000 machines are likely to be working full tilt on any given day in the United States and will call some 20 million numbers around the country.


Advances on the Gyroscope Front
If it were not for gyroscopes, planes would lose their way, missiles would miss their targets and man would not have reached the moon.
Now, technological advances are making gyroscopes smaller, lighter and cheaper.
The devices are moving beyond sophisticated military and aerospace instruments and into consumer products, where they might be used for everything from taking the jitter out of video camcorders to helping pull automobiles out of skids.
New Mouse for Computers
Among recent developments, Gyration Inc., a Silicon Valley start-up, this month introduced a computer mouse that operates in three dimensions.
The hand-held device, containing two gyrators, controls the movement of objects on a video screen as the user waves it around in the air.


For Pavin, It's All In Reach
It has gotten so that there is little that is more emphemeral in golf than being considered the best, but Corey Pavin would earn substantially more than 15 Warholian minutes if he can win the Tour Championship this week at historic Pinehurst No. 2.
By beating an exclusive field of the top-30 money winners on the PGA Tour Pavin could separate himself from everyone else in American golf by winning the $360,000 first prize in the tour's season-ending finale.


Theater in Review
Atomic Opera  Ohio Theater 66 Wooster Street Manhattan Through Sunday Created by Kevin Malony, Michele Elliman and John O'Malley; score and sound, Douglas J. Cuomo; production design, Alexander Brebner; costumes, Anne Patterson; lighting, Richard Schaefer; choreography, Mr.
O'Malley and Ms.
Elliman; concept, text and direction, Mr.
Maloney.
Presented by T.W.E.E.D., in association with the Neo Labos Dancetheater.
WITH: Torrin Cummings, Michele Elliman, Audrey Fort, Lisa Gillette, Peggy Gould, Renate Graziadei, Mia Kim, David McGrath, John O'Malley, Colleen O'Neill and Craig Victor.
Anyone who grew up in the cold-war era and was weaned on blood-chilling terms like "anticipatory retaliation" is likely to find grim fun in "Atomic Opera," a 70-minute dance-theater work that satirizes America's love affair with atomic energy in the late 1940's and 50's.


Delay in Choosing a Smith Jury
Jury selection in the rape trial of William K. Smith, due to begin Wednesday, was postponed today until Thursday, as defense lawyers moved to insulate prospective jurors from what they called the carnival-like atmosphere surrounding the trial.
In a motion filed this afternoon, lawyers for Mr.
Smith asked the judge presiding over the case, Mary E. Lupo of Palm Beach County Circuit Court, to bar television cameras from broadcasting the faces of prospective jurors or from disclosing their names and addresses.
They also asked the Judge to maintain those prohibitions once the six jurors are selected for the trial.


Review/Dance; Meredith Monk's Works, From Tiny to Grand
Meredith Monk, one of America's most brilliant and unclassifiable theatrical artists, gave audiences glimpses of three of her major works on Sunday night at the World Financial Center.
The performance made one long for a full-scale retrospective of her creations.
Since the 1960's, Ms.
Monk has been a dancer, a choreographer, a stage director and a composer.
She has presented everything from exquisite miniatures to grand theatrical panoramas.
Examples of both were on view Sunday.


Ben Hill Willingham, 77, Is Dead; Led 2 Major Apparel Companies
Ben Hill Willingham, a retired president of two apparel and textile giants, Genesco Inc. and Burlington International, died Sunday at Memorial Hospital in Savannah, Ga.
He was 77 years old.
A former resident of Nashville, New York and Zurich, he lived in Savannah in retirement.
He died after a long illness, the family said.


Delay in Choosing a Smith Jury
Jury selection in the rape trial of William K. Smith, due to begin Wednesday, was postponed today until Thursday, as defense lawyers moved to insulate prospective jurors from what they called the carnival-like atmosphere surrounding the trial.
In a motion filed this afternoon, lawyers for Mr.
Smith asked the judge presiding over the case, Mary E. Lupo of Palm Beach County Circuit Court, to bar television cameras from broadcasting the faces of prospective jurors or from disclosing their names and addresses.
They also asked the Judge to maintain those prohibitions once the six jurors are selected for the trial.


Foreign Affairs; Mideast Tricks or Treaties?
It just doesn't seem possible that President Bush and Secretary of State Baker will wander into the historic Mideast peace conference today without a supersecret game plan.
Too much can go wrong too quickly with them left holding the bag of blame.
The whole initiative could capsize in six months if Washington simply sat back and waited for the right conditions to ripen.
Mr.
Bush and Mr.
Baker, whatever they are telling the world to lower expectations, must have a plan.
And given their preoccupation with growing Syrian military power, it is likely to be aimed principally at cooling the one conflict that could spark a new Mideast war -- the hatred between Israel and Syria.
The plan that fits the pattern of Bush-Baker thinking would call for three small steps to show quick results well short of peace:


Review/Film; Saving the Huron Indians: A Disaster for Both Sides
Of all the tales that make up the saga of France's 17th-century exploration and settlement of what was to be called Canada, one of the most heroic, brutal and finally disastrous is the story of the Huron Mission.
Founded and maintained by Jesuit priests at great cost in physical suffering to themselves and to the Hurons, the mission endured for two decades before it was abandoned in the early 1650's.
The Jesuit plan had been to convert the stationary Huron tribes, whose members would then become missionaries to their nomadic Indian brothers.


Frederick Frost Jr., Architect, 84; Designed Many Public Buildings
Frederick G. Frost Jr., an architect who designed many public buildings in New York City, died on Saturday at his home in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 84 years old.
He died of heart failure, said his son Arthur Corwin Frost of Bronxville.


Review/Television; 2 Portraits in Music Of Paul McCartney
In the pantheon of the Beatles, Paul McCartney was always the responsible one, the head-on-his-shoulders businessman with a genius for pop music.
John Lennon, the rebel of the group, generated more headlines and intense loyalties, but Mr.
McCartney stayed the course, deftly extending his career after the Beatles' breakup 21 years ago with his own group, Wings, and as a solo performer since 1980.
He has not just survived; he has come into his own, exuding confidence, energy and, on several levels, a remarkable generosity.
Two carefully packaged new television productions make that clear.
Mr.
McCartney's "Liverpool Oratorio" is a "Great Performances" presentation on Channel 13 tonight from 8:30 to 11.
The work itself, running about an hour and 40 minutes, is preceded by a documentary tracing the elaborate preparations for this performance, the widely heralded premiere on June 28 in Liverpool Cathedral in England.


U.S. Mail Service Recognizes Baltic States as Independent
The United States Postal Service has officially recognized Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania as independent countries.
The three Baltic nations, formerly members of the Soviet Union, are to be listed separately from the Soviet Union in the International Mail Manual, the Postal Service announced in the current issue of the Postal Bulletin, an update of postal regulations that is published every two weeks.


Why the Delay on Dr. Jeffries?
The City University of New York's decision to allow Dr.
Leonard Jeffries to stay as chairman of City College's black studies department sends an alarming message.
The decision will be reviewed next June.
Even so, it suggests a tolerance for bigoted behavior in high places.
Dr.
Jeffries has a right to free speech.
As department chairman, he also is responsible for acting in the broader interests of the university.
In that he has failed, spouting anti-Semitic and anti-white remarks.
His latest diatribe was delivered in July, when he blamed "rich Jews" for financing the slave trade and blamed Jews and the Mafia for negative portrayals of blacks in movies.


Review/Theater; 'White Rose' and Good Germans
A couple of years ago the WPA Theater inaugurated a late-night Silly Series with "The Lady in Question," Charles Busch's extravagantly hilarious send-up of 1940's Hollywood movies about little people who get caught up in the anti-Nazi German underground.
Last night the WPA opened its new season, its 15th, with "The White Rose," a terminally solemn example of the exact sort of clodhopping melodrama that Mr.
Busch demolished with mockery.
Is there some inside joke kicking around at the WPA that the audience is not being let in on?
"The White Rose," which was written by Lillian Garrett-Groag and comes to New York by way of the Old Globe Theater in San Diego, is one of those plays in which the characters and events are historically accurate and yet every scene and line seems utterly bogus.
The dialogue sounds like the captions in those instructional film strips that were the bane of every elementary school in the days before the invention of the videocassette.
For interludes of comic relief, wholesome Munich university students can be found sipping wine and sharing their enthusiasm for Frank Sinatra records with a Teutonic spontaneity that recalls the flirtation between the aspiring SS thug Kurt and the 16-going-on-17 Liesl Von Trapp in "The Sound of Music."


American Express to Buy 2 Top Supercomputers
Executives of the American Express Company said today that they planned to purchase new massively parallel supercomputers from the Thinking Machines Corporation.
American Express's order for two of the machines was among nine sales commitments that Thinking Machines announced at a news conference in Cambridge, Mass., today as the company introduced the new computers.


U.S. and States Head for Clash Over Medicaid
Bush Administration officials headed today for a clash with Congress over their plan to restrict fund-raising techniques used by states to pay for the health care of poor people under Medicaid.
New rules approved today by Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, affirm and clarify those restrictions, which have been strongly criticized by governors and members of Congress of both parties.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about New York City newspapers misstated the average daily circulation of the Long Island edition of Newsday for the six months ended Sept. 30, as reported to the Audit Bureau of Circulations.
It was 495,000, not 695,000.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.12
5.18
7.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.89
4.96
7.14
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.92
5.02
7.14
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.15
7.30
8.51
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.89
8.02
8.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.97
9.05
9.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.86
6.88
7.74
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


John Kobal, 51; Compiled Collection Of Hollywood Lore
John Kobal, who wrote many books about Hollywood and assembled an important collection of historical photographs of movie stars, died on Monday at his home in London.
He was 51 years old.
He died of pneumonia, said David Kent, a business associate.


Four Presidential Candidates To Meet for Televised Forum
Four declared candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination will engage in a locally televised panel discussion here Friday.
The session, from 7 to 8 P.M., will entail questions put by Hal Bruno, political director of ABC News, to Govs.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas and L. Douglas Wilder of Virginia, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts.


Giant Old Magic Seems Gone With the Ex-Coaching Staff
O.K., Giants fans. You want the glass half-full?
How about looking at your 4-4 darlings this way: They won two straight games (and three of four), and then last Sunday held the Redskins, perhaps the top team in the league, without a point for more than two and a half quarters.
No one from Washington invaded Giants territory for more than half the game.


It's Official! Yankees Put Showalter at the Helm
Twenty-two days after he was dumped onto baseball's rapidly growing unemployment line, Buck Showalter was hired back yesterday and given a superior position as the new manager of the Yankees.
After the Yankees turned left and right and scratched their heads while searching for someone to replace Stump Merrill, they settled on the man who coached at third base for the last two years and has been affiliated with the organization since he was 21 years old.
Excluding the last three weeks, of course.


Senate Indicates It Would Allow Its Staff to Complain of Job Bias
Bowing to public and presidential pressure over its televised hearings on sexual harassment accusations against Judge Clarence Thomas, the Senate indicated tonight in a test vote that it would let its employees take complaints of employment discrimination to Federal court.
The 76-to-22 vote rejected the view that the proposal was unconstitutional, the main argument against it.
The Senate then recessed until Wednesday, when it plans to vote on final adoption of the proposal as an amendment to the civil rights bill and on the bill itself.


Prost Is Dropped From Ferrari Team
Ferrari, Italy's Formula One team, dropped the three-time world champion ALAIN PROST yesterday after a season of frustration and bitter disputes with the French driver.


Chrysler To Sell Stake In Venture
The Chrysler Corporation agreed today to sell its 50 percent stake in the Diamond-Star Motors manufacturing venture to the Mitsubishi Motors Corporation for about $99.8 million.
The agreement, which had been expected, follows several months of negotiations between the auto makers, which had been partners in the Bloomington, Ill., venture.
Chrysler will gain some cash in the deal and relieve itself of some financial pressure when its resources are tight.
Mitsubishi will assume all Diamond-Star's debts and pay for most of the development costs of future vehicles.


Knicks Almost Down To Opening-Day Size
Brian Quinnett and Carlton McKinney are in.
Jarvis Basnight is out.
And Patrick Eddie is probably headed for the injured list.
The Knicks trimmed their roster to 13 players today by releasing Basnight, a 6-foot-7-inch free agent forward from Nevada-Las Vegas.
And if Eddie is placed on the injured list, as expected, the Knicks will be at the 12-man limit for their season-opener Friday night against the Orlando Magic.


Britain and Vietnam to Force Refugees to Return
Britain and Vietnam signed an agreement today opening the way for the forcible repatriation of tens of thousands of Vietnamese refugees now being detained in Hong Kong.
The agreement comes one week after Hanoi agreed to accept the return of 222 Vietnamese "doublebackers," people who had come to Hong Kong once before, been paid a cash incentive to return to Vietnam and then re-entered Hong Kong illegally a second time.


Chase Subsidiaries
The Chase Manhattan Corporation said it had agreed to sell the stock of its European leasing subsidiaries to a large Spanish bank.
The agreement with Banco Hispano Americano is part of Chase's effort to scale back to its core banking business.
The banks did not disclose terms of the sale.
Chase said its European leasing subsidaries were worth about $550 million.
Chase is selling the stock of subsidiaries in Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Italy and Spain.
The leasing subsidiary of Hispano Americano, Corporacion Financiera Hispamer, will buy the companies from Chase.


Market Place; Casinos Are Not Such a Gamble
GAMBLING industry stocks tend to be regarded as a big gamble themselves.
High leverage, high fixed costs and the unpredictablility of high rollers all contribute to the uncertainties of an intensely competitive sector whose growth has long been curtailed because gambling is allowed in relatively few places.
Only one pure gambling company, Circus Circus Enterprises, has an investment-grade rating from Standard &amp; Poor's.
But although the sector will never offer blue-chip credentials, there are encouraging signs.
Analysts cite the growing popularity of gambling, its widening acceptance, the resilience of the Nevada economy and the successful digestion of a number of new casinos.


THE MIDDLE EAST TALKS: Waiters at the Table; Soviets Serve U.S. Needs for Parley In Hopes of Winning Economic Help
It is too early to say whether the Madrid Middle East peace conference heralds a new relationship between Arabs and Israelis, but it has already highlighted new relationships between Arabs and Arabs, between Israel and the United States and, most important, between the United States and the Soviet Union.
On the United States-Soviet front, it would not be an overstatement to say that the Soviets have literally made themselves an arm of American Middle East diplomacy in recent months, as they did everything possible to facilitate the peace conference to win American good will, which they hope to cash in later for American economic aid.


Economic Scene; Transit Green, Gridlock Blues
TO nobody's surprise, the seemingly interminable wrangle over the transportation reauthorization bill, now heading for a Congressional conference, is all about money: how much of it will Uncle Sam hand out, how will the states divide it, how much will go to mass transit.
What may surprise is the "pox on all their pork barrels" view of Peter Gordon, an associate dean of urban planning at the University of Southern California and author of a new position paper from the libertarian Reason Foundation.
He reckons that much of the $100 billion to $150 billion slated for highway and mass-transit aid over the next half decade is bound to be wasted unless Washington turns over a new economic leaf.
The alternative to gridlock as usual, Mr.
Gordon argues, is a transportation policy that exploits opportunities to privatize, asks most users to pay their own way and subsidizes needy transit patrons rather than empire-building transit bureaucracies.


Salomon Reduces Bonuses by $110 Million
In an assault on excessive Wall Street compensation, Salomon Brothers yesterday announced a $110 million cut in the size of bonuses it planned to pay its employees, largely because it did not believe many of its traders and investment bankers deserved so much.
Salomon's announcement, in a letter to shareholders by the firm's chairman, Warren E. Buffett, was viewed by financial experts as a manifesto on Wall Street compensation that may spread throughout the industry.


Strikes Cripple Los Angeles Hospitals
Simultaneous strikes today by nurses and a group of their co-workers forced six Los Angeles County hospitals to close their emergency rooms to ambulances, delay operations and curtail virtually all other services, but a judge ordered the nurses to return to work on Wednesday.
Late this afternoon, Judge William Huss of the Los Angeles Superior Court granted an order sought by county attorneys, who argued that the strikes imperiled the public welfare.
At a strategy session tonight, leaders of Local 660 of the Service Employees International Union, which represents both groups of striking workers, were planning to debate whether to defy the court order.


Sports of The Times; By George, Is He Exiled Or Not?
ON Oct. 7, the day after the Yankees ended their season in fifth place in the American League East with a 71-91 record, William Nathaniel (Buck) Showalter was dismissed as a Yankee coach.
In searching for a successor to Stump Merrill as manager, General Manager Gene Michael also dismissed Showalter as a candidate.
"We want somebody," Michael said, "who's been a major league manager."


New York City Hospitals' Tie To Medical Schools Is Frayed
In the teeming corridors of Bellevue Hospital Center, New York City's largest and oldest public hospital, the doctors on the medical staff stand out, wearing crisp white lab coats emblazoned with a badge of honor: the violet insignia of the private medical school down the street.
The emblem, of the New York University School of Medicine, conveys two messages that are at the heart of a simmering dispute over the way doctors are supplied to the city's public hospitals.
Under a complex system, large private medical schools send doctors to staff the public hospitals, and as a result exert extraordinary control over the hospitals' direction and quality.
The emblem attests to the superior training and competence of the doctors who work at Bellevue.
But it is also a symbol of their independence -- and at times aloofness -- from the wishes, priorities, politics and bureaucracy of the elected city government.


WALESA IS SEEKING A 2D POLISH POST
After a parliamentary election that showed both rising apathy and widespread voter dissatisfaction, President Lech Walesa offered tonight to serve as his own Prime Minister over a fragmented legislature.
The move, if accepted, would give the former shipyard electrician and Solidarity leader control over the country's two most powerful offices and was immediately condemned by some as a step toward one-man rule.


Russian Judges Want Real Justice
Twelve days before he called for sweeping economic changes, Boris Yeltsin addressed the first congress of Russian judges in Moscow.
At the gathering of 535 judges, the President of the Russian republic declared his desire to restructure its legal system.
The gap between these hopes and reality was painfully clear.
As the judges confirmed, they have been seen as little more than low-level servants of the Communist Party.
The success of Mr.
Yeltsin's programs will require a drastic transformation in judicial temperament and in public perception of the judiciary.


Book Notes
Battle of the Sexes
Deborah ("You Just Don't Understand") Tannen meets Robert ("Iron John") Bly in a face-to-face, word-to-word confrontation this Friday at 8 P.M., and tickets to the event at Cooper Union's Great Hall have been sold out for weeks.


Metropolitan Diary
FOR HALLOWEEN For Halloween I dress up as a scaredy cat And hide under the coffee table While my own teen-age children Dressed as witches Dig through the bowl of candy In the front hall Their long fingers, with the false nails, Coming up with only cavities and candy When what they want from me Is total freedom -- with car. -- BETH BAHLER
. . .
The scene is Sloan's supermarket at Sheridan Square, where a young man stands at a bridge table displaying an assortment of muffins.
The fellow offers shoppers his pitch along with samples of the muffins, which are new on the market.
"Muffin-a-Day, the Total Health Muffin," he explains to a short matron who has parked herself and her cart in front of the muffin table.
"Scientifically formulated by a physician to address your most important health concerns, but produced by an expert pastry chef with gourmet goodness in mind," he continues earnestly.
"Each 3.8-ounce muffin is fat- and cholesterol-free, sugar-free, provides 12 grams of dietary fiber and is only 142 calories."
The woman sticks around for the muffin man's entire spiel.
When he finishes, she looks up and points to a high shelf nearby.
"Could you reach up and hand me one of those large Hershey bars?"
. . .
Scene:
The Metropolitan Museum of Art during the recent exhibition "Masterpieces of Impressionism and Post-Impressionism: The Annenberg Collection."
Dramatis personae:
Two women of a certain age and Catherine Traiforou, who overhears their brief exit conversation.
Woman one, enthusiastically:
I liked it, I really liked it.
Woman two, dubiously:
So, is that all they own?
. . .
Dear Diary:
My license plate, given to me by my husband, has been our motto since we first met.
It reads UNBELDI (one fine day).
While driving down Second Avenue one recent Sunday, a cab driver honked, rolled down his window at a traffic light and, with a sense of knowledge, asked, "What opera?" With a smile, I replied, "Madama Butterfly."
He sighed.
"Ah, yes," he said.
"The second act." With that, he rolled up his window and drove on. -- E. Z. WEINSTEIN
. . .
Spotted by Alec A. Pandaleon of Scarsdale, N.Y., in Waldenbooks on lower Broadway, Self-Improvement section: "Final Exit."
. . .
The place was a family-type restaurant on the East Side of Manhattan.
The time: the recent past.
The occasion: a welcome-back, get-together dinner for cousins, aunts, uncles, etc., some of whom had summered in the Hamptons.
Among the assorted conversations caught by Mary E. Sughrue was this between a teen-age lad and his aunt.
Aunt:
Well, how was your summer?
Lad:
Great! I have two new girlfriends.
Aunt:
Terrific! Do they live in the city?
Lad:
Yeah.
Aunt:
Do they live near you?
Lad:
Yes, they do. And guess what? One of them lives just two canopies away!
. . .
Dear Diary:
Taking in the sights of the city while walking to work, I paused at the corner of Broadway and Maiden Lane to allow traffic to pass.
Near the corner I saw a Con Ed work crew about to descend into the bowels of the city's public works.
Their work area was cordoned off by official-looking iridescent orange tape and their heavy equipment was standing ready nearby.
Five or six men -- some in hard hats, others looking supervisory -- stood by an open manhole, holding, as a centerpiece to the scene, a sophisticated electrical schematic.
Their conversation ebbed and flowed from discussion to debate causing the crew to refer frequently to various points on the drawing.
As they continued to discuss and finger-point on how to proceed, I got caught up in the complexity of the drawing and became more cognizant that the electrical requirements of this city are indeed immense.
What a considerable undertaking to service the miles of cables and the electrical power coursing through them!
It was then that my thoughts were interrupted when, over the din of their discussion, an important-looking fellow peered up from the drawing.
"Which way is north?" he asked. -- KEVIN K. FULL


House Leaders Say a Compromise Is Now Possible on Jobless Benefits
House leaders of both parties moved today to try to make a deal to enact extended unemployment benefits, suggesting that enough political points had been scored and that it was time to get checks to the jobless.
But senators and the Bush Administration held back.
Since late July, Democrats and some Republicans have supported programs providing up to 20 weeks of benefits for people out of work more than half a year, to be paid for by increasing the Federal deficit.
The Administration has rejected these measures, calling instead for a narrower proposal that would be financed, in part, by selling unused radio frequencies.


Burmese, in a Desperate Situation, Seek Help; Peace Prize Winner
To the Editor:
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi's Nobel Peace Prize (news article, Oct. 15) is a ray of hope for a small, benighted country that has rarely made international headlines.
However, for many Burmese citizens, this recognition of their courageous struggle comes too late.


9 STATES IN EAST PLAN STRICT LIMITS ON CAR POLLUTION
The Governors of nine Eastern states and the Mayor of Washington agreed yesterday that they would adopt California's far-reaching program to require cleaner cars in a broad assault against smog in urban America.
Some of the states have already banded together to require less-polluting gasoline, but the move on cars would be the largest joint step against pollution that they have ever taken, proponents say.


Economy Grew During Summer But Then Eased
The economy expanded for the first time in a year in the July-September quarter, the Commerce Department reported today, but its chief economist acknowledged that the recovery had already started to lose momentum by Labor Day.
The third-quarter rise, at an annual rate of 2.4 percent, was presented by Bush Administration officials and many private economists as proof that the slump that began in July 1990 had ended.
"The recession is over," asserted J. Antonio Villamil, the department's chief economist.


Put Care for Aged Under Social Security
To the Editor:
"Going Broke on Medicaid" (editorial, Oct. 17) highlights the problems forced on the elderly by a national policy that requires the aged to be declared both ill and destitute before they can qualify for financial assistance for long-term care (either at home or in an institutional setting).
If the problem is so endemic among the middle class, however, why isn't it addressed by the broader Social Security trust fund?
Under Social Security, workers pay a premium on a portion of their earned income, matched by their employers.
In return, they (and covered dependents) are entitled to certain retirement, disability and medical benefits.
The logic of the system is that workers should be forced to save against some eventualities during their working years, since they can reasonably expect to live beyond the age where they can continue supporting themselves, and everyone faces at least the chance of disability, age-related major medical expenses or premature death.
Doesn't the possibility of needing nursing-home or at-home personal care meet this same premise?
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan has repeatedly pointed out that the Social Security trust fund is overfunded, with the excess assets being lost to the Federal deficit.
He had sought a 1 percent payroll tax cut, which would have generated $23 billion in savings a year.
Coincidentally, Federal Medicaid spending is approximately $35 billion a year, with long-term care making up the largest category of expenditure.
Since the Senator's tax cut was not successful, why not use the excess funds he's identified to pick up the cost of long-term care through Social Security?
This would eliminate the money, time and heartbreak associated with the system of means testing and "legal sleight of hand" you describe.
It would also strengthen the value of the Social Security trust fund, reduce the Medicaid burden on the states and counties (and New York City) and, above all, it would provide the elderly with the peace of mind of knowing that they can be cared for if the need arises without having to fear loss of their homes or whatever other assets for which they've worked a lifetime.
EDWARD M. DOLAN Irvington, N.Y., Oct. 21, 1991


Man in Evers Case Tied to Hate Group
Prosecutors seeking to block the release on bond of Byron De La Beckwith, the man accused of assassinating the civil rights leader Medgar Evers, have linked the white supremacist to a little-known racist group whose members are said to consider themselves "God's executioners."
The group, identified as the Phinehas Priesthood, holds "that integration and race mixing is strictly forbidden by the Bible and that it is their ordained duty to strike down those who are viewed as enemies of the pure white race," the Hinds County Assistant District Attorney, Bobby DeLaughter, said in documents filed last week in preparations for Mr.
Beckwith's third trial.
Prosecutors declined to say how they came to link Mr.
Beckwith to the group, and they said they had no other details.


Despite Billions in Tax Rises, States Slash Services
Despite tax increases totaling $25 billion in the last 15 months, state governments are reducing their services as they struggle to survive the growing costs of health care and other expenses required by the Federal Government, says a report issued today by the National Governors' Association and the National Association of State Budget Officers.
The states were also battered by a limp economy that has had an effect "much worse than a normal recession," said Raymond C. Scheppach, executive director of the governors' group.


National Starts With Revival of Fanfare
With a Vice President's wife and a renowned country-and-western singer on hand to provide the introductions and a top cover girl to demonstrate the skills of the all-American cutting horse, the 108th National Horse Show opened here tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena with a return to traditional fanfare.
There was color, there was glamour, there was music and goodwill.
Ronnie Milsap gave what amounted to a private concert; Marilyn Quayle gave a gracious speech, and Christie Brinkley played cowgirl.


INSIDE
Rights Bill Passes Test
The Senate indicated that it would allow its employees to take complaints of employment discrimination to Federal court.
Page A22.
U.S.
Bans Haiti Trade
Pressing for a return to democracy after the coup, the United States banned trade with Haiti.
Page A3.
Inquiry on 1980 Campaign
A Senate panel will investigate whether the 1980 Reagan campaign got Iran to delay the release of hostages.
Page A22.
Ex-Sununu Aide Ends Deal
Edward M. Rogers Jr. canceled a $600,000 contract to represent the former head of Saudi intelligence, who has been linked to B.C.C.I.
Page D1.


New Radar-Image Photographs Show Volcanoes' Reshaping of Venus


Braves' Cox Named Manager of Year
BOBBY COX became the first man to win manager of the year in both leagues when he was voted National League Manager of the Year yesterday by the Baseball Writers Association of America.
Cox, the 1985 American League winner with the Toronto Blue Jays, led the Braves to their first pennant since moving from Atlanta to Milwaukee in 1966.
Atlanta, the worst team in baseball in 1990 at 65-97, finished 94-68 this year.


Dial to Concentrate On Consumer Goods
In a restructuring plan warmly embraced by investors, the Dial Corporation announced a proposal yesterday intended to complete its transformation from a bus company to a soap company.
The restructuring will be accompanied by a one-time charge against earnings that analysts said would lead to a considerable improvement in the conglomerate's profitability.
Dial's stock jumped $2.875 yesterday, to $44.25, after gaining 12 percent in the last two weeks, after the company announced that it was considering disposing of some businesses to focus on its consumer products and its services group.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Declined to exercise 1992 contract option of Scott Fletcher, second baseman, and declined to offer him salary arbitration.
Named Tommy Thompson catching coordinator and Ken Silvestri assistant player development instructor; Terry Francona manager and Jaime Garcia pitching coach of South Bend of the Midwest League; Rick Peterson pitching coordinator of Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League; Don Cooper pitching coach of Birmingham of the Southern League and Kirk Champion pitching coach at Sarasota of the Florida State League.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Named Buck Showalter manager.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Offered salary arbitration to Mike Moore, pitcher.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Named Bill Plummer manager.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
ATLANTA HAWKS -- Waived Darren Henrie and Dave Popson, forwards, and Clifford Lett, guard.
BOSTON CELTICS -- Signed Larry Robinson, forward.
DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Waived Michael Cutright, guard.
INDIANA PACERS -- Waived Greg Grant, guard, and Doug Roth, center.
NEW YORK KNICKS -- Waived Jarvis Basnight, forward.
PHOENIX SUNS -- Waived Joey Wright, guard.
Placed Trent Tucker, guard, on the injured list.
PORTLAND TRAILBLAZERS -- Waived Walter Davis, guard, and Stuart Gray, center.
Placed Ennis Whatley and Lamont Strothers, guards, on the injured list.


Israelis and Arabs: The 44 Years of Rage and Hate
Nov. 29, 1947: The United Nations votes to recommend the partitioning of Palestine into three parts: a Jewish state, an Arab state and an international zone for the city of Jerusalem, administered by the United Nations.
The Jews accept the recommendation; the Arabs reject it.
May, 15, 1948: As the old British mandate over Palestine from the League of Nations ends, the State of Israel is established and the United States is the first to recognize it.
The same day, five Arab countries -- Egypt, Jordan, Iraq, Syria and Lebanon -- declare war and invade the new nation.


In Nepal, Artichokes Teach a Lesson
THE story starts with artichokes: On Earth Day in 1990, Judith Chase took a load of them down from her organic vegetable patch on a hilltop, where the earth is good and the air is pure, to sell to a fashionably eccentric garden restaurant in Katmandu, Nepal, named Mike's Breakfast.
Fresh artichokes were a novelty in Nepal, and they were a hit.
Appropriate Agricultural Alternatives and Ms.
Chase, who moved here from Waterbury, Conn., in 1977, were in business.


Bias Cited in Beating of 2 Blacks
A gang of whites beat two 13-year-old black youths with fists and a bat near a Brooklyn junior high school Monday afternoon, the police said.
The attack, which the police have characterized as bias-related, occurred minutes after the two 13-year-olds were involved in a schoolyard fight with an Asian youth.
The group of whites, which included about 10 teen-agers and at least three adults, shouted racial slurs before beating the youths, a police spokesman, Lieut.
Robert Nardoza, said.


Breeders' Big Shots Set to Do Business
Housebuster made the scene by van, 75 miles along the interstate from his serene hideaway in Lexington, Ky.
Jolie's Halo made it by van from Maryland, where he worked out before taking the high road south.
Sheikh Albadou and Second Set flew in from England, and Hector Protector and Arazi by charter from France.
And Fly So Free was already here, but he faced his public today with mane combed, girth tightened and shoes shined.


Lee Boltin Dies at 73; A Photographer of Art
Lee Boltin, a photographer of art objects who specialized in primitive works, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 73 years old and lived in Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
He died of leukemia, said his wife, Caroll.


Head of Summit Books Is Said to Be Leaving
James H. Silberman will be ending his career tomorrow as president and editor in chief of Summit Books, an independent imprint at Simon &amp; Schuster, according to associates of Mr.
Silberman and people close to the company.
Mr.
Silberman's contract with Summit, which he began in 1976 and has made into one of the country's most distinguished publishers, expires at the end of the month, and Simon &amp; Schuster has decided not to renew it, his associates said.


Science Centers Help Bring Schoolwork to Life
Powered by his curiosity, 11-year-old Eric Seltzer stepped up to a display table at the New York Hall of Science and stared into an outsized microscope.
What he discovered less than six inches from his nose was a world his sixth-grade science textbook could only hint at.
A zoo of living microorganisms sprang into focus, hundreds of times larger than life and, he said, millions of times more interesting than those he has tried to imagine while seated in science class.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the outlook for the Digital Equipment Corporation misstated the announcement date for some new computer models.
It is today; it was not last week.


Eating Well; Food Companies Agree To Modify Claims on Fat
ROBERT ABRAMS, the New York State Attorney General, has shot down the efforts of Kentucky Fried Chicken, Dunkin' Donuts and Nestle to imply that their fried chicken, doughnuts and coffee creamer had become nutritional hall of famers.
"It is inappropriate for these companies to suggest that products such as Coffee-mate Liquid, Kentucky Fried Chicken and Dunkin' Donuts, which get up to 61 percent of their calories from fat, are healthy foods," Mr.
Abrams said.


Public Hearings To Assess Plan To Add Shelters
The chairman of the New York City Council committee that will ultimately review the Mayor's plan to scatter homeless shelters throughout the city announced a series of public hearings on the plan yesterday, saying at the same time that the proposal was creating "hysteria" and "racial tension" in middle-class communities.
Councilman Noach Dear, chairman of the Site Selection Committee, said the Mayor's plan was ill conceived and had caused resentment among white homeowners in areas like the Borough Park neighborhood he represents.


Momentum in Madrid
Israel, its Arab neighbors and Palestinians from the occupied territories will sit down with each other at a peace conference today in Madrid.
That's a simple statement of fact.
It is also a momentous pronouncement of transforming change.
With each other.
Only once in four decades of war and bitterness has the Middle East even come close to such an opportunity.
The opening is fragile; the parties are tensely poised; the moment could rapidly melt.
But it is an opening, and there are practical reasons for hope.


Empire Builder Waits as the Foundations Shake
Pat Dye brushed aside a pile of papers as he sat down behind a large, round wooden table in his office in the Auburn University athletic complex on Monday.
A reporter who sat down across from Dye, the Auburn athletic director and head football coach, produced a tape recorder and asked Dye if he objected to being taped.


Public &amp; Private; Things That Don't Go Bump
I know a lot about bats.
It's not as if I'm Merlin D. Tuttle, but I do know more than your average layman about roosting and hibernation, mating and echolocation, the Mexican free-tailed and the naked bulldog, the pipistrelles and the rousettes, the pollinators and the insectivores.
Until last year I was afraid of bats, as so many people are, and I couldn't tell a flying fox from a Flying Wallenda.
But that was before I was asked to read "America's Neighborhood Bats" aloud.
Before Santa Claus got a request for a bat detector.
Before I flew to Toronto for a daylong bat conference and saw the small white scar on the palm of one scientist that marked the spot where an overeager vampire bat had scented snack time.


For Twins and Braves, It's Still a Hometown Advantage


Britain Still Unsure of Monetary Plan
Twenty years after Britain agreed to join the European Community, is it ready to go along with its fellow members on a plan for a common European currency and closer political union when the 12 leaders meet to sign a new treaty in the Netherlands six weeks from now?
The answer was still not clear today, after Prime Minister John Major's office said that he would not be prepared to sign a pledge to make a "swift transition" to the final stage of monetary union, even with a treaty loophole that would leave the ultimate right of approval with the British Parliament, as he had demanded.


It's Official: Time to Get the Coats Out of Cold Storage


BRIEFS
*
Computer Associates International Inc., Garden City, L.I., said the waiting period for its acquisition of Pansophic System Inc., Lisle, Ill., a developer of computer systems, expired on Monday. *
Kobe Steel Ltd., Tokyo, and Aluminum Company of America, Pittsburgh, will form an equally owned joint venture in Charlotte, N.C., to produce and market aluminum tubes.


Tourist's Mother Tells How She Learned of His Death
The mother of a Utah tourist slain during a subway robbery in midtown Manhattan testified yesterday that she and her family had hoped to see her son alive at the hospital where he was taken soon after they were attacked last year.
But Karen Watkins, the mother of the victim, Brian Watkins, began sobbing when she recalled being told that her son had died on the way to the hospital and all she could do was say goodbye to him posthumously and tell him "how much I loved him."


Delay in Choosing a Smith Jury
Jury selection in the rape trial of William K. Smith, due to begin Wednesday, was postponed today until Thursday, as defense lawyers moved to insulate prospective jurors from what they called the carnival-like atmosphere surrounding the trial.
In a motion filed this afternoon, lawyers for Mr.
Smith asked the judge presiding over the case, Mary E. Lupo of Palm Beach County Circuit Court, to bar television cameras from broadcasting the faces of prospective jurors or from disclosing their names and addresses.
They also asked the Judge to maintain those prohibitions once the six jurors are selected for the trial.


Cuomo Picks Officials to Head 2 Agencies
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has nominated John F. Hudacs, the state's commissioner of the Office of General Services, to succeed Thomas F. Hartnett as state Labor Commissioner.
Mr.
Cuomo also nominated Robert B. Adams, the First Deputy Commissioner of the Office of General Services, to succeed Mr.
Hudacs as head of the agency.


The Pop Life; Hammer's New Album Enveloped in Publicity
"Too Legit to Quit," the new album by the rapper Hammer that went on sale yesterday, has been the focus of a prerelease publicity blitz that industry analysts say is unprecedented.
Capitol Records, which has shipped 2.5 million copies of the album to stores, has already spent $1.5 million on a television advertising campaign and $1 million on store displays.
There are to be tie-ins with the movie "The Addams Family," which is to be released around Thanksgiving, and with the Toys "R" Us chain, along with appearances by Hammer on "The Arsenio Hall Show" and "Saturday Night Live." There is also to be an entire Hammer weekend on MTV.


A Settlement for Wieboldt
Former directors and principal shareholders of Wieboldt Stores Inc. have agreed to pay $11.7 million to the bankrupt estate of the Chicago retailer, which collapsed after a failed leveraged buyout of the chain in 1985.
Under the agreement, a group including the Ohio businessman Jerome Schottenstein, his family, and Julius and Edmond Trump agreed to settle claims against them without admitting or denying wrongdoing.
The Trumps are not related to the developer Donald J. Trump.


Surprise Choice to Head Magazines
In an announcement that surprised most of the magazine industry, K-III Magazines said yesterday that Harry A. McQuillen, president of the Macmillan Publishing Company, would fill the top posts of the group that acquired eight Murdoch magazines in June for $650 million.
The announcement that Mr.
McQuillen would get the job of president and chief executive of K-III Magazines answered what had been the hottest question in magazine publishing for months.
In fact, almost every leading magazine executive had been cited as a possibility.
While Mr.
McQuillen, 45 years old, has extensive book-publishing experience, he has none as a magazine executive.


Key Comerica Figures Take Turns at Helm
When Comerica Inc. and the Manufacturers National Corporation complete their friendly merger, announced on Monday, the chairmen of the Detroit-based banks will take turns running one of the nation's 25 largest banking companies.
Gerald V. MacDonald of Manufacturers National will be chief executive of the merged bank until 1994, when Eugene A. Miller of Comerica will take over.
The unusual agreement caps a 15-year relationship for the bank executives, who met when Mr.
Miller approached Mr.
MacDonald to take out a personal loan.
Throughout their careers, they met frequently, and both became chairmen of their respective boards in early 1990.
They started discussing a possible merger in February partly as an offensive answer to concerns that their banks might be acquired by unwelcome suitors.
They held clandestine afternoon talks at a suburban Detroit hotel this fall to discuss the merger's details.
"You date, then you get engaged, then you get married," said Mr.
Miller at a press conference Monday.


Teen-Age Sex
To the Editor:
By labeling adolescents as children in "Condoms Issue: Should Children Have Sex?" (letter, Oct. 10), Dale O'Leary invokes images of pre-teen-age youngsters engaging in sexual intercourse.
In addition, her statement that "someone always gets hurt" is simply not true.


Bush and Gorbachev in Spain: Let the Talks Begin
As the tension builds toward the start of a Spanish bullfight, two men enter the arena, clad in old costume.
They are called the alguacilillos, the little bailiffs, whose job is to carry the keys that free the bulls for the fight.
Then, there is a parade of matadors, picadors and banderilleros and much preening and showing of readiness for the fray.
On the eve of the Middle East peace talks, Madrid was a bit like that today.


Holiday Fares At British Airways
British Airways said it was lowering Thanksgiving air fares to London.
The round-trip fares range from $409 from such cities as Boston, New York, Newark and Philadelphia, to $629 from Anchorage.
Departures from other United States cities are available for prices in between.


Closed A-Plant Drops Effort to Reopen Early
The owner of the nation's oldest nuclear power plant, Yankee Rowe, which was shut at the end of September because of uncertainty about brittleness in the reactor vessel, has given up seeking Government permission to re-open the plant soon.
Yankee Rowe, in western Massachusetts near the Vermont border, is scheduled for a detailed inspection in April, and the owner, the Yankee Atomic Electric Company, has decided not to try to reopen it before then.


CHRONICLE
The Government of Prime Minister NAWAZ SHARIF of Pakistan announced on Monday that it would name ABIDA HUSSAIN, 45, the only woman in the Cabinet, as Ambassador to the United States.
Her appointment was made five months after the Prime Minister named her as his adviser on population planning.
She is married to FAKHAR IMAM, the Education Minister, and is a member of the minority Shiite Muslim sect.


A Loosening Of the Grip On Budgets
SOME of the nation's leading advertisers say they are beginning to see glimmers of light amid the recession's gloom.
In interviews here during the 82d annual meeting of the Association of National Advertisers, which ended yesterday, top advertising and marketing executives at some companies said they were planning to increase advertising spending for 1992 from this year's levels.


MIDEAST FOES VOICE GUARDED OPTIMISM ON PEACE PARLEY
On the eve of his nation's first peace conference with all its neighbors in four decades of hostility, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel said today that "our quest for peace is unrelenting," and a Palestinian leader praised "the new tone emerging from Israel."
Their comments helped generate some initial guarded optimism that the talks opening here on Wednesday morning, co-sponsored by the United States and the Soviet Union, and arranged by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d in eight hard months of diplomacy, would prove less short-lived than the last Middle East peace conference in Geneva in 1973, which met once and never reconvened.


Burmese, in a Desperate Situation, Seek Help
To the Editor:
The All Burma Students' Democratic Front of the Ye Kyaw Camp inside Burma has issued an urgent international S O S for 15,000 civilians trapped in the Burma war zone and for widespread human rights abuses.
Civilian casualties among those caught in the war zone are mounting, and all face a grave danger of being killed by Burma's military government, the State Law and Order Restoration Council, in its annual dry-season offensive in a few weeks.


Chairman Resigning At Ketchum New York
Hank Seiden, chairman of Ketchum Advertising, New York, announced yesterday that he would resign at the end of the year to open his own agency.
Ketchum does not plan to appoint a successor, an agency spokeswoman said, adding that Mr.
Seiden's duties would be assumed by Steve Penchina, who was named executive creative director in April.


The Jets Have Their Own King Of the One-Liners on Defense
Who said that?
"They knew that Elvis had left the building." -- Oct. 6 at Cleveland.


Living and Teaching the Good Life
IT wasn't only wine that drew more than 1,000 people to New York last weekend for the 10th anniversary of The Wine Spectator's Wine Experience, a four-day whirl of swirling, sniffing, socializing, smiling, plus some discreet spitting.
The occasion, which brings together wine makers and wine aficionados, while contributing scholarships to students in the food and beverage industry, commenced on Thursday evening at the Marriott Marquis with a wine tasting and concluded Monday afternoon with a batch of classes called Lifestyle Seminars.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt
*
CIT Group Holdings Inc., New York, $100 million of subordinated notes due in 2001 were priced at 99.831 through Salomon Brothers to yield 8.40 percent.
The noncallable notes bear an 8 3/8 percent coupon and are rated A2 by Moody's and A by Standard &amp; Poor's.
Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank owns 60 percent of CIT and Manufacturers Hanover Corp. owns 40 percent.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The economy expanded in the third quarter for the first time in a year, the Government reported.
But the Commerce Department's chief economist acknowledged that the recovery had started to lose momentum by Labor Day.  [ Page A1. ]  Consumer confidence fell sharply this month, the Conference Board said.  [ D13. ]


Needle Swap Programs Gain Wider Acceptance
Underneath the subway tracks on a Bronx street corner, three volunteers stood holding packages of syringe needles, alcohol pads and condoms.
For the next two hours, a steady trickle of intravenous drug addicts -- prostitutes, scrawny men in jeans, a couple with a baby boy, a man in suit and tie -- exchanged fistfuls of used needles and picked up supplies.
That exchange of dirty needles for clean ones last Saturday morning, meant to curb the spread of AIDS, was illegal.
But when a police car stopped by the site, an officer stuck his head out the window to yell, "Get out of here, rapido, rapido!" and then drove off without making arrests.


Dow Up 16.32 With an Increase in Volume
Stocks managed to keep much of their gains yesterday in active trading, as the Dow Jones industrial average closed 16.32 points higher, at 3,061.94.
Hugh A. Johnson, a senior vide president with First Albany, said the market was surprising, since the economic news of a 2.4 percent rise in the gross national product at an annual rate and later the Conference Board's report of an unexpectedly sharp 12.5-point decline in its consumer confidence index, was deeply troubling.


Dr. Joseph F. Fletcher, 86, Dies; Pioneer in Field of Medical Ethics
Dr.
Joseph F. Fletcher, a founder of the field of biomedical ethics whose 1966 book "Situation Ethics" sparked both scholarly and popular debate, died Monday at the University of Virginia Medical Center in Charlottesville, Va.
He was 86 years old.


CBS Is a Big Winner, Too
The Twins-Braves World Series produced stellar ratings for CBS, with Game 7 posting a 32.2 Nielsen rating.
The seven-game 24.4 average, up 15 percent from last year's dismal first year of the CBS contract, is the highest since the 24.0 in the 1987 Series between the Twins and Cardinals.
The high viewership of the World Series cheered CBS, and helped the network win the ratings race for the week that ended Sunday.
But it was not the all-time ratings winner.
That honor goes to the 1980 Royals-Phillies Series, with a 32.8 average rating, followed by the 1978 Dodgers-Yankees Series, which averaged 32.7.


New Police Officers of the Safe Streets Program Have Dinkins Confident


Parisians Flocking To See 'Les Mis'
Parisians have a solid record of sniffing disdainfully at that very Anglo-Saxon phenomenon known as the musical, but the arrival of "Les Miserables" here this month seems to have caught them off guard.
They are flocking to see it without even a trace of embarrassment.
Of course, it helps that the pop opera is based on the 1862 novel by Victor Hugo and is mainly the work of a French composer and a French lyricist.
And no doubt it is essential that the Paris production is sung in French and not, as in the version that made it one of the biggest musical hits ever, in English.


Knee Braces and All, Giants Are Still Wary of McMahon
For the last three seasons, the Philadelphia Eagles have been a National Football League powerhouse.
They put together records of 10-6, 11-5 and 10-6, and made the playoffs each year.
Now, despite their good-as-ever defense, they are in trouble.
They have lost their last four games, falling to a 3-5 record.
They have started seven offensive-line combinations this season.
More distressing for them, they have used five quarterbacks, and not one has survived physically and mentally.


Yankees' Task: Get Some Players
Now that Buck Showalter has taken the open chair in the manager's office, the Yankees must proceed to fill the voids in their everyday lineup.
They can start with third base, deftly slide to the pitching staff and culminate their quest by securing another power hitter.
Can the Yankees accomplish all this before spring training?
Will they?
The answer to these pivotal questions is a big fat maybe, because the Yankees do not appear to know what direction they should take this winter.
General Manager Gene Michael has said the organization will soon devise its agenda for the off season.


People
*
Jan Hedquist, 45 years old, managing director of Ketchum Advertising International, has been named to the additional post of president at Ketchum Advertising, Pittsburgh.
He succeeds Tom Rich, who left the agency in April. *
Gail Stone, 44, has been named publisher at Elle magazine, a publication of Hachette Magazines Inc., succeeding Larry Burstein, who left in September to become publisher of Self magazine.
Ms.
Stone had previously been associate publisher at Modern Bride.


EXECUTIVES
*
Atlantic Records Co., New York, a Time Warner unit, named Val Azzoli senior vice president-general manager. *
General Mills, Minneapolis, named Stephen W. Sanger executive vice president.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about new banking legislation misstated the size of the Treasury credit line now held by the insurance fund that protects bank deposits.
It is $5 billion, not $45 billion.


Trade Official Assails Europe Over Ecology
Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, today criticized the agriculture policy of the European Community as environmentally destructive.
In an apparent response to growing attacks on American trade policies as ecologically risky, she painted the Bush Administration as sensitive to the environment.


Design for the Very Young Beginner
IF part of a museum's mission is to develop a viewer-friendly relationship between the objects it displays and the people who look at them, then the Cooper-Hewitt Museum is right on course.
Since September, Bruce Hannah, the first designer-in-residence at the museum, has been giving tours of its collections to Manhattan schoolchildren.
His point, he said, is that "everything that is made by people is designed."


Dorothy Weed Piano Teacher, 92
Dorothy Weed, a piano teacher and former director of the Diller-Quaile Music School on the Upper East Side, died on Tuesday at Doctor's Hospital.
She was 92 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died after a long illness, said Marjory Duncalfe, the director of the school.


Senate Approves Civil Rights Bill, 95-5
Seeking to still two years of bitter debate over discrimination and quotas, the Senate today passed, 95 to 5, a civil rights bill intended to make it easier to sue in job bias cases.
The House is expected to move quickly to adopt the compromise bill, which was worked out late last week by Senators John C. Danforth and Edward M. Kennedy and the Bush Administration.
President Bush, who is expected to sign it quickly, said on Friday that it provided "a new standard against discrimination and for equal opportunity."


Coslet and Infante Find It Easy To Take Stock of One Another
When the Jets resume action this Sunday against Green Bay in Giants Stadium, after a week off, it will be a reunion of sorts for head coaches Bruce Coslet of the Jets and Lindy Infante of the Packers.
Both were assistant coaches in Cincinnati in the early 1980's.
Infante was in his second year as quarterbacks and receivers coach and Coslet was in his first year as the special teams and tight ends coach when the Bengals finished 12-4 in 1981 and went to Super Bowl XVI.
"He was my neighbor for the two and a half years we were together in Cincinnati," said Coslet, the second-year Jet head coach.
"He's a good guy."


Affidavit Says Boy Confessed In Slaying Of Buddhist Monks
One of three teenagers arrested Friday in connection with the slayings of nine people at a Buddhist temple near Phoenix has told investigators that he was part of a gang of robbers that went to the temple in August, according to an affidavit.
The statement attributed to Jonathan Doody, 17 years old, was contained in a search warrant affidavit obtained Tuesday by the Arizona Republic.
The affidavit also says that Rolando David Caratachea, 17, Alessandro Garcia, 16, and about seven others took part in the robbery and killings.


From Urban Walks, A New Sokolow Dance
Anna Sokolow has long been acknowledged as the urban poet of American modern dance.
Miss Sokolow, who received the 1991 Samuel H. Scripps American Dance Festival Award, has created many kinds of dances over her half-century as a choreographer.
But it is her depictions of the brutal loneliness and despair of urban life that have defined her.
And tonight, her Players' Project company is to present the premiere of another city dance, "The Street," at the start of a four-performance engagement at Marymount Manhattan Theater, 221 East 71st Street.
Set to an actor's live reading of poetry by Langston Hughes and a commissioned score by Joseph Reiser that erupts on occasion into heavy metal-style rock music, "The Street" comes out of years of walking New York streets and riding the subway.
Tiny and gray-haired but with the easily erect carriage of a woman much younger than her 79 years, Miss Sokolow thinks nothing of taking a late night walk east to Delancey Street from her home in the West Village or following her feet into interesting new side streets, though she admits to hating the subways.


New York City Budget Has Big Gap
Four months after passing a barely balanced budget, New York City officials said yesterday that the plan was already out of whack by perhaps a quarter-billion dollars, because of rising costs, weaker revenue projections and Mayor David N. Dinkins's decision to restore some services he intially cut.
At the same time, Felix G. Rohatyn, the head of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, warned the city that it could not count on $1 billion in aid from the corporation to help close budget gaps over the next four years unless it freezes taxes for two years, cuts its workforce by 30,000 to 35,000 employees through attrition and improves productivity.


High Above the City, a Closer Look at a New Day


Borden Profit Falls 8%
Borden Inc. said on Tuesday that third-quarter income dropped 8 percent, to $98.9 million, or 67 cents a share, from $107.8 million, or 73 cents a share, in the 1990 quarter.
Sales slipped by 3.6 percent to $1.87 billion from $1.94 billion.
The company said results were in line with projections, as production disruptions, the recession and competition put pressure on sales.
The company repeated that earnings growth would be delayed until next year, with cost savings from plant modernizing.
The company's stock rose 25 cents yesterday, to $33, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Middle East Friends and Enemies: Some of the Leading Delegates in Madrid; Faris Bouez, Lebanese Foreign Minister
Faris Bouez of Lebanon, 36 years old, is the least experienced delegation leader at the conference.
A Maronite Christian and lawyer, he was active in the National Bloc, a pacifist group that opposed Syria's military presence in Lebanon, but he held no major political post until his father-in-law, President Elias Hrawi, named him Foreign Minister in December.


4 Journalists Are Winners of Cabot Prizes
Four journalists working in South America and Mexico have been awarded the 1991 Maria Moors Cabot Prizes from Columbia University for "the advancement of press freedom and inter-American understanding."
These are the winners, who will each be honored tonight at Columbia with a gold medal and a $1,000 award:


New-Home Sales Post Sharp Drop
Despite a decent rise in household incomes last month and the lowest mortgage rates in 14 years, sales of new homes fell sharply in September.
Since the housing sector has led the way since January in pulling the nation out of recession, economists see the plunge as strong evidence that Americans' confidence in the sluggish recovery is fading.
Home sales plunged 12.9 percent last month, the biggest drop in two and a half years, to their lowest level since the depths of the recession in January, the Commerce Department reported yesterday.


Israel Plays Down Effectiveness of Patriot Missile
Senior Israeli scientists and military officers have disclosed new information indicating that the American Patriot missiles used in Israel in the Persian Gulf war destroyed far fewer Scud missile warheads than previously believed, Israeli and Defense Department officials said today.
Over the last few weeks, senior Israeli Air Force officers and civilian scientists have related these new findings to military analysts in Israel and to senior researchers at the Pentagon.


Ford Engines Returning to Indy
The battle between auto industry giants, Ford and Chevrolet, is once again off to the races with the imminent return of Ford engines to the Indy-car circuit after an absence of 20 years.
Cosworth Engineering and Ford Motor Company announced yesterday the formation of a new Indy-car team to provide engines for the 1992 season.


Topps Stock Distribution
In a move it describes as the successful culmination of its 1984 leveraged buyout of the Topps Company, the investment bank Forstmann Little &amp; Company has announced that it will distribute 25.3 million shares of Topps's stock to limited and general partners in two of its investment groups.
The move, announced Tuesday, transfers control of 53 percent of Topps, a maker of baseball trading cards, from the hands of four general partners to 35 limited and general partners.
Topps, based in Brooklyn, is registering the shares with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which would allow the stock to be sold on the open market after the shares are distributed.


Review/Dance; New Ballet Hispanico Work Set To (Ah, Memories!) 'Tico, Tico'
Ballet Hispanico has come a long way since 1970, when Tina Ramirez founded a pre-professional troupe with a special interest in the Hispanic heritage of its young dancers.
Nowadays, a Ballet Hispanico program guarantees top production values, costumes by some of the best Broadway and dance designers in the country, and choreographers from veterans like Talley Beatty to experimentalists like William Whitener.
Above all, it has a polished group of performers exuding the sheer joy of dancing.


Events: Belle Epoque And History in Facades
An Era Past  New York School of Interior Design, 155 East 56th Street; (212) 753-5365.
"Paris in the Belle Epoque: Photographs From the Archives of Roger-Viollet," an exhibition of 70 photographs of buildings and interiors taken between 1880 and 1914, starts tomorrow and runs through Feb. 27.
Hours: noon to 6 P.M.
Monday through Thursday; noon to 5 P.M.
Friday.
Free.


Bank Reform, Deformed
What started out as a wise, urgently needed rescue for the nation's ailing banks -- and potentially for taxpayers as well -- has turned grotesque.
An ugly turf war between two House committees has yielded up legislation that would deform, not reform, the business.
There's still a way out, but unless some deft maneuvering takes place on the House floor in the next few days, the public will be left with a grim, graphic case study in what's wrong with Congress.


American Tobacco Has New President
American Brands Inc. has appointed Donald S. Johnston president and chief operating officer of its American Tobacco Company, which sells such well-known cigarettes as Tareyton, Pall Mall and Carlton.
The title of president had been held by Charles H. Mullen, who continues as the company's chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Johnston had been the executive vice president for sales at American Tobacco.


Knicks Showing Interest in Davis
The Knicks are exploring the possibility of signing Walter Davis, the 6-foot-6-inch veteran swingman who was waived by the Portland Trail Blazers on Tuesday.


Back for His Seventh New York Run, Petersen Still Retains the Dream
Pat Petersen of Bay Shore, L.I., will run another inefficient, passionate race this Sunday in the New York City Marathon.
He will test his sometimes irregular heartbeat and drag his 31-year-old body through as many of the five boroughs as it will allow.
He will not win, unless a few of the elite runners bump each other off the Queensboro Bridge.
But Petersen is the only male entrant from the United States who can dream of finishing among the top three after 26.2 miles.


Cablevision Shifts Officers
John A. Kofalt, the chief operating officer of the Cablevision Systems Corporation, will become president on Jan. 1.
He will succeed John Tatta, who has been named chairman of the executive committee.
Both appointments were announced yesterday.
Mr.
Kofalt, 49 years old, a graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point, has been with Cablevision since 1976.
In 1981, he was named group vice president in charge of all company-managed cable operations.


Business and the Law; Holding Directors Liable for Losses
LITIGATION accusing corporate directors of negligence and other misconduct is fairly common in the United States, so it would be unthinkable for someone to accept a director's post if an American company did not carry insurance as protection from lawsuits.
But this is not so in Israel, where the first significant case is unfolding in which damages are being sought from directors for failing to prevent the financial looting of their company.


Teachers Aren't Asked About Child Abuse
To the Editor:
One good explanation why abusers of children are teaching our children in New York City public schools (news article, Oct. 11) is that the application for employment by the Board of Education does not inquire if the applicant has ever been found to have abused children.


Making Giants Stadium a Part of the '94 World Cup
The world governing body of soccer is determined to make Giants Stadium an integral part of the 1994 World Cup tournament despite the need for drastic changes there and a lack of funds to implement them.
That message was made abundantly clear late this afternoon by members of an inspection committee from FIFA, the governing body, who spoke enthusiastically about a special concept planned for the stadium.
Contributions Cited
"This stadium must be part of the tournament," said Guido Tognoni, FIFA's press officer and a member of the inspection committee.
"We're making a lot of inspections and have nice things to say about everyone, but this site cannot be left out of the world's biggest sports event."


Palm Beach Rape Trial Faces Test: Finding Jury
Jury selection is to start Thursday in the case of William K. Smith, the 31-year-old Kennedy heir charged with raping a Florida woman on the family's Palm Beach estate over Easter weekend.
But the task of finding six citizens sufficiently unaffected by the saturation news coverage the case has already received could prove formidable.
Lawyers say interviewing potential jurors could take two weeks to a month or more, longer than the time earmarked for testimony in the trial, which is scheduled to begin Dec. 2.


Questions For Albany; Fiscal Gap, Cuomo And Miller Collide
A special session of the Legislature would be difficult enough later this year if the political agenda in Albany were limited to the state's $689 million budget gap.
But the situation is complicated as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo tries to decide, at the same time, whether to run for President and how to balance the budget.
Adding to the complexity is the fact that Assembly Speaker Mel Miller could be on trial in Brooklyn during the special session.


Travelers Posts Profit; Cigna Soars
The Travelers Corporation, the troubled insurance giant, reported a third-quarter profit of $65 million, or 60 cents a share, yesterday in contrast to a loss of $499 million a year earlier.
Separately, the Cigna Corporation, another insurance giant, said its third-quarter profits rose elevenfold, to $123 million, or $1.72 a share, from $11 million, or 15 cents a share, a year earlier.
Although the 1990 results reflected a special $98 million after-tax charge, analysts were nonetheless impressed.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.08
5.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.93
4.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.16
4.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.34
6.24
7.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.62
7.57
7.92
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.65
8.92
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.68
6.70
6.81
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Witness Said to Place Gotti Near Mob Killing
A witness saw John Gotti near the spot where Paul Castellano was slain shortly before the killing, and later identified his face but did not recognize his voice, prosecutors said in a court document that has been unsealed.
The document, a letter from the prosecution to the defense, added some details to information previously disclosed about the unnamed witness's identification of Mr.
Gotti, the reputed boss of the Gambino crime family.


Knee Braces and All, Giants Are Still Wary of McMahon
For the last three seasons, the Philadelphia Eagles have been a National Football League powerhouse.
They put together records of 10-6, 11-5 and 10-6, and made the playoffs each year.
Now, despite their good-as-ever defense, they are in trouble.
They have lost their last four games, falling to a 3-5 record.
They have started seven offensive-line combinations this season.
More distressing for them, they have used five quarterbacks, and not one has survived physically and mentally.


Books of The Times; On an Iowa Farm, a Tragedy With Echoes of Lear
A Thousand Acres  By Jane Smiley  371 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
Does this sound familiar?


Drop in Quality In First Homes
Who's buying a first home in America?
Typically couples in their 20's with a few children, the Census Bureau said today.
But high costs are pushing buyers into the low end of the American dream.
"The homes the first-time buyers are buying are not as nice as those of other recent buyers," said Barbara Williams, a Census Bureau statistician.


Bronx Journal; Pitching for Tourists (and Not Just Yankee Fans)
It was a distinctly unurban scene: Two carriages hauled by huge Belgian draft horses stopped at a sea wall overlooking Long Island Sound.
A carriage driver in a bright red sweater dropped the reins and called out to a group of somewhat skeptical guests waiting for him.
"Welcome, everybody," the driver, 42-year-old Michael Sandlofer, said.
"Welcome to the Bronx."


Washington Talk; Gas Mileage and Safety, Or Statistics in Collision
As Congress takes up a proposal to increase gas mileage requirements sharply, all sides in the debate have churned out so much devilishly detailed data to support their respective views that the basic facts have become impossible to determine.
There is a lot riding on fuel economy in automobiles: smog, the global climate, the trade deficit, the job market, the Middle East and the size of the family car to the highway mortality rate.


Middle East Friends and Enemies: Some of the Leading Delegates in Madrid; Kamal Abu Jaber, Jordanian Foreign Minister
Foreign Minister Kamal Abu Jaber, a 59-year-old former political science professor, was appointed to his post on Oct. 3 and has since devoted his energies to preparing the joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation to the Madrid talks.
King Hussein said he and Mr.
Jaber "have worked day and night" in the last three weeks to get ready for the conference.


Rite Aid Seeks to Buy Revco As Salomon Settles Lawsuit
Two broad steps were taken yesterday to clean up the tattered trail left in the botched 1986 leveraged buyout of Revco D.S.
The Rite Aid Corporation, a competing drugstore chain, offered to buy the bankrupt Revco, even as the architect of the buyout, Salomon Brothers, agreed to pay $29.7 million to settle a lawsuit from some of the investors in it.
The offer by Rite Aid, the nation's largest drugstore chain, intensifies a battle for control of Revco that has been waged since the Ohio-based drugstore chain filed for bankruptcy in 1988.


JOBS ARE AT RISK IN HAITI SANCTIONS
Amid the drone of assembly lines on vast shop floors and the purring, air-conditioned cool in back-room offices, the impending effects of a stringent United States economic embargo imposed on Haiti on Tuesday seemed present on every face in this city's sprawling industrial zone.
More than 20 years ago, Haiti began developing light-assembly industries in the region, in which textiles and simple electronic components are sent from the United States for assembly and then shipped back.


Council's Agency Merger Plan to Challenge Mayor
Like street fighters circling an adversary, the City Council leadership has set the stage for a bitter confrontation with Mayor David N. Dinkins over streamlining city government by drafting a bill that would force him to consolidate two departments his own aides recommended last year should be fused.
The legislation, written by Councilman Herbert E. Berman of Brooklyn, would dismantle the Mayor's Office of Cultural Affairs and put it under the aegis of the Parks and Recreation Department.
The idea was first proposed by the Mayor's Office of Operations last year but was later dropped because arts groups protested.
The bill is to be introduced in the Council next week.


TRANSACTIONS
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
BOSTON CELTICS -- Signed Larry Bird, forward, to a 2-year contract extension through the 1993-94 season.
Signed Kevin Gamble, forward, to a 3-year contract.
Waived Anderson Hunt, Kennard Winchester and Rick Calloway, guards, and Michael Smith and Steve Scheffler, forwards.
CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Signed Larry Johnson, forward, to a 6-year contract.
DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Waived Jim Grandholm, forward.
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Waived Anthony Jones and Irving Thomas, forwards.
PHOENIX SUNS -- Waived Joe Barry Carroll, center. FOOTBALL National Football League
NFL -- Suspended Tim Worley, Pittsburgh Steelers running back, for six games for violating the NFL's drug policy.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Activated Alphonso Carreker, defensive end, from the physically-unable-to-perform list.
Placed Ronnie Haliburton, linebacker, on injured reserve.
DETROIT LIONS -- Placed Rodney Peete, quarterback, on injured reserve.
Claimed D.J.
Dozier, running back, off waivers from the Minnesota Vikings.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Activated Marcus Allen, running back, from injured reserve and placed him on the practice squad.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed A.J.
Greene, defensive back.
Waived Johnie Cooks, linebacker, and Greg Meisner, defensive lineman.


Tartikoff Begins Charting New Course For Paramount Films
Brandon Tartikoff, the chairman of the Paramount Pictures Corporation, said today that the dismal financial showing of the studio's latest releases, "Frankie and Johnny" and "The Butcher's Wife," had led to a fundamental reassessment of the kinds of films he would make as he solidified control of one of Hollywood's most powerful studios.
Instead of movies intended for an older audience, Mr.
Tartikoff said he planned to make films that appeal to younger audiences, who make up the bulk of moviegoers today.
He cited movies with music, like "Saturday Night Fever" and "Footloose," major successes that drew huge young audiences.


CHRONICLE
Halloween is not normally celebrated in France, but in New York it is hard to ignore.
Among the hundreds of parties that will draw celebrants of the spooky tonight is one to be given by Random House at the Grolier, a club with Gothic touches in its decor.
The publisher is celebrating "The New Gothic," an anthology of works dealing with psychological horror rather than the dungeons and vampires of the "old Gothic."


TV Time for Democrats
To the Editor:
Walter Goodman points out (Critic's Notebook, Oct. 7) how much free publicity President Bush receives on television for his re-election campaign.
One year from now it will be a few weeks before the election.
Every television appearance of President Bush from here on is political.
For this reason, the networks should give designated Democrats equal time to respond when the President appears and states his views.


Couples Gets High Marks but Keeps a Low Profile
No one in golf this year has undergone more image rehabilitation than Fred Couples.
The gifted long hitter who unwittingly became the symbol of indolence and underachievement on the PGA Tour is now being talked about as America's best player and potentially the best in the world.


Fed Signals Cut in the Funds Rate
The Federal Reserve Board sent an oblique signal to the credit markets yesterday that it had lowered a key short-term interest rate by an additional quarter of a percentage point.
A move by the Fed to lower the overnight rate on bank loans in the Federal funds market had been widely anticipated, and prices of short-term Treasury securities rose in response.
The step was not as well received among long-term investors, however, as Treasury bond prices slipped a bit.


Revamping At A.T.&amp;T.
A.T.&amp; T. said Tuesday that it had reorganized senior management for the largest part of its business, long-distance service.
The reorganization of the long-distance business, whose revenue could exceed $21 billion this year, is in part a result of the fast growth of multinational American companies, especially in Europe, as well as A.T.&amp; T.'s own innovations with residential customers.


Chrysler's Loss Is Not as Deep as Feared
The Chrysler Corporation said today that it lost $82 million in the third quarter, significantly less than analysts had predicted.
The results touched off strong buying of Chrysler stock, which rose $1.625 to finish at $12.75 on trading of 3.3 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange.
Chrysler's loss was on revenue of $7.5 billion, compared with a loss of $214 million a year ago on revenue of $6.5 billion.
For the nine months the auto maker has lost $892 million on revenue of $21.1 billion, compared with a nine-month profit last year of $37 million on revenue of $23 billion.


An Irrepressible Agency Meets an Implacable Client
IN one of the more intriguing match- ups, a company with a reputation for being hard to please is hiring an agency with a reputation for creating campaigns that are hard to ignore.
E. &amp; J. Gallo Winery, the sales leader in the nation's $7.8 billion wine market, has named Deutsch Inc., a New York agency that specializes in attention-getting ads, to handle the introduction of Eden Roc, an inexpensive extra-dry California sparkling wine.


Morning TV: The Twist That Works
On Wednesday last week, with auto industry earnings plummeting, the morning network television shows rounded up industry analysts and auto executives for the standard interview-with-expert.
But on "Good Day New York," the morning program produced by the Fox-owned station in New York, WNYW, a reporter, Gordon Elliott, showed up at a garage in Woodside, Queens.
He brought along a stylist from Pierre Michel, a fancy Manhattan salon, to make over the silver-haired mechanic for a feature entitled: "From Automan to Anchorman."
The mechanic makeover just happened to have been scheduled for that day.
"If we could have planned it that way, we would have," said Joachim Blunck, the executive producer of "Good Day New York." The local news report included a cursory mention of the auto industry's declining earnings.


Revelation of a 'Planet' Prompts Two Theories
Ever since the discovery earlier this year of what appears to be a large object orbiting a dead star, scientists have been stretching their minds to explain the strange phenomenon.
Is it an illusion of some sort, or a manifestation of stellar evolution wholly unexpected and inexplicable?
Is the object a planet many times the size of Earth and thus the first established evidence of a planet around a star other than the Sun?


The U.N. Today
General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M.
GENERAL COMMITTEE -- 9:15 A.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


In the Nation; Finally Facing Facts
When Alan Greenspan offered an optimistic economic forecast in July, he was careful to hedge; recovery, he said, "could be muted or even falter." This was scarcely noticed in the euphoria of the Fed chairman's conclusion that the recession was over and election year 1992 would see a growth rate of 2 to 3 percent.
More than three months later, Mr.
Greenspan has confirmed the hedge rather than the prediction.
He said the economy was "demonstrably sluggish" though moving forward; and the optimism of July was notably missing from his October speech to business executives in Rhode Island.


Holy Cathedral! Artist Makes a Home for Bats
IF bats ever move into Christopher Sproat's "Bat Cathedral," a bat house in a sculpture garden at the DeCordova Museum in Lincoln, Mass., they may be the first bats to dwell in a place that is both meant for them and a work of art.
"It's the only artist-designed bat house that I know of," said Mr.
Sproat, a Manhattan sculptor.
It is also, he added, far superior to the cramped one-hole bat houses intended to be hung from building walls that are now available in many mail-order catalogues.


CUNY to Hear Charges Of Jeffries Death Threat
City College announced yesterday that it would investigate allegations that Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., chairman of the college's black studies department, had threatened the life of an editor of The Harvard Crimson during an interview and had a bodyguard seize the editor's tape recordings.
An official of the City University of New York, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that university officials would interview the student.
But the official declined to say what might happen next other than to note that any information could be used in the college's evaluation of Dr.
Jeffries's performance over the remaining eight months of his term as chairman.


Plan to Revive Erie Canal: Add Tollbooths to Locks?
In 1883 a group of upstate lawmakers, desperately afraid that the railroads would put the Erie Canal out of business, led a successful campaign to have the canal declared "forever free from tolls."
The free ride didn't work, of course, when it came to thwarting competition from the railroads, not to mention interstate highways and the airlines.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Montana priced $85 million in tax and revenue anticipation notes due in June 1992 to yield 4.10 percent with a 4.50 percent coupon through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
PREFERRED STOCK


Accounts
*
Avis Inc., Garden City, L.I., to Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, New York, for advertising in Australia and New Zealand.
The agency, which creates advertising for Avis in the United States and Canada, said that billings are $3 million.
Connaghan &amp; May Advertising, Sydney, previously handled Avis in Australia, while the New Zealand agency HKM handled it there.


Billington Sparkles For Devils
Craig Billington, making his first start of the National Hockey League season tonight, made 34 saves as the Devils beat the Calgary Flames, 5-2.
Billington's biggest saves came in the third period -- a glove grab of a big shot by Jamie Macoun, then sparkling stops on deflections by Joe Nieuwendyk and Doug Gilmour during a power play.


Mideast Clashes Kill One Arab And Wound 35
The opening of the Madrid peace conference was greeted in the Middle East today with new bloodshed and calls for an Islamic holy war against Israel, but also with a rare peace march by supporters of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
One Palestinian youth was shot to death and at least 35 others were wounded in stone-throwing clashes with the Israeli Army in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
It was an uncommonly high casualty count even for people grown numb to the incessant mayhem produced by the four-year-old Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation.


Market Place; Putting a Value On a Cable Deal
SHARES of the American Television and Communications Corporation have risen to $54.50 from the $49.50 in mid-October when news first appeared that Time Warner Inc. would buy the 18 percent of the cable operator that it did not already own.
Time Warner said Tuesday that it would offer one share of a new preferred stock for each American Television share.
The new preferred shares can be converted in about three and a half years to $75 a share.
On Tuesday, American Television's stock jumped $3.375 and yesterday it gained another 12.5 cents.


Justice Puts Off Inquiry on Ex-Aide's B.C.C.I. Link
Justice Department officials said today that they would await a White House ethics review before deciding whether to open a criminal investigation of a former White House aide who on Tuesday canceled a $600,000 contract to represent the former head of Saudi Arabian intelligence, a primary figure in the criminal inquiries into the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
"When the White House completes its review, the department will give it careful consideration and make a decision regarding further action," Paul J. McNulty, a department spokesman, said of the action invovling the former aide, Edward M. Rogers Jr.


Kelly Is American League's Top Manager
TOM KELLY, whose Minnesota Twins became the only club in baseball history to go from last place one year to World Series winners the next, yesterday was named American League Manager of the Year.


CHRONICLE
The setting is just right for a Halloween party, the same room in the Paris Opera House once haunted by the Phantom of the Opera.
Tonight PIERRE BERGE, president of the Paris Opera houses and chairman of Yves Saint Laurent, and the Chase Manhattan Bank are giving a Halloween party for 49 very select guests in honor of the Martha Graham Dance Company, now performing in Paris.


Navy Cuts Ties to Group in Sex Abuse Case
The Navy today severed all ties to a private naval aviation association because of accusations, first disclosed by the group's president two weeks ago, that five women were sexually abused at its annual meeting in Las Vegas, Nev., last month.
The Navy is investigating the incidents, which could lead to criminal charges against members of the organization, the Tailhook Association, a private group of 15,000 retired and active-duty Navy carrier pilots.


Storm Batters Shore; 5 Missing on Rescue Copter
An unusual and powerful combination of high tides, gale-force winds and storm-driven waves flooded low-lying coastal areas from the Carolinas to Maine last night, washing away houses on Long Island and capsizing boats off Connecticut.
An Air National Guard rescue helicopter with five people aboard was reported down in the water and missing.
Meteorologists said they expected the storm to "keep on howling" through most of today and tonight as it follows its westward course toward the mainland, making for a soggy Halloween.


Bright Lights Pierce Dark Clouds
In front of the Toronto hotel were many people and few taxi cabs.
A traveler told the driver to take him to Maple Leaf Gardens for the exhibition game between Canada and the United States.
This was in August, right before the start of the Canada Cup tournament.
Before he could close the door, the traveler saw Walter and Phyllis Gretzky, Wayne's parents, waiting for a ride.
Walter had a big, full bag in his arms .
"Are you going to the game now?" the man asked.


Miscellany
*
A commercial that advocates an extension of unemployment benefits has appeared on four television stations in Washington and Charleston, W. Va., this week, after being refused by six others in Houston and Washington.
The spot, produced by Citizen Action, a consumer group, depicts a newly unemployed husband and wife writing a letter to President Bush asking him not to veto the bill granting added weeks of unemployment benefits.
Several of the stations that declined the spot say they do not accept issue-oriented advertising. *
Kentucky Fried Chicken, Dunkin' Donuts and Nestle Food have agreed to stop advertising and marketing campaigns suggesting that certain of their products are healthy, low-fat alternatives to their regular fare.
The agreement was reached with Robert Abrams, New York State attorney general.


Move at First Chicago
Barry F. Sullivan, chairman and chief executive of the First Chicago Corporation, will take early retirement by next April, the company said yesterday.
A spokeswoman for First Chicago, the nation's 13th largest banking company, said Mr.
Sullivan, 60 years old, wanted to pursue civic interests.
A Bronx native and graduate of Georgetown University, Mr.
Sullivan spent 23 years at Chase Manhattan.
After he was passed over for the top spot there, he left New York in 1980 for First Chicago.


This Witch Is Speaking At the Smithsonian
BEING a reporter as well as a witch, Margot Adler knew where things were heading when another reporter called her office at National Public Radio with an urgent request for an interview.
"Are you doing a Halloween piece?" Ms.
Adler said, chuckling.
Yes, well,
perhaps
it was a cornball idea.


Big Losses At Armco, Bethlehem
Two big steel companies -- Bethlehem and Armco -- yesterday reported huge losses for the third quarter, while a third, Wheeling-Pittsburgh, reported a drop in sales and a small profit.
The companies attributed the results to falling steel prices, higher costs and sagging demand brought on by the recession.
The Bethlehem Steel Corporation, the nation's second-largest steel producer behind the USX Corporation, said it lost $61 million for the quarter, in contrast to net income of $10 million in the period last year.
Armco Inc., which is the nation's fifth-largest steelmaker, said it lost $26.9 million, deeper than the $8.8 million loss in the period last year.
Following are details of the companies' results:  Bethlehem
Bethlehem's sales slipped in the quarter, to $1.12 billion, compared with $1.2 billion in the third quarter of 1990.
Walter F. Williams, Bethlehem's chairman and chief executive, said, "Realized prices were lower in all major product lines in the third quarter and in the first nine months of 1991 than in the year-earlier periods, and, on average, were at the severely depressed levels of the early 1980's."
Indeed, steel prices have tumbled in the last year, with steel producers cutting prices to keep market share.
As a result, the average price for a ton of hot-rolled sheet steel -- the basic product used in everything from pipes and automobile parts to traffic signs and file cabinets -- has slid on spot markets from $345 at the beginning of last year to about $280 now.
And steel buyers have said they could usually get prices that are even slightly lower.
Bethlehem reported an operating loss of $48 million in its basic steel operations, compared with operating income of $27 million for the third quarter of last year.
The company said the results were negatively affected by higher labor costs, citing a wage increase that went into effect as part of a pact with the United Steelworkers of America.
In its steel-related operations, which include freight car manufacturing operations and shipbuilding, Bethlehem reported an operating loss of $3 million, compared with $12 million in the year earlier period.
The company, based in Bethlehem, Pa., said it incurred "unusually high operating costs" because of modernization and repair of a coke oven and blast furnace at its mill in Sparrow's Point, Md.
The company said it estimated that the work amounted to about $50 million in the third quarter.
On the New York Stock Exchange, Bethlehem's shares gained 75 cents, to $15.625.
Armco
Armco said its sales for the quarter dropped to $387.6 million, from $418.1 million in the third quarter of last year.
Included in the quarterly loss is an equity loss of $31.9 million from flat-rolled joint venture between Armco, based in Parsippany, N.J., and the Kawasaki Steel Corporation of Japan.
However, Armco said operating income improved to $13.9 million for the quarter, from $3.4 million in the quarter lst year.
"This is encouraging," said Robert L. Purdum, Armco's chairman and chief executive.
"But continuing softness in the economy concerns us as we look through the first half of next year." Mr.
Purdum added that "the near-term outlook for most of Armco's major markets remains weak." Armco's shares lost 12.5 cents, closing at $5.125.
Wheeling-Pittsburgh
The Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corporation, in Wheeling, W. Va., which earlier this year emerged from bankruptcy, reported net income of $392,000, or 2 cents a share.
The figure compared with net income of $22.3 million in the comparable period last year.
Analysts stressed that the comparisons were not revealing because the company was in bankruptcy.
Sales for Wheeling-Pittsburgh, the nation's eighth-largest steel producer, dropped to $244.6 million, from $286.5 million.
The company's shares fell 25 cents, to $7.25.


House the Homeless
To the Editor:
Re Anna Quindlen's Oct. 26 column on housing, not just sheltering the homeless, is it sensible for the city to raze a perfectly viable parking lot servicing Kings Highway, a crowded shopping area, to erect a shelter for the homeless?
Why not refurbish all the abandoned buildings you see around Brooklyn, Bedford Stuyvesant and East New York and put the homeless there?
It has nothing to do with Not In My Backyard; it's just common sense.
ELAINE GOLDMAN Brooklyn, Oct. 26, 1991


Middle East Friends and Enemies: Some of the Leading Delegates in Madrid; Heidar Abdelshafi, Palestinian
When he was named leader of the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East talks, Dr.
Heidar Abdelshafi was a well-known and highly respected figure in the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip, but journalists had to scramble to find out more about his background.
He is still surrounded by a bit of mystery, largely because the 72-year-old physician has kept a low profile for nearly 30 years after starting out as an important organizer in the Palestinian movement.
He is said to have been a Communist in his youth.


Bond Proposition Will Help New York Recover
To the Editor:
On Election Day, Nov. 5, the people of New York State have the opportunity to put New York on the road to economic recovery.
Proposition 1 on the ballot will allow the State Legislature to increase the Job Development Authority's authorization of state bonds from $600 million to $900 million.
This power to extend low-interest loans to companies looking to expand in New York State has proved to be a valuable economic tool in stimulating economic growth.


La Begonia Journal; For Afrikaner Gaucho, Arid Land and Hard Work
He shuffles about with a heavy stick for a cane.
But at 79, after 64 years of riding the plains on horseback, Enrique Carlos Grimbeek seems an archetype of life in the Argentine outdoors.
He still wears the baggy pants and thick belt of a gaucho.
A visitor to his 180,000-acre sheep farm in the southeastern corner of Chubut province will find him hospitable and talkative, full of stories about the hard life of a rancher.
But his tales are hard to follow.
Mr.
Grimbeek's Spanish is almost unintelligible, since it includes a heavy Dutch accent and is sprayed with Afrikaans words.


Lower Dose of Aspirin Found Safer and Effective
Daily doses of a mere one-tenth of a regular aspirin are safer and no less effective than higher doses in preventing heart attacks and strokes, a new study has found.
The study, conducted in the Netherlands, involved 3,131 patients who had suffered a minor stroke or transient ischemic attack.
The study, whose results are being reported in today's issue of The New England Journal of Medicine, represents the lowest dose of aspirin yet tested in a major patient trial to prevent potentially fatal attacks of blood-vessel disorders.


Opening Postponed For 'Nick And Nora'
The opening of "Nick and Nora," the only original musical announced for Broadway this year, has been postponed to Dec. 2.
The show, based on the martini-loving sleuths created by Dashiell Hammett in "The Thin Man," is in previews at the Marquis Theater.
It was to have opened on Nov. 10, with Barry Bostwick as Nick and Joanna Gleason as Nora.
"It doesn't mean the show is in trouble because it's being postponed," Elizabeth I. McCann, a producer of the show, said yesterday.
"Any musical can run into problems, and we're working on them."


REPORT SAYS IRAN SEEKS ATOMIC ARMS
In the wake of revelations by United Nations inspectors about Iraq's advanced nuclear weapons program, an American intelligence assessment has concluded that at least some of Iran's revolutionary leaders are intent on developing nuclear weapons.
The brief, cautiously worded assessment, contained in a broad, classified National Intelligence Estimate on Iran that is still subject to revision, also concludes that Iran's nuclear program is disorganized and only in an initial stage of development.
Some Administration officials -- as well as independent arms-control analysts -- say they believe that the assessment underestimates the scope of Iranian intentions.


4 Libyans Charged by France in Air Bombing
A French judge issued arrest warrants today for four Libyan Government officials, including a brother-in-law of the Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, for suspected complicity in the 1989 bombing of a French DC-10 over Africa in which 170 people were killed.
The judge, Jean-Louis Bruguiere, who is responsible for investigating terrorist cases, also asked Interpol, the international police organization, to seek for questioning two other Libyan officials, although no charges have been brought against them.


Striking Los Angeles Nurses Vote to Return to Work


Political Parties in Poland Resist Walesa's Bid to Become Premier
President Lech Walesa's offer to assume the additional post of Prime Minister was coolly received today by the political parties that will make up the splintered new Parliament.
They instead stepped up talks to form a governing coalition led by a Prime Minister of their choosing.
Tadeusz Mazowiecki, the former Prime Minister and leader of the Democratic Union, which narrowly finished first with about 12 percent of the vote in elections on Sunday, met privately with Mr.
Walesa today and offered to lead a new government.
Mr.
Walesa, who broke with Mr.
Mazowiecki last year as the Solidarity union fragmented, was said to have declined the offer.


Breeders' Cup: In Excess Shifts Race; Farma Way Withdrawn
The $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic, the richest horse race in the world, lost its two star performers today when In Excess was entered instead in the $1 million Breeders' Cup Mile and Farma Way was withdrawn because of an ankle injury.
The two colts abdicated this morning when 91 horses were being entered for Saturday's eighth running of the Breeders' Cup series of seven championship races at Churchill Downs.
Both were ranked at the top of the list of candidates for the title Horse of the Year, and both figured to shoot for the title in the mile-and-a-quarter Classic, which has become the kingmaker of American racing.


Worley's Drug Suspension
Pittsburgh Steelers running back TIM WORLEY, who hasn't played this season because of injuries and off-field problems, was suspended yesterday for six games for violating the National Football League's drug policy.
Worley was suspended under the N.F.L.'s revised drug policy that went into effect July 15.
The league does not reveal the names of first-time offenders, so a player must be a two-time violator to warrant a six-game suspension.


After Angering Dinkins, Hospitals Chief Is Out, Now
Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo, who resigned last week as president of the New York City hospital system, effective on March 1, resigned again yesterday, effective immediately.
"I was told to resign rather than be fired," he said at a hastily organized news conference late yesterday afternoon.
That order, he said, came from "City Hall," though he declined to be more specific.


On Keating Five, Ethics Panel Acted Properly
To the Editor:
"The Keating None?" (editorial, Oct. 23), your latest in a series of shrill tirades concerning the Senate Ethics Committee, again demonstrates ignorance about the committee's role and actions.


Rankings No Shock: Ripken Is Just Perfect
As Don Mattingly continued slipping, Cal Ripken Jr. joined the Yankees' first baseman yesterday as the only perfect players in the 11-year history of baseball's ranking statistics.
Ryne Sandberg, the most consistently top-ranked player at any position in both leagues, registered the best score ever for a National League player but still couldn't join the perfect ones.
Ripken, who batted .323, hit 34 home runs and drove in 114 runs this year for Baltimore, ranked No. 1 in the seven statistical categories (five offensive and two defensive) used in ranking American League shortstops.
That gave him a 1.000 average rank, matching the perfect average rank Mattingly achieved for American League first basemen in 1987.


Palm Beach Rape Trial Faces Test: Finding Jury
Jury selection is to start Thursday in the case of William K. Smith, the 31-year-old Kennedy heir charged with raping a Florida woman on the family's Palm Beach estate over Easter weekend.
But the task of finding six citizens sufficiently unaffected by the saturation news coverage the case has already received could prove formidable.
Lawyers say interviewing potential jurors could take two weeks to a month or more, longer than the time earmarked for testimony in the trial, which is scheduled to begin Dec. 2.


Dollar Tumbles as Fed Lets A Key Interest Rate Decline
The dollar tumbled yesterday after the Federal Reserve allowed a key short-term interest rate to decline.
Gold prices slipped domestically after rising overseas.


When Governments Can Gag Doctors
To the Editor:
Discussions of the Supreme Court Rust decision, ruling that physicians may not discuss abortion with patients in Medicaid clinics, has focused on the abortion issue to the exclusion of the more fundamental principle.
The Supreme Court has now stated that the Government has the right to tell doctors not to discuss certain medical treatments with patients.


INSIDE
Major Rights Package Is Approved by Senate
Trying to shed its elitist image, the Senate voted to give its staff members the right to take job discrimination complaints to a Federal court.
It took the extraordinary move before passing a bitterly debated civil rights bill intended to make it easier to sue in job bias cases.
Page A20.
Sales of New Homes Tumble
September's sales fell 12.9 percent, despite rising incomes and low mortgage rates, underscoring a fading confidence in the economy.
Page D1.
Hospital Chief Resigns Anew
Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo resigned again as New York City's hospital chief, giving up what amounted to a four-month severance package.
Page B1.
Iran's Nuclear Intentions
An American intelligence assessment says that at least some of Iran's leaders are determined to develop nuclear weapons.
Page A7.


Campaign on Term Limits Taps a Gusher of Money
For all the debate over what placing limits on politicians' terms of office would do for American democracy, the money now pouring into the campaign for the most restrictive such measure ever to go before a state's voters tells an altogether different story.
Billed by its supporters as a prairie fire of populism, the term limit proposal on the Nov. 5 ballot in Washington State has been bankrolled by a group founded by a handful of wealthy, out-of-state industrialists with a conservative political agenda.
Two brothers, David H. Koch and Charles G. Koch, listed by Fortune magazine as among the 20 richest men in the world, are the main financial backers of the group leading the push for term limits.


South Africa Likely to Skip Winter Games
South Africa's return to the Olympics is virtually certain to take place in the 1992 Summer Games in Barcelona, Spain, rather than the Albertville Winter Olympics, which precede them by five months.
Sam Ramsamy, the president of the new South Africa national Olympic committee, said yesterday from Johannesburg that a final decision on the Winter Games would be made this weekend.


China Heeds Human Rights Pressure
To the Editor:
In "Why Getting Tough With China Won't Work" (letter, Oct. 14), Michael D. Swaine asserts that a get-tough policy with China is doomed.
Worse, he suggests it could backfire by destabilizing "those coastal areas that have served as the bastions of progressivism in China." To reach these conclusions, Mr.
Swaine relies on what seem two false premises.


Investors Turn Sights On Short-Term Bonds
Investors are pouring into short-term bond funds and other higher-yielding products, fund managers said this week, looking for higher yields than the 5 percent or less from bank certificates of deposits and money market funds.
"Folks have got the 5 percent blues and are looking for other places to put their money," said William Corneliuson, the vice chairman of the Strong Funds in Milwaukee.


Energy Bill Is Stirring Debate on Wildlife Areas
More than a decade after Congressional passage of a plan to reduce America's dependence on imported oil, the Senate is set to debate another energy proposal with familiar provisions.
At its core, the measure, which is closely modeled after a plan offered earlier this year by the White House, seeks to end the nation's economic vulnerability by clearing the way for the oil industry to drill in sensitive areas like the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska and by making it easier for the nuclear industry to build new reactors.


National Gallery Plans An O'Keeffe Catalogue
The National Gallery of Art in Washington announced yesterday that it would oversee and publish a catalogue raisonne of the works of the American modernist Georgia O'Keeffe.
The artist, who died in 1986 at the age of 98, is thought to have produced more than 1,200 paintings and drawings in her long career.


Welcome, Couples, to Manhattan's Nesting District
EVERY week, every Saturday, it's the same deal.
For one day only, the gray, hard-working, truck-crowded leg of Broadway that slants from Union Square up to the Flatiron Building on 23d Street suddenly goes all honey and hibiscus, all hearth and homey.
Last Saturday, the Greenmarket at Union Square set the pitch.
Amid the sounds of a Caribbean steel drum, the smell of fresh parsley and the sight of dogs in red bandannas, a steady surge of more than 10,000 P.W.P.'s (parents with prams) and their sweatered brethren began an entire day of what could be termed "life-style shopping" by stocking up on goat cheese and organic wines, homemade pretzels and leafy maple branche.
All were in their best Joni Mitchell mood.


Wagons Are Circled at WPP Group
The WPP Group, the world's biggest advertising and public relations company, could use some of its own expertise these days to improve its image.
In recent weeks, British publications and some analysts have contended that London-based WPP is on the verge of a financial crisis because of depressed advertising spending in both America and Britain.
They have predicted that bankers or shareholders might try to force out Martin Sorrell, WPP's chief executive, and that the company, with businesses including J. Walter Thompson, Ogilvy &amp; Mather and Hill &amp; Knowlton, might be broken up.


Small Stocks in Rally, and Dow Gains 9.84
Stocks closed higher yesterday for the third straight trading session, led by a strong rally in small stocks.
Blue-chip issues gained modestly, and the Dow Jones industrial average rose 9.84, to 3,071.78.
The Nasdaq composite index of over-the-counter trading rose to a record of 541.32, up 6.81 for the day.
The Russell 2000 index of small issues also reached a high of 183.35, up 1.45.


Palm Beach Rape Trial Faces Test: Finding Jury
Jury selection is to start Thursday in the case of William K. Smith, the 31-year-old Kennedy heir charged with raping a Florida woman on the family's Palm Beach estate over Easter weekend.
But the task of finding six citizens sufficiently unaffected by the saturation news coverage the case has already received could prove formidable.
Lawyers say interviewing potential jurors could take two weeks to a month or more, longer than the time earmarked for testimony in the trial, which is scheduled to begin Dec. 2.


CAMBODIA LETS GO 442 FROM ITS JAILS
The Cambodian Government said today that it had freed 442 political prisoners this month and that more releases were planned.
It was the first significant release of prisoners in years by the Vietnamese-installed Government.
Until recently, the Phnom Penh Government would not directly confirm that it was holding political prisoners.


Next Computer To Go Public
Steven P. Jobs, the founder of Next Computer Inc., said yesterday that during the next 18 months he planned to take public the company he founded in 1985.
"We have a lot of people on Wall Street who want to take us public," Mr.
Jobs said, adding that investment banking firms were among some of the company's largest customers.
"We'll definitely go public within the next 18 months."


Excerpts From Speeches in Madrid: 'Long and Painful History' of Struggle
Following are excerpts from speeches yesterday
by President Bush, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and the Egyptian Foreign Minister, Amr Moussa, at the opening session of the Middle East peace conference
in Madrid
.
Mr.
Bush's speech was transcribed by Reuters.
Mr.
Gorbachev's remarks were transcribed by The Associated Press as he spoke through an interpreter.
The A.P. provided excerpts from Mr.
Moussa's speech, which was translated by Cable News Network.
PRESIDENT BUSH
We come to Madrid on a mission of hope -- to begin work on a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement to the conflict in the Middle East.
We come here to seek peace for a part of the world that in the long memory of man has known far too much hatred, anguish and war.
I can think of no endeavor more worthy, or more necessary.


How Sweet A Victory?
Many months after the event, George Bush and the United States today plucked the fruits of victory in the Persian Gulf war, but it is still much too early to predict how sweet they will prove to be.
Critics have suggested that the United States achieved far too little in the war, because Saddam Hussein was not overthrown, Iran remained as hostile and Kuwait as undemocratic as ever, and Saudi Arabia shed neither its isolation nor its archaic ways.
Iraq was thrown out of Kuwait, some said, but very little else changed.


Tax-Free Fund Rates Up; Taxables Are Off
Yields on tax-exempt money market funds tended to move up again slightly for the week that ended yesterday, while yields on taxable funds continued to decline, according to IBC/Donoghue's, which monitors the funds and issues The Money Fund Report.
Walter S. Frank, chief economist for IBC/Donoghue's, reported that total assets of the tax-exempt funds declined a slight $36 million, to $89.5 billion for the week.
The average days to maturity of holdings in the tax-exempt portfolios dropped by one day, to 60 days.


ISRAEL AND ARABS, FACE TO FACE, BEGIN QUEST FOR MIDEAST PEACE
For the first time, Israel and all the Arab nations around it sat down face to face here today for peace talks aimed at settling their outstanding disputes and finding a way for Israelis and Palestinians to share the homeland they both claim as their own.
Representatives from Israel, Jordan, Syria, Lebanon and the Palestinians took their seats around a T-shaped meeting table in the Hall of Columns at Spain's Royal Palace.
They had been invited there by the co-sponsors of the Middle East conference, President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, who gave the opening addresses.  [ Excerpts from speeches, page A17. ]


Dispute Rises on Way To Fill Race Vacancy
Three days before the biggest day of championships in thoroughbred racing, the method of selecting horses for the $10 million Breeders' Cup series was challenged today by the former president of the organization, who is now the owner of a horse not selected for a vacancy in the races.
The challenge was mounted by C. Gibson Downing, a lawyer from nearby Lexington who served as president of the Breeders' Cup for six years in the 1980's.
He came head to head with his former colleagues today when they selected somebody else's horse to fill the opening created when Panoramic was injured and dropped from the $2 million Turf race.


Senators Extend Anti-Bias Laws To Their Staffs
Declaring that they wanted to erase a popular view that they were out of touch and elitist, senators voted today to extend anti-discrimination protections to their own employees and to pay any damage awards from their own pockets.
They also took the unprecedented step of letting their employees take civil rights complaints to a Federal appeals court, provoking warnings from some lawmakers that the measure was hastily conceived and would breach the constitutional principle of separation of powers between the legislative and judicial branches.


Old Neckties Made New
Tiecrafters  116 East 27th Street, New York, N.Y. 10016; (212) 867-7676.
Neckties are getting wider again.
And Andy Tarshis, the president Tiecrafters, a 39-year-old company that cleans and alters neckwear, couldn't be happier.
For years most neckties measured three and a quarter inches.
Currently, fashionable ties measure three and three-quarters inches, Mr.
Tarshis said.
"And I've heard they may go to four inches next season," he added.


Cuomo to Call Back Legislature to Cope With Budget Deficit
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo pegged the shortfall in the state's budget at $689 million today and said he would summon the Legislature back in special session to deal with the problem.
At the same time, New York City officials said they faced at least a $200 million gap in their own budget, even without the threat of further state cuts.  [ Page B7. ]


Home Video
Finally, 'Fantasia'
"Fantasia," the 1940 Disney animated classic, will be released tomorrow on cassette for the first time.
It's a big title, certainly, but how big?
"It will never outsell 'E.T.,' " said Ed Weiss, manager of the Movies Unlimited video stores in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.
Industry sources say about 9.3 million cassettes of "Fantasia," with a suggested price of $24.99, have been distributed, which would place it third on the all-time best-seller list, behind "E.T." and "Batman."


Hopes High as Riley Era Unfolds
Any resemblance between the Knicks of this season and last season is remote.
As far as the Knicks are concerned, that's good.
"To me, it's kind of amazing the transformation this team has gone through in a short time," said Paul Silas, one of the Knicks' assistant coaches.
"I think it has a lot to do with Pat Riley, the fact that he commands so much respect. It's so different. I'm loving life. I really think we've got a great chance to do well. The foundation is being laid right now, and I think the players are sensing that."


Essay; Impose No 'Solution'
In a serious, balanced and moving speech at the opening of the Madrid conference, President Bush made the point on which all progress depends: "Peace cannot be imposed from the outside by the United States or anyone else." He repeated: "This conference cannot impose a settlement on the participants. . . ."


Career Advice Pays Off For Finance Executive
Two years ago Donna Sims Wilson received career advice at a meeting of black professionals: she should work for a minority-owned company if she wanted to be part of the next generation of finance and real estate barons.
She followed that advice, and yesterday she saw a major payoff, as her firm -- Pryor, McClendon, Counts &amp; Company -- became the first minority-owned investment bank to act as lead underwriter for a Resolution Trust Corporation offering.
In 1989, Mrs.
Wilson left Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, where she was a vice president in fixed-income sales, and joined Pryor, McClendon, a minority-owned investment banking firm with headquarters in New York.
At Pryor, McClendon she is the senior vice president responsible for mortgage finance operations.


Keeping Secret on Child Abuse
The death of 8-month-old Ashlei Orellane earlier this month and the abuse of 8-year-old Tiesha Carter last month have again raised questions about whether New York City's authorities are doing all they can to protect children.
But it's hard to tell because a state law requires confidentiality in child abuse cases.
Proposed amendments that would relax the law deserve serious consideration in Albany.
Two child welfare workers and police found Tiesha Carter hiding in an apartment closet, covered with burns, cuts, scars and bruises.
The girl's mother, who was previously convicted and incarcerated for assaulting a 5-year-old foster child, was charged with attempted murder and unlawful imprisonment.


Calendar: Shopping For Fun and Charity
Solid Illusions  200 West 57th Street, Suite 802; (212) 586-2464.
A show and sale of trompe-l'oeil furnishings and accessories starts Tuesday.
Proceeds will benefit the Foundation for Developmentally Disabled Children in Israel.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Tuesday through next Thursday.
Admission: $10.
There will also be a party on Monday from 6 to 9 P.M.
Tickets, $50.


Pirates Name Sauer President
In a front-office restructuring that will give him more autonomy than his predecessor, MARK SAUER was named president and chief executive officer of the Pittsburgh Pirates yesterday, succeeding CARL BARGER.


Group of Potential Buyers Is Talking to Islanders
Representatives of a combination of two Long Island investment groups say they are negotiating seriously to buy the Islanders from John O. Pickett, the current owner, who has been trying to sell the team since last winter.
Bargaining continues, the leaders say, but they won't provide details about price or number of investors or scheduled future meetings.
"I can't say much, pardon me for being guarded," said Steve Walsh, managing partner of Walsh, Greenwood, which is based in North Hills, L.I., and Greenwich, Conn.
"We are two very small firms in terms of people, not in terms of assets. Walsh, Greenwood is an investment firm. We are part of a serious group. We are serious about doing it."


Review/Television; It Looks Like an Abortion Clinic, but ...
Tonight at 10 on Channel 7 , "Prime Time Live" takes its undercover cameras into what it calls fake abortion clinics.
In a variation on the bait-and-switch advertising, these places, sponsored largely by religious groups, invite women in with lines like "Considering abortion? See us first!" Those who respond, says Chris Wallace, tonight's correspondent, "get a heavy dose of anti-abortion rhetoric and medical misinformation."
The charge is backed up by scenes of clinic employees -- some of whom wear white lab coats, although they are not nurses or doctors -- passing along dubious descriptions and incorrect information plainly intended to frighten vulnerable young women.
One former client calls such a counselor "the deceiving nurse."


For a Wedding Fit for a Czar
DAVID E. MONN, an interior designer, has orchestrated dozens of fantastical weddings with themes like a trip around the world and a visit to the circus.
On Saturday and Sunday, his rendition of Czarist nuptials in St.
Petersburg will open in a bridal fair at the Mark Hotel at 25 East 77th Street.
He has designed all the furnishings in the fair, promoting everything from shoes to honeymoon locales.
Along a staircase and throughout the exhibit area on the Mark's second floor, he hung raspberry damask, sheets of sheer voile and portraits of Russian royalty.


Gorbachev and Mitterrand Meet, for a Little Embarrassment
After attending the opening of the Middle East peace conference in Madrid, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev met President Francois Mitterrand in southern France tonight to smooth over relations ruffled by the French leader's response to the failed Soviet coup in August.
After Mr.
Gorbachev was detained at his summer dacha in the Crimea, Mr.
Mitterrand was strongly criticized at home for referring to "the new Soviet leaders" and suggesting that it would be possible to do business with them if they continued to carry out economic and political change.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Hank Jones  Fat Tuesday's 190 Third Avenue (at 17th Street) Through Sunday
The pianist Hank Jones is known as the dean of jazz pianists because of his harmonic and rhythmic resourcefulness; Mr.
Jones is always sending a phrase around a corner, dressed in new clothes.
But as recent shows have demonstrated, he's not much of a band leader.
On Tuesday night at Fat Tuesday's, Mr.
Jones led a quintet through a dull and unorganized set that was characterized by uninspired, technically awkward improvising.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
5.12
8.00
3-MO. TREAS.
4.83
4.89
7.12
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.84
4.92
7.11
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.14
7.15
8.48
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.89
7.89
8.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
8.97
9.92
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.86
6.86
7.71
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Fear Grips Zaire as Foreigners Pull Out
As hundreds of foreigners fled Zaire today on the final evacuation flights scheduled by Western governments, a growing sense of disorder and desperation gripped this central African country.
Many of the foreigners held important technical and managerial positions -- jobs that most diplomats believe Zairians, for now, are incapable of filling.


Nintendo Says Game Sells Well
An executive of Nintendo of America said the company had sold more than 500,000 of its new second-generation video game, Super NES, in the last two months.
Peter Main, the vice president of marketing, told toy analysts that the company expected to sell 2.2 million units of the $200 machines by the end of the year.
He predicted the company's sales would reach $4 billion this year.


Museum Opens Doors to a Puerto Rican Tradition
CASITAS, the rough one-story cottages urban Puerto Ricans everywhere build in empty lots as social clubs, have attracted considerable academic interest in recent years.
Folklorists have documented 40 such structures in New York City's Hispanic neighborhoods; but few mere curiosity seekers have been in the fenced-off sites.
"Las Casitas: An Urban Cultural Alternative," an exhibit at the Bronx Museum of the Arts, on the Grand Concourse at 165th Street, until Jan. 12, lets would-be voyeurs step into a casita.
But the show's 12-by-12 foot wooden replica contains nothing mysterious, just a round plastic table, three mismatched plastic chairs and colorful wall hangings like postcards from Puerto Rico and a tapestry of the Last Supper.


DOZENS ARE HURT IN JETLINER TESTS
Evacuation tests in a jumbo jetliner on Saturday left one woman paralyzed and at least 46 other people injured after they jammed their way through mobbed exit doors and plunged down escape slides inside a pitch-black hangar.
The injuries occurred during two separate tests conducted by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation on its MD-11 jetliner.
Operating under Federal Aviation Administration guidelines, the company was testing to see if a version of the plane reconfigured to hold 410 seats instead of the normal 287 could be evacuated within the Government time limit of 90 seconds.


Citicorp Attacks Problem Loans
Citicorp, facing huge and growing losses, has summoned more managerial firepower to tackle its commercial real estate portfolio.
The nation's largest banking company announced this week that Robert A. McCormack, who cleaned up the bank's big loan debacle with third world debt, would become its point man in charge of working out its domestic real estate problems.


Philharmonic Musicians Vote to Authorize Strike
The 105 musicians of the New York Philharmonic, whose three-year contract formally expired last month, have voted to extend the contract until Nov. 13.
They also voted unanimously to authorize their negotiating committee to call a strike after Nov. 13 if no settlement has been reached.
The votes came on Tuesday after the negotiating committee reported that little progress had been made in several weeks of discussions with the orchestra's management, the Philharmonic-Symphony Society of New York.
The committee informed the Society of the actions at a negotiating meeting last night.


Arthur B. Hardy, 78, Psychiatrist Who Treated a Fear of Going Out
Dr.
Arthur B. Hardy, a psychiatrist who promoted a new treatment for agoraphobia that helped thousands of patients across the nation, died Saturday at his home in Menlo Park, Calif.
Dr. Hardy, who was 78 years old, died of cancer, associates said.


Queens Police Hunting Armed Man in 3 Rapes
An armed man who sneaks up behind his victims and covers their eyes with a knit cap is being sought in three rapes that have occurred in Southeast Queens since mid-September, the police said.
The attacks took place on Sept. 14 and 28 and on Oct. 19 in Laurelton near the Springfield Gardens border, in Springfield Gardens and in South Ozone Park between 12:35 and 1:10 A.M., the police said.


Hopes Fueling G.O.P. Battle In New Jersey
Republicans have their best chance in 20 years to capture both houses of the New Jersey Legislature.
One sign of their confidence is that they have already begun fighting among themselves over who will lead them should they take over.
Democrats now hold a six-seat margin in each house of the Legislature.
But the Republicans think they can persuade voters to change that on Tuesday by striking back at the legislators who helped Gov.
Jim Florio pass an unpopular $2.8 billion tax-increase package last year.


Quotation of the Day
"They are young and old, people in business suits. And you're going to see more and more of them." -- Brian Carnevale, a Massachusetts grocer, on the rise in food-stamp recipients.  [ A1:1. ]


Giants Place Cooks on Waivers
The difficulties in managing a National Football League roster were demonstrated today when the Giants waived Johnie Cooks, a 10th-year linebacker, from their injured-reserve list.
Cooks, who will be 33 years old in three weeks, was the second choice over all in the 1982 draft and spent his first six pro seasons with the Colts in Baltimore and Indianapolis.
When the Colts, trying to eliminate high salaries, waived him early in the 1988 season, the Giants signed him.


I.B.M. Signs Pact On Memory Chips
The International Business Machines Corporation has signed a contract with the Lam Research Corporation to co-develop a new process for the production of advanced memory chips.
Lam, based in Fremont, Calif., is a leading supplier of wafer processing equipment for semiconductors.


Low-Key Tack For Fur Coats
In a marked contrast to past campaigns that showed four- color pictures of beautiful women wearing plush furs, Saga Furs of Scandinavia has introduced advertising with nary a fur in sight.
The ads, created by Steve Gold Inc., New York, feature a black-and-white drawing of a snowy night.
In the corner of one ad is the line from Shakespeare, "Now is the winter of our discontent," followed by the line, "Not necessarily," and the Saga logo.


Mario Scelba Dies at 90 in Rome; A Prime Minister in Postwar Italy
Mario Scelba, a founder of Italy's dominant Christian Democratic party, a former Prime Minister and the postwar Interior Minister whose riot squads battled Communists on the left and neo-Fascists on the right in the unsettled years of the young republic, died on Tuesday in Rome.
He was 90 years old.
A party official said he died at his home of thrombosis.


BRIEFS
*
Amax Inc., New York, a metals company, said its Alumeax Inc. unit in Norcross, Ga., would form a venture in Japan with Mitsui &amp; Co., Tokyo, and Mitsui &amp; Co.
U.S.A.
Inc.
The new company, to be called SSF Japan, will promote metal-forging technology. *
Computer Associates International Inc., Garden City, L.I., a software company, said 15,010,368 common shares, or 83 percent of the total outstanding, of Pansophic Systems Inc., Lisle, Ill., a computer company, had been tendered and accepted for payment as of Tuesday.


Corrections
The "Dividends Declared" table in Business Day yesterday misstated the date on which investors must own Hubco Inc. shares to receive this quarter's dividends.
It is Nov. 18, not Dec. 18.


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Rodgers and Hart Revue  Rainbow and Stars 30 Rockefeller Plaza Through Nov. 23
Nobody has ever performed "Ten Cents a Dance" quite the way Elaine Stritch does it in "The Rodgers and Hart Revue," which opened a four-week engagement at Rainbow and Stars on Tuesday evening.
The veteran musical comedy star, who is making her New York cabaret debut in the show, growled it out on Tuesday with the uproarious cynicism of someone so disenchanted that she seemed almost beyond suffering.
Affecting a bizarre effervescence in the song's final moments, she pasted on a phony grin that turned her face into a mask of hateful cordiality.
It was a stunning star turn.


2 Midwest Banks Announce Plan to Merge
The National City Corporation of Cleveland announced plans yesterday to acquire the Merchants National Corporation of Indianapolis, creating another strong competitor in a growing rivalry among the region's expansion-minded banks.
The acquisition of Merchants National, with $5.7 billion in assets, will make National City, with $23.8 billion in assets, the third-largest banking company in Indiana.
It now has only a small presence in the state.
After Ameritrust, a Cleveland banking company, rejected National City in favor of the Society Corporation last month, Edward B. Brandon, National City's chairman, said the company would push ahead with the opportunities for expansion, and could double its size in five years.
Many Merger Possibilities
In a slip of the tongue that shows how some banks are considering many merger candidates simultaneously, Mr.
Brandon once substituted Michigan National -- a $10.5 billion company based in Farmington Hills, Mich. -- for Merchants National.
He quickly corrected himself saying "I'm not that ambitious, at least today."


A Vote for Democracy
America's active participation in democracy is dwindling.
Barely half the eligible voters took part in the 1988 Presidential election -- the lowest rate in 64 years.
The turnout in non-Presidential years is smaller still.
A bill that would help reverse this ominous trend is now threatened with a Senate filibuster.
The bill won't even make it to the floor unless the favorable votes of 60 senators can be mustered today to close off debate on a motion to proceed.
Senators who care about enlarging democracy will vote yes.


Sports of The Times; Peeping Through The Vents
CAN you believe this?
An official at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas authorized the installation of a video camera in an air-conditioning duct of a campus gym to secretly tape an assistant basketball coach's conditioning class.


ZAMBIA PRESIDENT FACING OPEN VOTE
For the first time in 19 years, voters in this southern African nation will go to the polls tomorrow in a vigorously fought presidential election that presents a sharp threat to the career of President Kenneth D. Kaunda, the founding father of Zambia and one of the last of the original leaders of post-colonial Africa.
The election is the first multiparty contest here since 1972, when Mr.
Kaunda declared a one-party state.
Unlike some other elections held in Africa this year under the banner of multiparty politics, the one in Zambia is seen by local politicians, outside monitors and diplomats as a genuine contest in which the opposition has been able to mount a strong campaign and broad segments of society show a genuine desire for change.


The Travails of Living the Green Life
FROM the street, it hardly seems that the Queen of Green lives here.
Half a dozen cars, one of them a conspicuously consumptive replica of a 1920's Mercedes, crowd the driveway and garage.
There is only one visible sign of devotion to the planet.
In a chewed-up clearing alongside the house, a swimming pool once rippled.
Now it is gone.
The Queen could not find an environmentally sound way to keep it free of algae and bacteria.


Agency Shift Possible In Detroit Bank Merger
One of the latest in a series of bank mergers may lead to an account loss for Campbell-Mithun-Esty, Minneapolis, or W. B. Doner &amp; Company, Southfield, Mich.
Comerica Inc. and Manufacturers National Corporation, both of Detroit, have announced plans to combine operations and create a bank that will carry the Comerica name and rank among the nation's 25 largest.
Comerica's advertising is currently handled by Campbell, while Doner has the Manufacturers account.


The Senate Covers Itself
The Senate, having already distinguished itself by forcing President Bush to accept its version of the 1991 civil rights bill, achieved even greater distinction yesterday.
It ended years of hypocrisy by voting to apply to itself anti-bias laws similar to those it applies to others.
The old double standard had its uses.
Congress might have been more reluctant to pass such landmark laws as the 1964 Civil Rights Act if its own members had been covered to the same extent as the private sector.


In Contact at Last, but Never Eye to Eye
They came to the conference today with barely a handshake and left with barely a backward glance, and the mood seemed as chilly as the fog that deadened the city.
But that was not surprising.
At just about every point where Arab and Israeli came together here, in public, from the colonnaded grace of the conference hall to the scramble of the press rooms, the sense of wide gulfs and deep suspicion was the same, as if tentative openings collided at each turn with suspicions and hatreds too raw for soothing.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
BEFORE the weather gets too cold to leave doors open, it is a good idea to inspect, repair and if necessary install doorway weatherstripping to eliminate drafts.
One way to inspect a door for drafts is to check for daylight around the edges when the door is closed.
Another way is to move a lighted candle around the inside edges of a closed door on a breezy day (keep draperies and other flammable items out of the way).
If the candle flickers, it is a sign that air is leaking in.


Orange Juice Prices Show Sharp Rise in Thin Trading
Orange juice futures prices rose sharply yesterday in thin trading on the New York Cotton Exchange.
The rally was not prompted by fresh news but some analysts said it could augur higher prices, nevertheless.
Frozen concentrated orange juice for November delivery rose 3.1 cents, to $1.665 a pound.
Later deliveries rose by larger amounts, including a 3.9-cent gain in the most-active January contract, to $1.696 a pound.


Council, Enraging Brooklynites, Votes to Improve a Sewage Plant
Struggling to comply with a court order to reduce the amount of sewage flowing through the city's largest treatment plant, the City Council voted yesterday to acquire the land necessary to improve the troubled Newtown Creek plant in Brooklyn.
The approval caused an immediate uproar in the Greenpoint section, where the plant lies and where many other of the city's most noxious waste sites have long been clustered.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
HIS mother was a well-known surgeon.
His father was a university professor.
His older siblings were either doctors or lawyers.
The family had similar expectations for him.
But after the young man graduated from a prestigious medical school, he decided to become a carpenter.


Saks in Talks for a Stake in Armani Stores
Saks Fifth Avenue is negotiating for a stake in Giorgio Armani's newest business venture, a chain of retail stores called A/X: Armani Exchange, which will sell jeans and other casual clothing.
Phillip B. Miller, Saks's vice chairman in charge of merchandising, said Saks has been negotiating with Simint S.p.A., the Italian company that makes the new Armani Jeans clothes, on a deal to allow Saks to own and operate some free-standing Armani Exchange boutiques in malls.


Race for Senate Shows Big Split On Health Care
Two days ago, Harris Wofford toured a Harrisburg hospital to dramatize his call for national health insurance, a stand that has contributed to the Democrat's stunning rise in polls taken for Pennsylvania's Senate race.
Today his Republican opponent, former Gov.
Dick Thornburgh, toured a hospital, too, and also talked about the way he would resolve the nation's health care problems.
Saying there are no easy answers, he argued for a redoubled effort to contain medical costs through competition and deregulation, and he referred derisively to national health insurance as "an untried, untested, radical and costly" alternative.


Clay P. Bedford, 88, Executive In Top Projects at Kaiser Industries
Clay P. Bedford, a top executive of Kaiser Industries in California for most of his 49 years at the company, died in his sleep Saturday at his home in Paradise Valley, Ariz.
He was 88 years old.
The cause of death was not specified, a family spokesman said.


A Royal Visit To Shore Up Canada Unity
The Prince and the Princess of Wales -- with their interest in causes, he in the environment and Canadian unity, she in AIDS, drug treatment and battered women -- are trying to rejuvenate the constitutional monarchy in the largest country of the Commonwealth.
The royal couple have drawn good reviews in a weeklong visit, culminating in the most pointed political intervention made by a member of the British royal family in Canada in recent memory.
They returned home from Ottawa on Tuesday night.


Scandal Is Breaking Up Clifford's Law Firm
The small but highly prosperous Washington law firm headed by Clark M. Clifford is breaking up, lawyers in the firm say, a victim of the continuing bad publicity over Mr.
Clifford's involvement with the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
At least 10 of the 17 lawyers in the firm of Clifford &amp; Warnke have been negotiating to join another Washington firm, Howrey and Simon, the lawyers said.
Two others are expected to go elsewhere.


Daydream and Ever If Ever Share the Puissance Title
When just seven horses tackled the ever-expanding pseudo-brick Puissance wall tonight at the National Horse Show, it was no surprise that two of them were piloted by Margie Goldstein, resident risk-taker on the prestigious grand prix circuit.
All seven cleared the initial 6-foot height, but just a trio of over-achievers, including Goldstein and her veteran high-jumper Daydream, vaulted the 6-foot-5-inch wall in the first jump-off.
Once the wall sprouted an additional 6 inches, only Goldstein atop Daydream and British Equestrian Team member Joe Turi on Ever If Ever survived for a third jump-off.
Both attempted a 7-foot-2-inch wall, but neither cleared it, which left Goldstein and Turi the eighth co-winners in the history of the event here.


Helms Would Bar Aid For Inmate Education
To the Editor:
Senator Jesse Helms is at it again.
He has intruded his particular agenda onto legislation by introducing an amendment that not only deprives Americans of fundamental rights to education, but also would in the long run, if passed, undoubtedly increase the rate of recidivism in the United States prison population and add to the crime rate.


CHRONICLE
Riley, who plays Asta, the legendary wire-haired terrier in "Nick and Nora," now in previews on Broadway, will receive the Golden Bone award of the Bide-a-Wee Home Association for "pawsome accomplishments in barking, diction and dramatic art."


Bear, Stearns in Loan Deal
Wells Fargo &amp; Company has decided to sell a $400 million package of loans to highly leveraged companies to an investor group led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, a Bear, Stearns official confirmed yesterday.
"We have a signed letter of intent with Wells to buy a portfolio of bank assets," said Nancy Havens-Hasty, a senior managing director at Bear, Stearns in its high-yield and bankruptcy departments.


Middle East Friends and Enemies: Some of the Leading Delegates in Madrid; Farouk al-Sharaa, Syrian Foreign Minister
The Syrian Foreign Minister, Farouk al-Sharaa, has been one of the driving forces behind his country's reconciliation with the West and especially with the United States.
A trusted aide of President Hafez al-Assad, he rose through the ranks of the ruling Baath party in a variety of government posts to become Foreign Minister in 1984.


Johnson, No. 1 Pick, Is Signed By Hornets
Larry Johnson's brand-new contract with the Hornets, made official at a news conference in Charlotte, N.C., yesterday, was not good news for the New Jersey Nets.
The six-year pact, at an average of $3.3 million per season, for last spring's top choice in the college draft, seemingly strengthens Kenny Anderson's claim to be worth in the neighborhood of $3 million year, a figure the Nets have said they will not approach.
Throughout his negotiations with the Nets, Anderson's Atlanta-based attorney, Richard Howell, had insisted that Johnson would end up at about $3.3 million a year as the first pick, a sizable gulf from what the Nets were offering Anderson at No. 2.


U.S. Renews Military Aid to Jordan
Ending a seven-month ban, the Administration has agreed to give $22 million in military assistance to Jordan in appreciation for King Hussein's participation in the Madrid peace conference, Jordanian and American officials said today.
Congress blocked an Administration request for $55 million in economic and military aid to Jordan in March to punish King Hussein for his tilt in favor of Iraq during the Persian Gulf war.
The legislation included a provision allowing President Bush to restore the aid if he determined that Amman was supporting peace talks in the Middle East.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19
Israel and the Arab nations around it sat down face to face for the first time in talks aimed at settling their disputes and finding a way for Israelis and Palestinians to share the land they both call their own.
Page A1


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about new evidence of volcanoes on Venus misstated the height of the volcano shown.
It is about 1.86 miles high, not 3 miles.


Casting Light on Shades
IN eight hours, Susanne Wellott and Jayne Ryba can strip the mystery from even the most convoluted lampshade.
They have been teaching lampshade construction to amateurs in Westchester County for two years, and last month they brought their course to Pratt Institute in Manhattan.
The final result of the four two-hour sessions is a completed shade.
"I'm not good with my hands, so if I can make one, anybody can," Ms.
Wellott said.


Eerie Metamorphosis Is Turning Girls Into Turtles
IT can happen overnight.
That angelic little girl who used to dwell in a world populated by Barbies suddenly starts shouting words like "Bodacious!" and "Tubuloso, dude!" in accents that suggest Jimmy Cagney, but without the finesse.


Corrections
A credit line in some editions last Thursday with a picture of Pol Pot, the Cambodian leader, bore an erroneous date.
The picture was taken in 1977, not 1985.
As the article noted, Mr.
Pol Pot has not been seen in public since the late 1970's.


Several New Offerings Brought Out by Digital
The Digital Equipment Corporation, striving to pull out of its two-year-long doldrums, today introduced hardware and software offerings.
Digital, based in Maynard, Mass., announced new versions of its VAX 4000 and VAX 6000 mid-range computers.
The powerful machines will triple the performance speed, compared with some current models, and are expected to put Digital back into a strong competitive position against machines based on reduced instruction set computing, or RISC, technology from companies like the Hewlett-Packard Company, I.B.M. and Sun Microsystems Inc.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a chronology yesterday about the Israeli-Arab conflict omitted a major entry in some copies.
The entry should have read:


Bridge
With millions of bridge hands played around the world each year, there is no sure way to determine which declarer has exercised the greatest skill.
However, the International Bridge Press Association makes an attempt.
A committee headed by Dirk Schroeder of Germany reviewed a number of candidates, and at a meeting in Yokohama, Japan, early this month the diagramed deal was named "Hand of the Year." It was played in Athens in April at the European Economic Community Championships.
The declarer was Schmuel Friedman, playing for Israel in a match against Belgium.
Three no-trump was an obvious contract, but after a spade lead it was not easy to find nine tricks.
After winning in dummy South led a club to the jack and was happy and surprised to find that he had won the trick.
There were now eight tricks in view, with various chances of a ninth.
Looking at all four hands, it is easy to find the ninth in the diamond suit, but that was not obvious to South.


Cable TV Company Raising New York Rates
Time Warner's New York City cable group, which operates cable television systems in Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens, will raise the rates that most of its customers pay by $2 a month starting in December, the company said yesterday.
At the same time, Time Warner said it would drop a $2-a-month surcharge for customers who have remote controls but do not subscribe to premium channels like Home Box Office.
The company also said that it would cut the cost of pay-per-view movies from $4.95 to $3.95.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
New home sales fell a sharp 12.9 percent in September to their lowest level since the depths of the recession in January.
The drop, the biggest in two and a half years, came despite the lowest mortgage rates in 14 years.
Economists see the housing plunge as evidence that confidence in the sluggish recovery is fading.  [ D1. ]
Consumer spending rose nine-tenths of 1 percent in September, helped by a one-half percent gain in personal incomes.  [ D5. ]


Dig Those Tunes (That's What They're All About)
FOR a soporific treat after a rough day of weeding and digging, try "In the Garden" (Narada), a new-age collection of instrumental tributes to plant cultivation.
Performed by Eric Tingstad and Nancy Rumbel on a variety of wind and string instruments, the songs sound like an arty version of a "Thirtysomething" sound track.
The tune "Bonsai Picnic," for example, combines Japanese-style drumbeats with sweet flute riffs, and "Big Weather" superimposes guitar twangs on rain and thunder noises.


Middle East Friends and Enemies: Some of the Leading Delegates in Madrid; Yitzhak Shamir, Israeli Prime Minister
Yitzhak Shamir is an improbable leader, a man of monumental caution who nonetheless spent much of his adult life taking risks, a pragmatist who nonetheless speaks with an ideologue's fervor about the right of Jews to populate all of the biblical Land of Israel.
When he became Prime Minister after Menachem Begin's sudden resignation in 1983, Mr.
Shamir was supposed to serve as a caretaker until a stronger figure could be found.
Yet except for two years when the prime ministership went elsewhere, he has presided over the Government ever since, serving longer than any Israeli leader except David Ben-Gurion.


Some Delta Debt Gets Lower Rating
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation yesterday downgraded its rating on $2.2 billion of Delta Air Lines senior debt.
While lowering the rating to BBB+ from A-, S.&amp; P. also canceled its credit watch on Delta, which was issued on Aug. 16.
The airline's $950 million worth of equipment trust certificates, which cover many of its planes, were also downgraded to A- from A. S.&amp; P. noted that Delta had acquired Pan American World Airways' European routes and shuttle when its own earnings were under pressure because of the weak economy.


Review/Theater; An Actor's Play on Actors and Egos
When Edwin Booth was 13 years old, he left school and joined his famous father, Junius Brutus Booth, barnstorming in theaters across America.
It was Edwin's role to be a watchful guardian, to keep his father sober enough to play King Lear and Richard III, whichever he should happen to choose minutes before going onstage.
Gradually the son moved from dresser to walk-ons to more important parts, eventually displacing his father in the public's esteem.
The tumultuous relationship between father and son is at the core of Austin Pendleton's "Booth Is Back," directed by Arvin Brown at the Long Wharf Theater.
At its sharpest, the play is a revealing two-character study of that family rivalry and of the itinerant, emerging American theater of the mid-19th century.


In Louisiana, Duke Divides Old Loyalties
When David Duke entered a hotel ballroom here today, Jo Ann Jernigan, a retired nurse and lifelong Democrat, jumped to her feet and applauded.
"I've got to see my candidate," she said Mr.
Duke, the Republican candidate for governor and former grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan.
"He's so cute. How can someone who looks like that be bad?"


Rise Seen in Disorder That May Hint Cancer
The rate of a baffling syndrome that seems to favor white, middle-aged and often affluent men is rising steadily, researchers have found.
The condition is thought to put people at heightened risk for cancer of the esophagus, which itself is now the fastest-rising malignancy in the United States and likewise almost always strikes white men.
The disorder, called Barrett's esophagus, often occurs in people who suffer from persistent heartburn or stomach regurgitations, although many with no symptoms at all have developed the condition.
Its hallmark is a change in the type of cells lining the esophagus, from the white skin-like tissue that normally coats the gullet to salmon-colored tissue more closely resembling the inside of the stomach.
That transformation is thought to set the stage for cancer.


A Young Actor With 2 Choice Roles: Enter Fame
Suddenly Loren Dean is hot, his agent's phone is ringing and he's encountering the distant early warning signals of fame.
For instance, just the other day, the young actor said, he was riding the M104 bus on Broadway, as he usually does, "and two different people came up to me and said, 'Loren, right? From "Beggars" '?" He was referring to the new John Patrick Shanley play "Beggars in the House of Plenty."
And that was before "Billy Bathgate," which opens tomorrow.
Mr.
Dean has the title role in the film, an adaptation of an E. L. Doctorow novel starring Dustin Hoffman and Nicole Kidman.


House Votes to Add $1 Billion To Programs Aiding Children
In an unexpected move Tuesday night, the House of Representatives voted to add more than a $1 billion to children's programs by declaring child poverty a national emergency.
Legislatively, the bill's prospects seem dim.
But politically, the bill adds a new wrinkle to the partisan maneuvering over domestic issues as next year's Presidential election approaches.


Pop and Jazz Review
June Tabor The Bottom Line
June Tabor brought her most austere music to the Bottom Line Tuesday night.
She sang British, Irish and North American traditional and traditionalist songs, accompanied by only one musician, Mark Emerson, on fiddle or accordion.
Her ballads, especially, defy the modern urban pace; they are dignified and unhurried, sung in a husky voice full of woeful dignity.
Ms.
Tabor performed them virtually without a musical safety net; often, she sang alone or with just a few drone notes for backup.


Halsey-Cenci Deal
The Halsey Drug Company said it had acquired most of H. R. Cenci Laboratories, a manufacturer of generic liquid prescription and over-the-counter products in Fresno, Calif.
Jay Marcus, Halsey's president, said the company anticipated "an increase in operational efficiency and overall capacity" as a result of the acquisition.
Halsey Drug, based in Brooklyn, and its subsidiaries make generic drugs and vitamins.
The company sells its products under the Blue Cross name and other private labels.


Hextall Due Back After Suspension
After a mandatory, monthlong leave of absence, goaltender RON HEXTALL is expected to start for the Philadelphia Flyers tonight against San Jose.
Hextall was suspended for six games for slashing Detroit wing JIM CUMMINS in a preseason game on Sept. 22.
He played the Flyers' first two games, posting a 2.90 goals-against average, then sat out seven games. (AP)


Lessons From Beyond the Court
The teacher, named Sandy Skea, looked across the auditorium of kids in their white assembly shirts and then, in a moment, was able to pinpoint what it meant for them to have in their school yesterday morning the people from the New York Knicks.
Skea, who teaches sixth-graders at Intermediate School 164 on 164th Street between Amsterdam and Edgecombe Avenues, said simply, "They need to hear stories."
This was a line that would be repeated to Greg Anthony as he relaxed in the back of a limousine leaving this urban theater for the Knicks' practice gym far away in the northern suburbs.
The rookie point guard from U.N.L.V. would nod knowingly and say: "Most of those kids see us all the time on televison, but I bet they don't feel like they are part of the same America. They don't believe they can make it in the America they see on TV."


Record Number In U.S. Relying On Food Stamps
As a tangible sign of the deepening economic troubles afflicting American families, the number of people receiving Federal food stamps jumped to a record level in August, meaning that almost one in 10 Americans now depend on the Government to put food on the table.
According to figures made public today by the United States Department of Agriculture, 23.6 million Americans received food stamps in August, an increase of more than 3 million over the same month last year.


